Mickey Charles Mantle (October 20, 1931 - August 13, 1995), nicknamed The Commerce Comet and The Mick, was an American professional baseball player.
Mantle played his entire Major League Baseball (MLB) career (1951-1968) with the New York Yankees as a center fielder and first baseman.
Mantle was one of the best players and sluggers and is regarded by many as the greatest switch hitter in baseball history.
Mantle was inducted into the Baseball Hall of Fame in 1974 and was elected to the Major League Baseball All-Century Team in 1999.
Mantle was one of the greatest offensive threats of any center fielder in baseball history.
He has the highest career OPS+ of any center fielder, and he had the highest stolen base percentage in history at the time of his retirement.
In addition, compared to the other four center fielders on the All-Century team, he had the lowest career rate of grounding into double plays, and he had the highest World Series on-base percentage and World Series slugging percentage.
He also had an excellent 0.984 fielding percentage when playing center field.
Mantle was noted for his ability to hit for both average and power, especially tape measure home runs.
He hit 536 MLB career home runs, batted .300 or more ten times, and is the career leader (tied with Jim Thome) in walk-off home runs, with a combined thirteen-twelve in the regular season and one in the postseason.
Mantle won the Triple Crown in 1956, when he led the Major Leagues in batting average (.353), home runs (52), and runs batted in (RBI) (130).
He later wrote a book (My Favorite Summer 1956) about his best year in baseball.
He was an All-Star for 16 seasons, playing in 16 of the 20 All-Star Games that were played.
He was an American League (AL)
Most Valuable Player (MVP) three times and a Gold Glove winner once.
Mantle appeared in 12 World Series including seven championships, and he holds World Series records for the most home runs (18), RBIs (40), extra-base hits (26), runs (42), walks (43), and total bases (123).
Early years
Mantle was born on October 20, 1931, in Spavinaw, Oklahoma, the son of Lovell (née Richardson) Mantle (1904-1995) and Elven Charles "Mutt" Mantle.
He was of at least partial English ancestry; his great-grandfather, George Mantle, left Brierley Hill, in England's Black Country, in 1848.
Mutt named his son in honor of Mickey Cochrane, a Hall of Fame catcher.
Mantle spoke warmly of his father and said he was the bravest man he ever knew.
"No boy ever loved his father more," he said.
Mantle batted left-handed against his father when his father pitched to him right-handed, and he batted right-handed against his grandfather, Charles Mantle, when his grandfather pitched to him left-handed.
His grandfather died at the age of 60 in 1944, and his father died of Hodgkin's disease at the age of 40 on May 7, 1952.
When Mantle was four years old, his family moved to the nearby town of Commerce, Oklahoma, where his father worked in lead and zinc mines.
In addition to his first love, baseball, Mantle was an all-around athlete at Commerce High School, playing basketball as well as football.
He played halfback and Oklahoma offered him a football scholarship.
His football playing nearly ended his athletic career.
In his sophomore year, he was kicked on the left shin during a practice game, and he developed osteomyelitis-a crippling disease that was incurable just a few years earlier-in his left ankle.
Mantle's parents drove him at midnight to Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, where he was treated at the children's hospital with the newly available penicillin, which reduced the infection and saved his leg from amputation.
Shulthis Stadium, the baseball stadium in Independence where Mantle played, was the site of the first night game in organized baseball.
Mantle hit his first professional home run on June 30, 1949 at Shulthis Stadium.
The ball went over the center field fence, which was 460 feet from home plate.
In 1950 Mantle was promoted to the Class-C Joplin Miners of the Western Association.
Bill Dickey called Mantle "the greatest prospect he's seen in his time."
Mantle immediately broke out of his slump, going on to hit .361 with 11 homers and 50 RBIs during his stay in Kansas City.
The osteomyelitic condition of Mantle's left leg had exempted him from being drafted for military service since he was 18 in 1949, but his emergence as a star center fielder in the major leagues during the Korean War in 1952 led baseball fans to question his 4-F deferment.
Two Armed Forces physicals were ordered, including a highly publicized exam on November 4, 1952 which was brought on by his All-Star selection, that ended in a final rejection.
Mantle had high hopes that 1953 would be a breakout year but his momentum was stopped by an injury.
He missed several weeks, so his numbers were modest but respectable, especially with 92 RBIs.
Although DiMaggio's status was not yet in the cards, Mantle had his first 100 plus RBI year, in a full season and regained .300 status .
The next is arguably his first great year, as he concluded with 37 home runs and a .306 batting average.
With 37 homers, he was now a home run hitter, not just an all-around player with tremendous power.
Mantle had his breakout season in 1956 after showing progressive improvement each of his first five years.
Described by him as his "favorite summer", his major league-leading .353 batting average, 52 home runs, and 130 runs batted in brought home both the Triple Crown and first of three Major League Baseball Most Valuable Player Awards.
He also hit his second All-Star Game home run that season.
During Game 5 of the 1956 World Series-Don Larsen's perfect game against the Brooklyn Dodgers-Mantle kept the perfect game alive by making a running catch of a deep fly ball off the bat of Gil Hodges, and provided the first of the two runs the Yankees would score with a fourth-inning home run off Brooklyn starter Sal Maglie.
Mantle's overall performance in 1956 was so exceptional that he was bestowed the Hickok Belt (unanimously) as the top American professional athlete of the year.
He is the only player to win a league Triple Crown as a switch hitter.
Mantle won his second consecutive MVP in 1957 behind league leads in runs and walks, a career-high .365 batting average (second to Ted Williams' .388), and hitting into a league-low five double plays.
Mantle reached base more times than he made outs (319 to 312), one of two seasons in which he achieved the feat.
The 1958 season started slowly for Mantle-the first half saw him at the .274 mark, as a shoulder injury from a collision with Braves’ Red Schoendienst in the World Series left him with permanent struggles in his uppercut from the left side.
He did, however, regain his status, hitting .330 in the second half, and leading his team back to the Series.
The 1959 season was another frustrating situation-this time the first half of his season was good and his second-half comparatively bad.
The season was bad for the Yankees, too, as they finished third.
Although his numbers dipped again, he managed to score 104 runs and his fielding was near perfect.
It was that year, also, he was timed running from home plate to first base in 3.1 seconds, considered outstanding for a heavy hitter.
‘59 was the first of four consecutive seasons that two All-Star games were played and Mantle played in seven of these games.
Mantle made the AL All-Star team as a reserve player in 1959, as his numbers had tailed off from previous seasons, he was used as a pinch runner for Baltimore Orioles catcher Gus Triandos and replacement right fielder for Cleveland Indians Rocky Colavito in the first game with Detroit Tigers Al Kaline playing the center field position.
Mantle was the starting center fielder in the second All-Star Game's lineup, getting a single and a walk in four at bats.
In 1960 Mantle started in both All-Star games, getting two walks in the first and a single in the second game.
Mantle had another “off year”, although by mid-August, he was back in his prime, leading the team to another World Series.
Although his batting average was his lowest since his rookie year, his league-leading 40 home runs and 94 runs batted in, saw him come in a close second to Roger Maris’ MVP award.
On January 16, 1961, Mantle became the highest-paid player in baseball by signing a $75,000 () contract.
DiMaggio, Hank Greenberg, and Ted Williams, who had just retired, had been paid over $100,000 in a season, and Ruth had a peak salary of $80,000.
Mantle became the highest-paid active player of his time.
Mantle's top salary was $100,000, which he reached for the 1963 season.
Having reached that pinnacle in his 13th season, he never asked for another raise.
M & M Boys
During the 1961 season, Mantle and teammate Roger Maris, known as the M&M Boys, chased Babe Ruth's 1927 single-season home run record.
Five years earlier, in 1956, Mantle had challenged Ruth's record for most of the season, and the New York press had been protective of Ruth on that occasion also.
When Mantle finally fell short, finishing with 52, there seemed to be a collective sigh of relief from the New York traditionalists.
Nor had the New York press been all that kind to Mantle in his early years with the team: he struck out frequently, was injury-prone, was a "true hick" from Oklahoma, and was perceived as being distinctly inferior to his predecessor in center field, Joe DiMaggio.
Over the course of time, however, Mantle (with a little help from his teammate Whitey Ford, a native of New York's Borough of Queens) had gotten better at "schmoozing" with the New York media, and had gained the favor of the press.
Maris, a blunt upper-Midwesterner, never did the same; as a result, he wore the "surly" jacket for his duration with the Yankees.
So as 1961 progressed, the Yanks were now "Mickey Mantle's team," and Maris was ostracized as the "outsider," and said to be "not a true Yankee."
The press seemed to root for Mantle and to belittle Maris.
Mantle was unexpectedly hospitalized by an abscessed hip he got from a flu shot late in the season, leaving Maris to break the record (he finished with 61).
Mantle finished with 54 home runs while leading the American league in runs scored and walks.
For the second year in a row, he narrowly missed winning his third MVP award, finishing four points behind repeat winner, Roger Maris.
In 1962 Mantle batted .321 in 121 games.
He was selected an All-Star for the eleventh consecutive season and played in the first game, but due to an old injury acting up, he did not play in the second All-Star game.
Despite missing 41 games, he was selected as MVP for the third time, beating out teammate Bobby Richardson in the voting.
In 1963 he batted .314 in 65 games.
On June 5 he tried to prevent a home run by Brooks Robinson in Baltimore and got his shoe spikes caught in the center field chain link fence as he leaped against the fence for the ball and was coming down.
He broke his foot and did not play again until August 4, when he hit a pinch-hit home run against the Baltimore Orioles in Yankee Stadium.
He returned to the center field position on September 2.
The season featured two amazing feats by Mantle: a line drive home run off the third tier facade at Yankee Stadium, off Kansas City's Pedro Ramos.
It was the closest any hitter came to hitting a fair ball out of the park.
And the aforementioned home run, following his long rehabilitation .On June 29, he had been selected an All-Star as a starting center fielder, but for the first time, he didn't make the 25-player team due to the foot injury.
In 1964 Mantle hit .303 with 35 home runs and 111 RBIs, and played center field in the All-Star game.
In the bottom of the ninth inning of Game 3 of the 1964 World Series against the St. Louis Cardinals, Mantle hit Barney Schultz's first pitch into the right field stands at Yankee Stadium, which won the game for the Yankees 2-1.
The homer, his 16th World Series home run, broke the World Series record of 15 set by Babe Ruth.
It also was perhaps his only “called shot”, as he told on deck hitter Elston Howard he might as well return to the dugout ...
this game is over!
He hit two more homers in the series to set the existing World Series record of 18 home runs.
The Cardinals ultimately won the World Series in 7 games.
Final seasons: 1965-1968
The Yankees and Mantle were slowed down by injuries during the 1965 season, and they finished in sixth place, 25 games behind the Minnesota Twins.
He hit .255 with 19 home runs and 46 RBI, in 362 plate appearances.
Mantle was selected an AL All-Star again, as a reserve player, but did not make the 28-player squad for the second and last time due to an injury and was replaced by Tony Oliva.
To inaugurate the Astrodome, the world's first multi-purpose, domed sports stadium, the Houston Astros and the New York Yankees played an exhibition game on April 9, 1965.
Mantle hit the park's first home run.
In 1966 his batting average increased to .288 with 23 home runs and 56 RBI, in 333 atbats, owing greatly to a very strong June - July, when he returned to his 1964 form (until sidelined by another injury).
After the 1966 season, he was moved to first base with Joe Pepitone taking over his place in the outfield.
On May 14, 1967, Mantle became the sixth member of the 500 home run club.
Mantle hit .237 with 18 home runs and 54 RBI during his final season in 1968.
He was selected an AL All-Star and pinch hit at the All-Star Game on July 11.
Mantle was selected an All-Star every season during his eighteen-year career except 1951 and 1966, and did not play in the 1952, 1963, and 1965 seasons.
Retirement: 1969
Mantle announced his retirement at age 37 on March 1, 1969.
He gave a "farewell" speech on "Mickey Mantle Day", June 8, 1969, in Yankee Stadium.
Mantle's wife, mother, and mother-in-law were in attendance and received recognition at the ceremony held in honor of him.
When he retired, Mantle was third on the all-time home run list with 536,
Player profile
Power hitting
Mantle hit some of the longest home runs in Major League history.
On September 10, 1960, he hit a ball left-handed that cleared the right-field roof at Tiger Stadium in Detroit and, based on where it was found, was estimated years later by historian Mark Gallagher to have traveled 643 feet (196 m).
Another Mantle homer, hit right-handed off Chuck Stobbs at Griffith Stadium in Washington, D.C. on April 17, 1953, was measured by Yankees traveling secretary Red Patterson (hence the term "tape-measure home run") to have traveled 565 feet (172 m).
Deducting for bounces, had it not been blocked by the ornate and distinctive facade.
On August 12, 1964, he hit one whose distance was undoubted: a center field drive that cleared the batter's eye screen, some 75' beyond the marker at the Stadium.
The Daily News reported it as a 502-foot homer.
Although he was a feared power hitter from either side of the plate and hit more home runs batting left-handed than right, Mantle considered himself a better right-handed hitter.
In roughly 25% of his total at-bats he hit .330 right-handed to .281 left.
His 372 to 164 home run disparity was due to Mantle having batted left-handed much more often, as the large majority of pitchers are right-handed.
In spite of short foul pole dimension of 296 feet (90 m) to left and 301 feet (92 m) to right in original Yankee Stadium, Mantle gained no advantage there as his stroke both left and right-handed drove balls there to power alleys of 344' to 407' and 402' to 457' feet (139 m) from the plate.
Overall, he hit slightly more home runs away (270) than home (266).
Surprisingly, Mantle was also one of the best bunters for base hits of all time.
He is in 10th place in number of bases-empty bunt singles for his career, with 80 in only 148 at-bats.
There are no other power hitters in the top ten.
Injuries
Mantle's career was plagued with injuries.
Beginning in high school, he suffered both acute and chronic injuries to bones and cartilage in his legs.
Applying thick wraps to both of his knees became a pre-game ritual, and by the end of his career simply swinging a bat caused him to fall to one knee in pain.
Baseball scholars often ponder "what if" had he not been injured, and had been able to lead a healthy career.
As a 19-year-old rookie playing right field in his first World Series, Mantle tore the cartilage in his right knee on a fly ball hit by Willie Mays.
Joe DiMaggio, in the last year of his career, was playing center field.
Mays' fly was hit to shallow center, and as Mantle came over to back up DiMaggio, Mantle's spikes caught a drainage cover in the outfield grass.
His knee twisted awkwardly and he instantly fell.
Witnesses say it looked "like he had been shot."
He was carried off the field on a stretcher and watched the rest of the World Series on TV from a hospital bed.
Still, Mantle was known as the "fastest man to first base" and won the American League triple crown in 1956.
In 1949 he received a draft-examine notice and was about to be drafted by the US Army but failed the physical exam and was rejected as unqualified and was given a 4-F deferment for any military service.
Over the next decade, Mantle experienced increasing difficulty hitting from his left side.
Later years
Mantle served as a part-time color commentator on NBC's baseball coverage in 1969, teaming with Curt Gowdy and Tony Kubek to call some Game of the Week telecasts as well as that year's All-Star Game.
In 1972 he was a part-time TV commentator for the Montreal Expos.
Despite being among the best-paid players of the pre-free agency era, Mantle was a poor businessman, making several bad investments.
His lifestyle was restored to one of luxury, and his hold on his fans raised to an amazing level, by his position of leadership in the sports memorabilia craze that swept the US, beginning in the 1980s.
Mantle was a prized guest at any baseball card show, commanding fees far in excess of any other player for his appearances and autographs.
This popularity continues long after his death, as Mantle-related items far outsell those of any other player except possibly Babe Ruth, whose items exist in far smaller quantities.
Mantle insisted that the promoters of baseball card shows always include one of the lesser-known Yankees of his era, such as Moose Skowron or Hank Bauer so that they could earn some money from the event.
Despite the failure of Mickey Mantle's Country Cookin' restaurants in the early 1970s, Mickey Mantle's Restaurant & Sports Bar opened in New York at 42 Central Park South (59th Street) in 1988.
It became one of New York's most popular restaurants, and his original Yankee Stadium Monument Park plaque is displayed at the front entrance.
Mantle let others run the business operations but made frequent appearances.
In 1983 Mantle worked at the Claridge Resort and Casino in Atlantic City, New Jersey, as a greeter and community representative.
Most of his activities were representing the Claridge in golf tournaments and other charity events.
But Mantle was suspended from baseball by Commissioner Bowie Kuhn on the grounds that any affiliation with gambling was grounds for being placed on the "permanently ineligible" list.
Kuhn warned Mantle before he accepted the position that he would have to place him on the list if Mantle went to work there.
Hall of Famer Willie Mays, who had also taken a similar position, had already had action taken against him.
Mantle accepted the position, regardless, as he felt the rule was "stupid."
He was placed on the list, but reinstated on March 18, 1985, by Kuhn's successor, Peter Ueberroth.
In 1992 Mantle wrote My Favorite Summer 1956 about his 1956 season.
Personal life
On December 23, 1951, Mantle married Merlyn Johnson (1932-2009) in Commerce, Oklahoma; they had four sons.
In an autobiography, Mantle said he married Merlyn not out of love, but because he was told to by his domineering father.
While his drinking became public knowledge during his lifetime, the press (per established practice at the time) kept quiet about his many marital infidelities.
Mantle was not entirely discreet about them, and when he went to his retirement ceremony in 1969, he brought his mistress along with his wife.
In 1980 Mickey and Merlyn separated, living apart for the rest of Mickey's life, but neither filed for divorce.
During this time, Mantle lived with his agent, Greer Johnson, who was not related to Mantle's wife.
The couple's four sons were Mickey Jr. (1953-2000), David (born 1955), Billy (1957-1994), whom Mickey named for Billy Martin, his best friend among his Yankee teammates, and Danny (born 1960).
Like Mickey, Merlyn and three of their sons became alcoholics, and Billy developed Hodgkin's disease, as had several previous men in Mantle's family.
During the final years of his life, Mantle purchased a condominium on Lake Oconee near Greensboro, Georgia, near Greer Johnson's home, and frequently stayed there for months at a time.
He occasionally attended the local Methodist church, and sometimes ate Sunday dinner with members of the congregation.
He was well-liked by the citizens of Greensboro, and seemed to like them in return.
This was probably because the town respected Mantle's privacy, refusing either to talk about their famous neighbor to outsiders or to direct fans to his home.
In one interview, Mantle stated that the people of Greensboro had "gone out of their way to make me feel welcome, and I've found something there I haven't enjoyed since I was a kid."
Mantle's off-field behavior is the subject of the book The Last Boy: Mickey Mantle and the End of America's Childhood, written in 2010 by sports journalist Jane Leavy.
Excerpts from the book have been published in Sports Illustrated.
Mantle was the uncle of actor and musician Kelly Mantle.
Illness and death
Before Mantle sought treatment for alcoholism, he admitted that his hard living had hurt both his playing and his family.
His rationale was that the men in his family had all died young, so he expected to die young as well.
His father died of Hodgkin's disease at age 40 in 1952, and his grandfather also died young of the same disease.
"I'm not gonna be cheated", he would say.
At the time, Mantle did not know that most of the men in his family had inhaled lead and zinc dust in the mines, which contribute to Hodgkin's and other cancers.
He outlived all the men in his family by several years.
As the years passed, Mantle frequently used a line popularized by football legend Bobby Layne, a Dallas neighbor and friend of Mantle's who also died in part due to alcohol abuse: "If I'd known I was gonna live this long, I'd have taken a lot better care of myself."
Mantle's wife and sons all completed treatment for alcoholism and told him he needed to do the same.
He checked into the Betty Ford Clinic on January 7, 1994, after being told by a doctor that his liver was so badly damaged from almost 40 years of drinking that it "looked like a doorstop."
The doctor also bluntly told Mantle that the damage to his system was so severe that "your next drink could be your last."
Also helping Mantle to make the decision to go to the Betty Ford Clinic was sportscaster Pat Summerall, who had played for the New York Giants football team while they played at Yankee Stadium, by then a recovering alcoholic and a member of the same Dallas-area country club as Mantle.
Summerall himself had been treated at the clinic in 1992.
Shortly after Mantle completed treatment, his son Billy died on March 12, 1994, at age 36 of heart problems brought on by years of substance abuse.
Despite the fears of those who knew him that this tragedy would send him back to drinking, he remained sober.
Mickey Jr. later died of liver cancer on December 20, 2000, at age 47.
Danny later battled prostate cancer.
Mantle spoke with great remorse of his drinking in a 1994 Sports Illustrated cover story.
He said that he was telling the same old stories, and realizing how many of them involved himself and others being drunk, including at least one drunk-driving accident, he decided they were not funny any more.
He admitted he had often been cruel and hurtful to family, friends, and fans because of his alcoholism, and sought to make amends.
Mantle became a Christian because of his former teammate Bobby Richardson, an ordained Baptist minister who shared his faith with him.
After the bombing of the Alfred P. Murrah Federal Building in Oklahoma City on April 19, 1995, Mantle joined with fellow Oklahoman and Yankee Bobby Murcer to raise money for the victims.
Mantle received a liver transplant at Baylor University Medical Center in Dallas, on June 8, 1995.
His liver had been severely damaged by alcohol-induced cirrhosis as well as hepatitis C.
Prior to the operation, doctors also discovered that he had an inoperable type of liver cancer known as an undifferentiated hepatocellular carcinoma, which further necessitated a transplant.
In July, he had recovered enough to deliver a press conference at Baylor, and noted that many fans had looked to him as a role model.
"This is a role model: Don't be like me," a frail Mantle said.
He also established the Mickey Mantle Foundation to raise awareness for organ donations.
Mantle returned to the hospital shortly thereafter where it was found that his cancer had spread throughout his body.
Mantle's popularity led to controversy concerning the conditions of his liver transplant.
Some felt that his fame had permitted him to receive a donor liver in just one day, bypassing other patients who had been waiting much longer.
Mantle's doctors insisted that the decision was based solely on medical criteria, but acknowledged that the very short wait created the appearance of favoritism.
During Mantle's recovery he made peace with his estranged wife, Merlyn, and repeated a request he made decades before for Bobby Richardson to read a poem at his funeral if he died.
Mantle died on August 13, 1995, at Baylor University Medical Center with his wife at his side, five months after his mother had died at age 91.
The Yankees played the Indians that day and honored him with a tribute.
At Mantle's funeral, Eddie Layton played "Somewhere Over the Rainbow" on the Hammond organ because Mickey had once told him it was his favorite song.
Roy Clark sang and played "Yesterday, When I Was Young."
The team played the rest of the season with black mourning bands topped by a number 7 on their left sleeves.
Mantle was interred in the Sparkman-Hillcrest Memorial Park Cemetery in Dallas.
In eulogizing Mantle, sportscaster Bob Costas described him as "a fragile hero to whom we had an emotional attachment so strong and lasting that it defied logic."
Costas added: "In the last year of his life, Mickey Mantle, always so hard on himself, finally came to accept and appreciate the distinction between a role model and a hero.
The first, he often was not.
The second, he always will be.
And, in the end, people got it."
Richardson did oblige in reading the poem at Mantle's funeral, something he described as being extremely difficult.
After Mantle's death, his family pursued a federal court lawsuit against Greer Johnson, his agent and live-in aide during the last decade of his life, to stop her from auctioning many of Mantle's personal items, including a lock of hair, a neck brace, and expired credit cards.
Eventually, the two sides reached a settlement, ensuring the sale of some of Mickey Mantle's belongings for approximately $500,000.
Honors
Mantle was inducted into the Oklahoma Hall of Fame in 1964.
On Mickey Mantle Day at Yankee Stadium, June 8, 1969, Mantle's Number 7 was retired and he was a given a bronze plaque to be hung on the center field wall near the monuments to Babe Ruth, Lou Gehrig, and Miller Huggins.
The plaque was officially presented to Mantle by Joe DiMaggio.
Mantle afterwards, gave a similar plaque to DiMaggio, telling the huge crowd in Yankee Stadium, "Joe DiMaggio's deserves to be higher."
In response, DiMaggio's plaque was hung one inch higher than Mantle's.
When Yankee Stadium was reopened in 1976 following its renovation, the plaques and monuments were moved to a newly created Monument Park behind the left-center field fence,
Shortly before his death, Mantle videotaped a message to be played on Old-Timers' Day, which he was too ill to attend.
He said, "When I die, I wanted on my tombstone, 'A great teammate.'
But I didn't think it would be this soon."
The words were indeed carved on the plaque marking his resting place at the family mausoleum in Dallas.
On August 25, 1996, about a year after his death, Mantle's Monument Park plaque was replaced with a monument, bearing the words "A great teammate" and keeping a phrase that had been included on the original plaque: "A magnificent Yankee who left a legacy of unequaled courage."
Mantle's monument now stands at the current Monument Park.
Mantle's original plaque, along with DiMaggio's, are now on display at the Yogi Berra Museum and Learning Center, with the DiMaggio plaque still hung higher than Mantle's.
Mantle and former teammate Whitey Ford were elected to the Baseball Hall of Fame together in , Mantle's first year of eligibility, Ford's second.
Beginning in 1997, the Topps Baseball Card company retired card #7 in its baseball flagship sets in tribute to Mantle, whose career was taking off just as Topps began producing them.
Mantle's cards, especially his 1952 Topps, are extremely popular and valuable among card collectors.
Topps un-retired the #7 in 2006 to use exclusively for cards of Mantle in the current year's design.
In 2017, Topps began including #7 cards in its main sets again, with Yankees catcher Gary Sanchez being the first player other than Mickey Mantle to appear in the #7 slot since 1995.
In 2018, the #7 card was issued to Yankees outfielder Clint Frazier.
In 2019, the #7 card was issued to Yankees second baseman Gleyber Torres.
In 1998 "The Sporting News" placed Mantle at 17th on its list of "Baseball's 100 Greatest Players".
That same year, he was one of 100 nominees for the Major League Baseball All-Century Team, and was chosen by fan balloting as one of the team's outfielders.
ESPN's SportsCentury series that ran in 1999 ranked him No. 37 on its "50 Greatest Athletes" series.
A school in Manhattan was renamed for Mantle on June 4, 2002.
In 2006, Mantle was featured on a United States postage stamp, one of a series of four including fellow baseball legends Mel Ott, Roy Campanella, and Hank Greenberg.
A statue of Mantle is located at Mickey Mantle Plaza at Chickasaw Bricktown Ballpark, the home stadium of the Triple-A Oklahoma City Dodgers, 2 South Mickey Mantle Drive in Oklahoma City.
Awards and achievements
Song and film appearances, depictions, and references
Mantle made a (talking) cameo appearance in Teresa Brewer's 1956 song "I Love Mickey", which extolled Mantle's power hitting.
The song was included in one of the Baseball's Greatest Hits CDs.
In 1962 Mantle and Maris starred as themselves in the movie Safe at Home!
This was followed that year by the Universal Pictures film, That Touch of Mink, starring Cary Grant and Doris Day.
During the movie, Mickey Mantle is seen in the Yankees dugout with Roger Maris and Yogi Berra, sitting next to Day and Grant as Day shouts her dissatisfaction with the umpire, Art Passarella.
In 1980 Mantle had a cameo appearance in The White Shadow, and in 1983, he had a cameo appearance in Remington Steele with Whitey Ford.
In 1981 the song "Talkin' Baseball" by Terry Cashman names Mantle in the refrain, "Willie, Mickey, and The Duke".
In 1993 and 1996, Mantle is referenced multiple times in the sitcom Seinfeld, specifically the episodes "The Visa" (1993), where Kramer punches him while at a baseball fantasy camp, and "The Seven" (1996), where George Costanza wants to name his future baby 'Seven' based on Mickey Mantle's uniform number.
Mantle appeared in Ken Burns's 1994 documentary Baseball.
Mantle appeared in the 1958 film Damn Yankees as himself in an uncredited role.
Mantle is referenced in the 1994 film Little Big League by character Billy Heywood: "You guys get to go to Yankee Stadium.
Play in the same outfield as Joe DiMaggio and Mickey Mantle."
In 1998 award-winning poet B. H. Fairchild published a narrative baseball poem Body and Soul that depicted the young Mickey Mantle in 1946.
In 2000, American recording artist Tony Sciuto included the song "Mickey Mantle" on his Union of the Soul album.
The 2001 film 61*, produced by Yankee fan Billy Crystal, chronicled Mantle and Roger Maris chasing Babe Ruth's 1927 single season home run record in 1961.
Mantle was played by Thomas Jane, and Maris by Barry Pepper.
Mantle's son Danny and grandson Will appeared briefly as a father and son watching Mantle hit a home run.
In 2003, Tom Russell's album Modern Art included the song "The Kid from Spavinaw", retelling the arc of Mantle's career.
In 2013-14, the Broadway play Bronx Bombers includes Mantle as a character.
In 2017, Bleachers' album Gone Now included the song "Dream of Mickey Mantle".
*List of Major League Baseball players to hit for the cycle
*List of Major League Baseball career home run leaders
*List of Major League Baseball career runs scored leaders
*List of Major League Baseball career runs batted in leaders
*List of Major League Baseball career stolen bases leaders
*List of Major League Baseball career total bases leaders
*List of Major League Baseball annual home run leaders
*List of Major League Baseball annual runs batted in leaders
*List of Major League Baseball annual runs scored leaders
*List of Major League Baseball annual triples leaders
*List of Major League Baseball players who spent their entire career with one franchise
Notes
Footnotes
Further reading
* https:/ image ?terms=%22signed%2Bby%2Byankees%22
"Signed By Yankees".
The Brooklyn Eagle.
September 24, 1950.
* United Press.
https:/ image ?terms=%22mantle%2Byanks%2Brookie%2Bloses%2Bduel%2Bwith%2Bsun%22
"Mantle, Yanks' Rookie, Loses Duel With Sun".
The Brooklyn Eagle.
March 12, 1951.
* Holmes, Tommy.
https:/ image ?terms=%22mickey+mantle%22
"Higher Education of Mickey Mantle".
The Brooklyn Eagle.
May 23, 1951.
* Burr, Harold.
https:/ image ?terms=%22mickey%2Bmantle%2Binherits%2Bbaseball%27s%2Bbiggest%2Bjob%22
"Mickey Mantle Inherits Baseball's Biggest Job".
The Brooklyn Eagle.
December 16, 1951.
