The Black Sea is a body of water and marginal sea of the Atlantic Ocean between Eastern Europe, the Caucasus, and Western Asia.
It is supplied by a number of major rivers, such as the Danube, Dnieper, Southern Bug, Dniester, Don, and the Rioni.
Areas of many countries drain into the Black Sea, including Germany, Russia, Turkey and Ukraine.
The Black Sea has an area of (not including the Sea of Azov), a maximum depth of , and a volume of .
It is constrained by the Pontic Mountains to the south, Caucasus Mountains to the east, Crimean Mountains to the north, Strandzha to the southwest, Balkan Mountains to the west, Dobrogea Plateau to the northwest, and features a wide shelf to the northwest.
The longest east-west extent is about .
Important cities along the coast include Odessa, Sevastopol, Samsun, and Istanbul.
The Black Sea is bordered by Ukraine, Romania, Bulgaria, Turkey, Georgia, and Russia.
It has a positive water balance; that is, a net outflow of water per year through the Bosphorus and the Dardanelles into the Aegean Sea.
There is a two-way hydrological exchange: the more saline and therefore denser, but warmer, Mediterranean water flows into the Black Sea under its less saline outflow.
This creates a significant anoxic layer well below the surface waters.
The Black Sea drains into the Mediterranean Sea, via the Aegean Sea and various straits, and is navigable to the Atlantic Ocean.
The Bosphorus Strait connects it to the Sea of Marmara, and the Strait of the Dardanelles connects that sea to the Aegean Sea region of the Mediterranean.
The Black Sea is also connected, to the north, to the Sea of Azov by the Strait of Kerch.
The water level has varied significantly over geological time.
Due to these variations in the water level in the basin, the surrounding shelf and associated aprons have sometimes been dry land.
At certain critical water levels it is possible for connections with surrounding water bodies to become established.
It is through the most active of these connective routes, the Turkish Straits, that the Black Sea joins the world ocean.
During geological periods when this hydrological link wasn't present, the Black Sea was an endorheic basin, operating independently of the global ocean system (similar to the Caspian Sea nowadays).
Currently, the Black Sea water level is relatively high; thus, water is being exchanged with the Mediterranean.
The Turkish Straits connect the Black Sea with the Aegean Sea, and comprise the Bosphorus, the Sea of Marmara and the Dardanelles.
The Black Sea undersea river is a current of particularly saline water flowing through the Bosphorus Strait and along the seabed of the Black Sea.
The discovery of the river, announced on 1 August 2010, was made by scientists at the University of Leeds, and is the first of its kind in the world.
The undersea river stems from salty water spilling through the Bosphorus Strait from the Mediterranean Sea into the Black Sea, where the water has a lower salt content.
::On the Southwest.
The Northeastern limit of the Sea of Marmara A line joining Cape Rumili with Cape Anatoli (41°13'N).
::In the Kertch Strait.
A line joining Cape Takil and Cape Panaghia (45°02'N).
Population
Name
Modern names
Current names of the sea are usually equivalents of the English name "Black Sea", including these given in the countries bordering the sea:
Such names have not yet been shown conclusively to predate the 13th century.
In Greece, the historical name "Euxine Sea", which holds a different meaning (see below), is still widely used:
Historical names and etymology
The principal Greek name "Póntos Áxeinos" is generally accepted to be a rendering of Iranian word ("dark colored"), compare Avestan ("dark colored"), Old Persian (color of turquoise), Middle Persian / ("blue"), and New Persian ("blue"), as well as Ossetic ("dark gray").
The ancient Greeks, most likely those living to the north of the Black Sea, subsequently adopted the name and altered it to .
Thereafter, Greek tradition refers to the Black Sea as the "Inhospitable Sea", , which is first attested in Pindar ().
The name was considered to be "ominous" and was later changed into the euphemistic name "Hospitable sea", , which was also for the first time attested in Pindar.
This became the commonly used designation for the sea in Greek.
In contexts related to mythology, the older form remained favored.
It has been erroneously suggested that the name was derived from the color of the water, or was at least related to climatic conditions.
Black or dark in this context, however, referred to a system in which colors represent the cardinal points of the known world.
Black or dark represented the north; red the south; white the west; and green or light blue for the east.
The symbolism based on cardinal points was used in multiple occasions and is therefore widely attested.
For example, the "Red Sea", a body of water reported since the time of Herodotus (-) in fact designated the Indian Ocean, together with bodies of water now known as the Persian Gulf and the Red Sea.
According to the same explanation and reasoning, it is therefore considered to be impossible for the Scythians, who principally roamed in present-day Ukraine and Russia, to have given the designation because they lived to the north of the sea, which would be therefore be a southern body of water for them.
The name could have only been given by people who were aware of both the northern "black/dark" and southern "red" seas; it is therefore considered probable it was given its name by the Achaemenids (550-330&thinsp;BC).
Strabo's Geographica (1.2.10) reports that in antiquity, the Black Sea was often simply called "the Sea" ( ).
He also thought the Black Sea was called "inhospitable" before Greek colonization because it was difficult to navigate and because its shores were inhabited by savage tribes.
(7.3.6) The name was changed to "hospitable" after the Milesians had colonized the Pontus region of the southern shoreline, making it part of Greek civilization.
In Greater Bundahishn, a sacred Zoroastrian text written in Middle Persian, the Black Sea is called .
A 1570 map of Asia titled from Abraham Ortelius's labels the sea ("Great Sea", compare Latin ).
English-language writers of the 18th century often used the name Euxine Sea ( or ) to refer to the Black Sea.
Edward Gibbon, for instance, calls the sea by this name throughout The History of the Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire.
During the Ottoman Empire period, the Black Sea was called either or , both meaning "the Black Sea" in the Ottoman Turkish.
In the tenth-century geography book , which was written in Persian by an unknown author, the Black Sea is called Georgian Sea, Sea of Georgians ().
Old Georgian sources of the 9th to 14th centuries, The Georgian Chronicles, used the name (), which means "The Sea of Speri", after the name of the Kartvelian tribe Speris or Saspers, now in Turkey.
The modern names of the Black Sea (, , etc.), originated in the 13th century.
Geology and bathymetry
The geological origins of the basin can be traced back to two distinct relict back-arc basins which were initiated by the splitting of an Albian volcanic arc and the subduction of both the Paleo- and Neo-Tethys Oceans, but the timings of these events remain controversial.
Since its initiation, compressional tectonic environments led to subsidence in the basin, interspersed with extensional phases resulting in large-scale volcanism and numerous orogenies, causing the uplift of the Greater Caucasus, Pontides, Southern Crimean Peninsula and Balkanides mountain ranges.
The ongoing collision between the Eurasian and African plates and westward escape of the Anatolian block along the North Anatolian Fault and East Anatolian Faults dictates the current tectonic regime, It is these geological mechanisms which, in the long term, have caused the periodic isolations of the Black Sea from the rest of the global ocean system.
The modern basin is divided into two sub-basins by a convexity extending south from the Crimean Peninsula.
The large shelf to the north of the basin is up to wide, and features a shallow apron with gradients between 1:40 and 1:1000.
The southern edge around Turkey and the eastern edge around Georgia, however, are typified by a narrow shelf that rarely exceeds in width and a steep apron that is typically 1:40 gradient with numerous submarine canyons and channel extensions.
The Euxine abyssal plain in the centre of the Black Sea reaches a maximum depth of just south of Yalta on the Crimean Peninsula.
The littoral zone of the Black Sea is often referred to as the Pontic littoral or Pontic zone.
The area surrounding the Black Sea is commonly referred to as the Black Sea Region.
Its northern part lies within the Chernozem belt (black soil belt) which goes from eastern Croatia (Slavonia), along the Danube (northern Serbia, northern Bulgaria (Danubian Plain) and southern Romania (Wallachian Plain)) to northeast Ukraine and further across the Central Black Earth Region and southern Russia into Siberia.
Hydrology
The Black Sea is a marginal sea and is the world's largest body of water with a meromictic basin.
The deep waters do not mix with the upper layers of water that receive oxygen from the atmosphere.
As a result, over 90% of the deeper Black Sea volume is anoxic water.
The Black Sea's circulation patterns are primarily controlled by basin topography and fluvial inputs, which result in a strongly stratified vertical structure.
Because of the extreme stratification, it is classified as a salt wedge estuary.
The Black Sea only experiences water transfer with the Mediterranean Sea, so all inflow and outflow occurs in the Bosphorus and Dardanelles.
Inflow from the Mediterranean has a higher salinity and density than the outflow, creating the classical estuarine circulation.
This means that inflow of dense water from the Mediterranean occurs at the bottom of the basin while outflow of fresher Black Sea surface-water into the Marmara Sea occurs near the surface.
Fresher surface water is the product of the fluvial inputs, and this makes the Black Sea a positive sea.
The net input of freshwater creates an outflow volume about twice that of the inflow.
Evaporation and precipitation are roughly equal at about .
Beneath the surface waters-from about 50-100 meters-there exists a halocline that stops at the Cold Intermediate Layer (CIL).
This layer is composed of cool, salty surface waters, which are the result of localized atmospheric cooling and decreased fluvial input during the winter months.
It is the remnant of the winter surface mixed layer.
As a result of these characteristics the Black Sea has gained interest from the field of marine archaeology as ancient shipwrecks in excellent states of preservation have been discovered, such as the Byzantine wreck Sinop D, located in the anoxic layer off the coast of Sinop, Turkey.
Modelling shows the release of the hydrogen sulfide clouds in the event of an asteroid impact into the Black Sea would pose a threat to health-or even life-for people living on the Black Sea coast.
There have been isolated reports of flares on the Black Sea occurring during thunderstorms, possibly caused by lightning igniting combustible gas seeping up from the sea depths.
Ecology
Marine
The Black Sea supports an active and dynamic marine ecosystem, dominated by species suited to the brackish, nutrient-rich, conditions.
As with all marine food webs, the Black Sea features a range of trophic groups, with autotrophic algae, including diatoms and dinoflagellates, acting as primary producers.
The fluvial systems draining Eurasia and central Europe introduce large volumes of sediment and dissolved nutrients into the Black Sea, but distribution of these nutrients is controlled by the degree of physiochemical stratification, which is, in turn, dictated by seasonal physiographic development.
During winter, strong wind promotes convective overturning and upwelling of nutrients, while high summer temperatures result in a marked vertical stratification and a warm, shallow mixed layer.
Day length and insolation intensity also controls the extent of the photic zone.
Subsurface productivity is limited by nutrient availability, as the anoxic bottom waters act as a sink for reduced nitrate, in the form of ammonia.
The benthic zone also plays an important role in Black Sea nutrient cycling, as chemosynthetic organisms and anoxic geochemical pathways recycle nutrients which can be upwelled to the photic zone, enhancing productivity.
In total, Black Sea's biodiversity contains around one-third of Mediterranean's, and is experiencing natural and artificial invasions or Mediterranizations.
Phytoplankton
The main phytoplankton groups present in the Black Sea are dinoflagellates, diatoms, coccolithophores and cyanobacteria.
Generally, the annual cycle of phytoplankton development comprises significant diatom and dinoflagellate-dominated spring production, followed by a weaker mixed assemblage of community development below the seasonal thermocline during summer months and a surface-intensified autumn production.
This pattern of productivity is also augmented by an Emiliania huxleyi bloom during the late spring and summer months.
: Annual dinoflagellate distribution is defined by an extended bloom period in subsurface waters during the late spring and summer.
In November, subsurface plankton production is combined with surface production, due to vertical mixing of water masses and nutrients such as nitrite.
Estimates of dinoflagellate diversity in the Black Sea range from 193 to 267 species.
This level of species richness is relatively low in comparison to the Mediterranean Sea, which is attributable to the brackish conditions, low water transparency and presence of anoxic bottom waters.
It is also possible that the low winter temperatures below of the Black Sea prevent thermophilous species from becoming established.
The relatively high organic matter content of Black Sea surface water favour the development of heterotrophic (an organism which uses organic carbon for growth) and mixotrophic dinoflagellates species (able to exploit different trophic pathways), relative to autotrophs.
Despite its unique hydrographic setting, there are no confirmed endemic dinoflagellate species in the Black Sea.
Animal species
: The Black Sea along with the Caspian Sea is part of the Zebra mussel's native range.
The mussel has been accidentally introduced around the world and become an invasive species where it has been introduced.
: The Common Carp's native range extends to The Black Sea along with the Caspian Sea and Aral Sea.
Like the Zebra mussel the Common Carp is an invasive species when introduced to other habitats.
: Is another native fish that is also found in the Caspian Sea.
It preys upon Zebra mussels.
Like the mussels and common carp it has become invasive when introduced to other environments, like the Great Lakes.
: Marine mammals present within the basin include two species of dolphins (common and bottlenose) and harbour porpoise inhabit the sea although all of these are endangered due to pressures and impacts by human activities.
All the three species have been classified as a distinct subspecies from those in the Mediterranean and in Atlantic Seas and endemic to Black and Azov Seas, and are more active during nights in Turkish Straits.
However, construction of the Crimean Bridge caused increases in nutrients and planktons in the waters, attracting large numbers of fish and more than 1,000 bottlenose dolphins.
On the other hand, however, others claim that construction may cause devastating damages on ecosystem including dolphins.
: Critically endangered Mediterranean monk seals were historically abundant in Black Sea, and are regarded to have become extinct from the basin in 1997.
Monk seals were present at the Snake Island until 1950s, and several locations such as the and Doğankent were last of hauling-out sites in post-1990.
Very few animals still thrive in the Sea of Marmara.
: Ongoing Mediterranizations may or may not boost in increases of cetacean diversity in Turkish Straits were introduced into the Black Sea by mankind and later escaped either by accidental or purported causes.
Of these, grey seal and beluga whales
Ecological effects of pollution
Since the 1960s, rapid industrial expansion along the Black Sea coast line and the construction of a major dam has significantly increased annual variability in the N:P:
Si ratio in the basin.
In coastal areas, the biological effect of these changes has been an increase in the frequency of monospecific phytoplankton blooms, with diatom bloom frequency increasing by a factor of 2.5 and non-diatom bloom frequency increasing by a factor of 6.
The non-diatoms, such as the prymnesiophytes (coccolithophore), sp., and the Euglenophyte are able to out-compete diatom species because of the limited availability of Si, a necessary constituent of diatom frustules.
As a consequence of these blooms, benthic macrophyte populations were deprived of light, while anoxia caused mass mortality in marine animals.
The decline in macrophytes was further compounded by overfishing during the 1970s, while the invasive ctenophore Mnemiopsis reduced the biomass of copepods and other zooplankton in the late 1980s.
Additionally, an alien species-the warty comb jelly ()-was able to establish itself in the basin, exploding from a few individuals to an estimated biomass of one billion metric tons.
The change in species composition in Black Sea waters also has consequences for hydrochemistry, as Ca-producing coccolithophores influence salinity and pH, although these ramifications have yet to be fully quantified.
In central Black Sea waters, Si levels were also significantly reduced, due to a decrease in the flux of Si associated with advection across isopycnal surfaces.
This phenomenon demonstrates the potential for localised alterations in Black Sea nutrient input to have basin-wide effects.
Pollution reduction and regulation efforts have led to a partial recovery of the Black Sea ecosystem during the 1990s, and an EU monitoring exercise, 'EROS21', revealed decreased N and P values, relative to the 1989 peak.
Recently, scientists have noted signs of ecological recovery, in part due to the construction of new sewage treatment plants in Slovakia, Hungary, Romania, and Bulgaria in connection with membership in the European Union.
populations have been checked with the arrival of another alien species which feeds on them.
File:black sea fauna jelly 01.jpg|Jellyfish
File:black sea fauna actinia 01.jpg|Actinia
File:black sea fauna actinia 02.JPG|Actinia
File:black sea fauna goby 01.jpg|Goby
File:black sea fauna stingray 01.jpg|Stingray
File:Black sea mullus barbatus ponticus 01.jpg|Goat fish
File:Black sea fauna hermit crab 01.jpg|Hermit crab, Diogenes pugilator
File:Black sea fauna blue sponge.jpg|Blue sponge
File:Squalus acanthias2.jpg|Spiny dogfish
File:Black Sea fauna Seahorse.
JPG|Seahorse
File:Kitesurfer and Dolphins Cropped.jpg|Black Sea Common Dolphins with a kite-surfer off Sochi
Terrestrial
In the past, the range of the Asiatic lion extended from South Asia to the Balkans, possibly up to the Danube.
Places like Turkey and the Trans-Caucasus were in this range.
The Caspian tiger occurred in eastern Turkey and the Caucasus, at least.
The lyuti zver (Old East Slavic for "fierce animal") that was encountered by Vladimir II Monomakh, Velikiy Kniaz of Kievan Rus' (which ranged to the Black Sea in the south), may have been a tiger or leopard, rather than a wolf or lynx, due to the way it behaved towards him and his horse.
Climate
Short-term climatic variation in the Black Sea region is significantly influenced by the operation of the North Atlantic oscillation, the climatic mechanisms resulting from the interaction between the north Atlantic and mid-latitude air masses.
While the exact mechanisms causing the North Atlantic Oscillation remain unclear, it is thought the climate conditions established in western Europe mediate the heat and precipitation fluxes reaching Central Europe and Eurasia, regulating the formation of winter cyclones, which are largely responsible for regional precipitation inputs and influence Mediterranean Sea Surface Temperatures (SST's).
The relative strength of these systems also limits the amount of cold air arriving from northern regions during winter.
Other influencing factors include the regional topography, as depressions and storms systems arriving from the Mediterranean are funneled through the low land around the Bosphorus, Pontic and Caucasus mountain ranges acting as wave guides, limiting the speed and paths of cyclones passing through the region.
Islands
There are some islands in the Black sea that belong to Bulgaria, Romania, Turkey, and Ukraine:
History
Mediterranean connection during the Holocene
The Black Sea is connected to the World Ocean by a chain of two shallow straits, the Dardanelles and the Bosphorus.
The Dardanelles is deep and the Bosphorus is as shallow as .
By comparison, at the height of the last ice age, sea levels were more than lower than they are now.
There is also evidence that water levels in the Black Sea were considerably lower at some point during the post-glacial period.
Some researchers theorize that the Black Sea had been a landlocked freshwater lake (at least in upper layers) during the last glaciation and for some time after.
In the aftermath of the last glacial period, water levels in the Black Sea and the Aegean Sea rose independently until they were high enough to exchange water.
The exact timeline of this development is still subject to debate.
One possibility is that the Black Sea filled first, with excess fresh water flowing over the Bosphorus sill and eventually into the Mediterranean Sea.
There are also catastrophic scenarios, such as the "Black Sea deluge theory" put forward by William Ryan, Walter Pitman and .
Deluge hypothesis
The Black Sea deluge is a hypothesized catastrophic rise in the level of the Black Sea circa 5600 BC due to waters from the Mediterranean Sea breaching a sill in the Bosporus Strait.
The hypothesis was headlined when The New York Times published it in December 1996, shortly before it was published in an academic journal.
While it is agreed that the sequence of events described did occur, there is debate over the suddenness, dating and magnitude of the events.
Relevant to the hypothesis is that its description has led some to connect this catastrophe with prehistoric flood myths.
Recorded history
The Black Sea was a busy waterway on the crossroads of the ancient world: the Balkans to the west, the Eurasian steppes to the north, Caucasus and Central Asia to the east, Asia Minor and Mesopotamia to the south, and Greece to the south-west.
The oldest processed gold in the world was found in Varna, Bulgaria, and the Black Sea was supposedly sailed by the Argonauts.
The land at the eastern end of the Black Sea, Colchis, (now Georgia), marked for the Greeks the edge of the known world.
The steppes to the north of the Black Sea have been suggested as the original homeland () of the speakers of the Proto-Indo-European language, (PIE) the progenitor of the Indo-European language family, by some scholars such as Marija Gimbutas; others move the heartland further east towards the Caspian Sea, yet others to Anatolia.
The Black Sea became an Ottoman Navy lake within five years of Genoa losing the Crimean Peninsula in 1479, after which the only Western merchant vessels to sail its waters were those of Venice's old rival Ragusa.
This restriction was gradually changed by the Russian Navy from 1783 until the relaxation of export controls in 1789 because of the French Revolution.
The Black Sea was a significant naval theatre of World War I and saw both naval and land battles during World War II.
Archaeology
Ancient trade routes in the region are currently being extensively studied by scientists, as the Black Sea was sailed by Hittites, Carians, Colchians, Thracians, Greeks, Persians, Cimmerians, Scythians, Romans, Byzantines, Goths, Huns, Avars, Slavs, Varangians, Crusaders, Venetians, Genoese, Georgians, Tatars and Ottomans.
Perhaps the most promising areas in deepwater archaeology are the quest for submerged prehistoric settlements in the continental shelf and for ancient shipwrecks in the anoxic zone, which are expected to be exceptionally well preserved due to the absence of oxygen.
This concentration of historical powers, combined with the preservative qualities of the deep anoxic waters of the Black Sea, has attracted increased interest from marine archaeologists who have begun to discover a large number of ancient ships and organic remains in a high state of preservation.
Modern use
Commercial and civic use
According to NATO, the Black sea is a strategic corridor that provides smuggling channels for moving legal and illegal goods including drugs, radioactive materials, and counterfeit goods that can be used to finance terrorism.
Navigation
Ports and ferry terminals
According to the International Transport Workers' Federation 2013 study, there were at least 30 operating merchant seaports in the Black Sea (including at least 12 in Ukraine).
Merchant fleet and traffic
According to the International Transport Workers' Federation 2013 study, there were around 2,400 commercial vessels operating in the Black Sea.
Hydrocarbons exploration
Since the 1980s, the Soviet Union started offshore drilling for petroleum in the sea's western portion (adjoining Ukraine's coast).
The independent Ukraine continued and intensified that effort within its exclusive economic zone, inviting major international oil companies for exploration.
Discovery of the new, massive oilfields in the area stimulated an influx of foreign investments.
It also provoked a short-term peaceful territorial dispute with Romania which was resolved in 2011 by an international court redefining the exclusive economic zones between the two countries.
Holiday resorts and spas
In the years following the end of the Cold War, the popularity of the Black Sea as a tourist destination steadily increased.
Tourism at Black Sea resorts became one of the region's growth industries.
The following is a list of notable Black Sea resort towns:
Modern military use
International and military use of the Straits
The 1936 Montreux Convention provides for a free passage of civilian ships between the international waters of the Black and the Mediterranean Seas.
However, a single country (Turkey) has a complete control over the straits connecting the two seas.
Military ships are separate category from civilian ships and they can only pass through the straits if the ship is belonging to a Black Sea power.
Other military ships have the right to pass through the straits if they are not in war against Turkey and they can stay in the Black Sea basin for a limited period of time.
The 1982 amendments to the Montreux Convention allow Turkey to close the Straits at its discretion in both wartime and peacetime.
The 1936 Montreux Convention governs the passage of vessels between the Black, the Mediterranean and Aegean Seas and the presence of military vessels belonging to non-littoral states in the Black Sea waters.
In December 2018, the Kerch Strait incident took place.
The Russian Navy and Coast guard took control of three ships belonging to their counterparts.
The ships were trying to enter the Black Sea
Trans-sea cooperation
