Allosaurus () is a genus of carnivorous theropod dinosaur that lived 155 to 145 million years ago during the late Jurassic period (Kimmeridgian to late Tithonian).
The name "Allosaurus" means "different lizard" alluding to its unique concave vertebrae (at the time of its discovery).
It is derived from the Greek sauros ("lizard / generic reptile").
The first fossil remains that could definitively be ascribed to this genus were described in 1877 by paleontologist Othniel Charles Marsh.
As one of the first well-known theropod dinosaurs, it has long attracted attention outside of paleontological circles.
Allosaurus was a large bipedal predator.
Its skull was large and equipped with dozens of sharp, serrated teeth.
It averaged in length, though fragmentary remains suggest it could have reached over .
Relative to the large and powerful hindlimbs, its three-fingered forelimbs were small, and the body was balanced by a long and heavily muscled tail.
It is classified as an allosaurid, a type of carnosaurian theropod dinosaur.
The genus has a complicated taxonomy, and includes an uncertain number of valid species, the best known of which is A. fragilis.
The bulk of Allosaurus remains have come from North America's Morrison Formation, with material also known from Portugal and possibly Tanzania.
It was known for over half of the 20th century as Antrodemus, but a study of the copious remains from the Cleveland-Lloyd Dinosaur Quarry brought the name "Allosaurus" back to prominence and established it as one of the best-known dinosaurs.
As the most abundant large predator in the Morrison Formation, Allosaurus was at the top of the food chain, probably preying on contemporaneous large herbivorous dinosaurs, and perhaps even other predators.
Potential prey included ornithopods, stegosaurids, and sauropods.
Some paleontologists interpret Allosaurus as having had cooperative social behavior, and hunting in packs, while others believe individuals may have been aggressive toward each other, and that congregations of this genus are the result of lone individuals feeding on the same carcasses.
Description
Allosaurus was a typical large theropod, having a massive skull on a short neck, a long, slightly sloping tail and reduced forelimbs.
Allosaurus fragilis, the best-known species, had an average length of , with the largest definitive Allosaurus specimen (AMNH 680) estimated at long, and an estimated weight of .
As with dinosaurs in general, weight estimates are debatable, and since 1980 have ranged between , , and for modal adult weight (not maximum).
John Foster, a specialist on the Morrison Formation, suggests that is reasonable for large adults of A. fragilis, but that is a closer estimate for individuals represented by the average-sized thigh bones he has measured.
Using the subadult specimen nicknamed "Big Al", researchers using computer modelling arrived at a best estimate of for the individual, but by varying parameters they found a range from approximately to approximately .
Several gigantic specimens have been attributed to Allosaurus, but may in fact belong to other genera.
The closely related genus Saurophaganax (OMNH 1708) reached perhaps in length, Another potential specimen of Allosaurus, once assigned to the genus Epanterias (AMNH 5767), may have measured in length.
David K. Smith, examining Allosaurus fossils by quarry, found that the Cleveland-Lloyd Dinosaur Quarry (Utah) specimens are generally smaller than those from Como Bluff (Wyoming) or Brigham Young University's Dry Mesa Quarry (Colorado), but the shapes of the bones themselves did not vary between the sites.
A later study by Smith incorporating Garden Park (Colorado) and Dinosaur National Monument (Utah) specimens found no justification for multiple species based on skeletal variation; skull variation was most common and was gradational, suggesting individual variation was responsible.
Kenneth Carpenter, using skull elements from the Cleveland-Lloyd site, found wide variation between individuals, calling into question previous species-level distinctions based on such features as the shape of the horns, and the proposed differentiation of "A. jimmadseni" based on the shape of the jugal.
Skull
The skull and teeth of Allosaurus were modestly proportioned for a theropod of its size.
Paleontologist Gregory S. Paul gives a length of for a skull belonging to an individual he estimates at long.
Each premaxilla (the bones that formed the tip of the snout) held five teeth with D-shaped cross-sections, and each maxilla (the main tooth-bearing bones in the upper jaw) had between 14 and 17 teeth; the number of teeth does not exactly correspond to the size of the bone.
Each dentary (the tooth-bearing bone of the lower jaw) had between 14 and 17 teeth, with an average count of 16.
The teeth became shorter, narrower, and more curved toward the back of the skull.
All of the teeth had saw-like edges.
They were shed easily, and were replaced continually, making them common fossils.
(although they were fragile).
Within the maxillae were sinuses that were better developed than those of more basal theropods such as Ceratosaurus and Marshosaurus; they may have been related to the sense of smell, perhaps holding something like Jacobson's organ.
The roof of the braincase was thin, perhaps to improve thermoregulation for the brain.
The braincase and frontals may also have had a joint.
The number of tail vertebrae is unknown and varied with individual size; James Madsen estimated about 50, The rib cage was broad, giving it a barrel chest, especially in comparison to less derived theropods like Ceratosaurus.
Allosaurus had gastralia (belly ribs), but these are not common findings, A furcula (wishbone) was also present, but has only been recognized since 1996; in some cases furculae were confused with gastralia.
The ilium, the main hip bone, was massive, and the pubic bone had a prominent foot that may have been used for both muscle attachment and as a prop for resting the body on the ground.
Madsen noted that in about half of the individuals from the Cleveland-Lloyd Dinosaur Quarry, independent of size, the pubes had not fused to each other at their foot ends.
He suggested that this was a sexual characteristic, with females lacking fused bones to make egg-laying easier.
and had three fingers per hand, tipped with large, strongly curved and pointed claws.
The wrist had a version of the semilunate carpal also found in more derived theropods like maniraptorans.
Of the three fingers, the innermost (or thumb) was the largest, The legs were not as long or suited for speed as those of tyrannosaurids, and the claws of the toes were less developed and more hoof-like than those of earlier theropods.
Discovery and history
Early discoveries and research
The discovery and early study of Allosaurus is complicated by the multiplicity of names coined during the Bone Wars of the late 19th century.
The first described fossil in this history was a bone obtained secondhand by Ferdinand Vandiveer Hayden in 1869.
It came from Middle Park, near Granby, Colorado, probably from Morrison Formation rocks.
The locals had identified such bones as "petrified horse hoofs".
Hayden sent his specimen to Joseph Leidy, who identified it as half of a tail vertebra, and tentatively assigned it to the European dinosaur genus Poekilopleuron as Poicilopleuron valens.
He later decided it deserved its own genus, Antrodemus.
Allosaurus itself is based on YPM 1930, a small collection of fragmentary bones including parts of three vertebrae, a rib fragment, a tooth, a toe bone, and, most useful for later discussions, the shaft of the right humerus (upper arm).
Othniel Charles Marsh gave these remains the formal name Allosaurus fragilis in 1877.
Allosaurus comes from the Greek allos σαυρος, meaning "lizard" or "reptile".
It was named 'different lizard' because its vertebrae were different from those of other dinosaurs known at the time of its discovery.
The species epithet fragilis is Latin for "fragile", referring to lightening features in the vertebrae.
The bones were collected from the Morrison Formation of Garden Park, north of Cañon City.
and Cope's Epanterias.
This is the well-known mount poised over a partial Apatosaurus skeleton as if scavenging it, illustrated as such by Charles R. Knight.
Although notable as the first free-standing mount of a theropod dinosaur, and often illustrated and photographed, it has never been scientifically described.
The multiplicity of early names complicated later research, with the situation compounded by the terse descriptions provided by Marsh and Cope.
Even at the time, authors such as Samuel Wendell Williston suggested that too many names had been coined.
For example, Williston pointed out in 1901 that Marsh had never been able to adequately distinguish Allosaurus from Creosaurus.
The most influential early attempt to sort out the convoluted situation was produced by Charles W. Gilmore in 1920.
He came to the conclusion that the tail vertebra named Antrodemus by Leidy was indistinguishable from those of Allosaurus, and Antrodemus thus should be the preferred name because as the older name it had priority.
Cleveland-Lloyd discoveries
Although sporadic work at what became known as the Cleveland-Lloyd Dinosaur Quarry in Emery County, Utah had taken place as early as 1927, and the fossil site itself described by William L. Stokes in 1945, major operations did not begin there until 1960.
Under a cooperative effort involving nearly 40 institutions, thousands of bones were recovered between 1960 and 1965.
Regardless of the actual cause, the great quantity of well-preserved Allosaurus remains has allowed this genus to be known in detail, making it among the best-known theropods.
Skeletal remains from the quarry pertain to individuals of almost all ages and sizes, from less than
Recent work: 1980s-present
The period since Madsen's monograph has been marked by a great expansion in studies dealing with topics concerning Allosaurus in life (paleobiological and paleoecological topics).
Such studies have covered topics including skeletal variation, growth, skull construction, hunting methods, the brain, and the possibility of gregarious living and parental care.
Reanalysis of old material , new discoveries in Portugal, and several very complete new specimens have also contributed to the growing knowledge base.
"Big Al" and "Big Al Two"
In 1991 "Big Al" (MOR 693), a 95% complete, partially articulated specimen of Allosaurus was discovered.
It measured about 8 meters (about 26 ft) in length.
MOR 693 was excavated near Shell, Wyoming, by a joint Museum of the Rockies and University of Wyoming Geological Museum team.
This skeleton was discovered by a Swiss team, led by Kirby Siber.
In 1996 the same team discovered a second Allosaurus, "Big Al Two", which is the best preserved skeleton of its kind to date.
The specimen was described by Breithaupt in 1996.
Big Al Two is also known to have multiple injuries.
Species
There are currently four, if not five, valid and one undescribed species of Allosaurus (A. amplus, possibly A. atrox,).
A. fragilis is the type species and was named by Marsh in 1877.
It differs from A. fragilis in several anatomical details including a jugal or cheekbone with a straight lower margin, and is confined to the Salt Wash Member of the Morrison Formation, while A. fragilis is only present in the higher Brushy Basin Member.
A. fragilis, "A. jimmadseni", A. amplus, and A. lucasi are all known from remains discovered in the Kimmeridgian-Tithonian Upper Jurassic-age Morrison Formation of the United States, spread across the states of Colorado, Montana, New Mexico, Oklahoma, South Dakota, Utah and Wyoming.
A. fragilis is regarded as the most common, known from the remains of at least sixty individuals.
however, subsequent analysis of specimens from the Cleveland-Lloyd Dinosaur Quarry, Como Bluff, and Dry Mesa Quarry showed that the differences seen in the Morrison Formation material could be attributed to individual variation.
but may be the same as A. fragilis.
The issue of species and potential synonyms is complicated by the type specimen of Allosaurus fragilis (catalog number YPM 1930) being extremely fragmentary, consisting of a few incomplete vertebrae, limb bone fragments, rib fragments, and a tooth.
Because of this, several scientists have interpreted the type specimen as potentially dubious, and thus the genus Allosaurus itself or at least the species A. fragilis would be a nomen dubium ("dubious name", based on a specimen too incomplete to compare to other specimens or to classify).
To address this situation, Gregory S. Paul and Kenneth Carpenter (2010) submitted a petition to the ICZN to have the name "A. fragilis" officially transferred to the more complete specimen USNM4734 (as a neotype).
This request is currently pending review.
Synonyms
Creosaurus, Epanterias, and Labrosaurus are regarded as junior synonyms of Allosaurus.
Later researchers suggested that the bone was pathologic, showing an injury to the living animal, It is now regarded as an example of A. fragilis.
and YPM 1893 has been treated as a specimen of A fragilis.
although most of the remains were removed by Richard Swann Lull to the new ornithopod species Dryosaurus grandis, except for a tooth.
Gilmore considered the tooth nondiagnostic but transferred it to Dryptosaurus, as D. medius.
Allosaurus valens is a new combination for Antrodemus valens used by Friedrich von Huene in 1932; Paul and Carpenter stated that the type specimen of this species, YPM 1931, was from a younger age than Allosaurus, and might represent a different genus.
However, they found that the specimen was undiagnostic, and thus A. lucaris was a nomen dubium.
It was transferred to Chilantaisaurus in 1990, but is now considered a nomen dubium indeterminate beyond Theropoda.
Allosaurus meriani was a new combination by George Olshevsky for Megalosaurus meriani Greppin, 1870, based on a tooth from the Late Jurassic of Switzerland.
However, a recent overview of Ceratosaurus included it in Ceratosaurus sp.
A. amplexus was named by Gregory S. Paul for giant Morrison allosaur remains, and included in his conception Saurophagus maximus (later Saurophaganax).
and is based on what is now AMNH 5767, parts of three vertebrae, a coracoid, and a metatarsal.
Following Paul's work, this species has been accepted as a synonym of A. fragilis.
A. maximus was a new combination by David K. Smith for Chure's Saurophaganax maximus, a taxon created by Chure in 1995 for giant allosaurid remains from the Morrison of Oklahoma.
These remains had been known as Saurophagus, but that name was already in use, leading Chure to propose a substitute.
Although Donald F. Glut listed it as a species of Allosaurus, L. sulcatus, named by Marsh in 1896 for a Morrison theropod tooth, Although tabulated as a tentatively valid species of Allosaurus in the second edition of the Dinosauria, Although obscure, it was a large theropod, possibly around 10 meters long (33 ft) and 2.5 metric tons (2.8 short tons) in weight.
Also, reports of Allosaurus in Shanxi, China go back to at least 1982.
An astragalus (ankle bone) thought to belong to a species of Allosaurus was found at Cape Paterson, Victoria in Early Cretaceous beds in southeastern Australia.
It was thought to provide evidence that Australia was a refugium for animals that had gone extinct elsewhere.
This identification was challenged by Samuel Welles, who thought it more resembled that of an ornithomimid, but the original authors defended their identification.
With fifteen years of new specimens and research to look at, Daniel Chure reexamined the bone and found that it was not Allosaurus, but could represent an allosauroid.
Similarly, Yoichi Azuma and Phil Currie, in their description of Fukuiraptor, noted that the bone closely resembled that of their new genus.
This specimen is sometimes referred to as "Allosaurus robustus", an informal museum name.
or it may represent an abelisaur.
Classification
Allosaurus was an allosaurid, a member of a family of large theropods within the larger group Carnosauria.
The family name Allosauridae was created for this genus in 1878 by Othniel Charles Marsh, but the term was largely unused until the 1970s in favor of Megalosauridae, another family of large theropods that eventually became a wastebasket taxon.
This, along with the use of Antrodemus for Allosaurus during the same period, is a point that needs to be remembered when searching for information on Allosaurus in publications that predate James Madsen's 1976 monograph.
Major publications using the name "Megalosauridae" instead of "Allosauridae" include Gilmore, 1920, Romer, 1956 and 1966, Steel, 1970, and Walker, 1964.
Following the publication of Madsen's influential monograph, Allosauridae became the preferred family assignment, but it too was not strongly defined.
Semi-technical works used Allosauridae for a variety of large theropods, usually those that were larger and better-known than megalosaurids.
Typical theropods that were thought to be related to Allosaurus included Indosaurus, Piatnitzkysaurus, Piveteausaurus, Yangchuanosaurus, Acrocanthosaurus, Chilantaisaurus, Compsosuchus, Stokesosaurus, and Szechuanosaurus.
Given modern knowledge of theropod diversity and the advent of cladistic study of evolutionary relationships, none of these theropods is now recognized as an allosaurid, although several, like Acrocanthosaurus and Yangchuanosaurus, are members of closely related families.
Allosauridae is one of four families in Carnosauria; the other three are Neovenatoridae, but this has been rejected, with tyrannosaurids identified as members of a separate branch of theropods, the Coelurosauria.
Allosauridae is the smallest of the carnosaur families, with only Saurophaganax and a currently unnamed French allosauroid accepted as possible valid genera besides Allosaurus in the most recent review.
Today, this bone tissue is only formed in female birds that are laying eggs, as it is used to supply calcium to shells.
Its presence in the Allosaurus individual has been used to establish sex and show it had reached reproductive age.
However, other studies have called into question some cases of medullary bone in dinosaurs, including this Allosaurus individual.
Data from extant birds suggested that the medullary bone in this Allosaurus individual may have been the result of a bone pathology instead.
However, with the confirmation of medullary tissue indicating gender in a specimen of Tyrannosaurus, it may be possible to ascertain whether or not the Allosaurus in question was indeed female.
The discovery of a juvenile specimen with a nearly complete hindlimb shows that the legs were relatively longer in juveniles, and the lower segments of the leg (shin and foot) were relatively longer than the thigh.
These differences suggest that younger Allosaurus were faster and had different hunting strategies than adults, perhaps chasing small prey as juveniles, then becoming ambush hunters of large prey upon adulthood.
Conversely, the skull bones appear to have generally grown isometrically, increasing in size without changing in proportion.
Sauropods seem to be likely candidates as both live prey and as objects of scavenging, based on the presence of scrapings on sauropod bones fitting allosaur teeth well and the presence of shed allosaur teeth with sauropod bones.
However, as Gregory Paul noted in 1988, Allosaurus was probably not a predator of fully grown sauropods, unless it hunted in packs, as it had a modestly sized skull and relatively small teeth, and was greatly outweighed by contemporaneous sauropods.
but the skull could withstand nearly 55,500 N of vertical force against the tooth row.
The original authors noted that Allosaurus itself has no modern equivalent, that the tooth row is well-suited to such an attack, and that articulations in the skull cited by their detractors as problematic actually helped protect the palate and lessen stress.
Another possibility for handling large prey is that theropods like Allosaurus were "flesh grazers" which could take bites of flesh out of living sauropods that were sufficient to sustain the predator so it would not have needed to expend the effort to kill the prey outright.
This strategy would also potentially have allowed the prey to recover and be fed upon in a similar way later.
A biomechanical study published in 2013 by Eric Snively and colleagues found that Allosaurus had an unusually low attachment point on the skull for the longissimus capitis superficialis neck muscle compared to other theropods such as Tyrannosaurus.
This would have allowed the animal to make rapid and forceful vertical movements with the skull.
The authors found that vertical strikes as proposed by Bakker and Rayfield are consistent with the animal's capabilities.
They also found that the animal probably processed carcasses by vertical movements in a similar manner to falcons, such as kestrels: the animal could have gripped prey with the skull and feet, then pulled back and up to remove flesh.
This differs from the prey-handling envisioned for tyrannosaurids, which probably tore flesh with lateral shakes of the skull, similar to crocodilians.
In addition, Allosaurus was able to "move its head and neck around relatively rapidly and with considerable control", at the cost of power.
Other aspects of feeding include the eyes, arms, and legs.
The shape of the skull of Allosaurus limited potential binocular vision to 20° of width, slightly less than that of modern crocodilians.
As with crocodilians, this may have been enough to judge prey distance and time attacks.
The arms, compared with those of other theropods, were suited for both grasping prey at a distance or clutching it close,
A new paper on the cranio-dental morphology of Allosaurus and how it worked has deemed the hatchet jaw attack unlikely, reinterpreting the unusually wide gape as an adaptation to allow Allosaurus to deliver a muscle-driven bite to large prey, with the weaker jaw muscles being a trade-off to allow for the widened gape.
Social behavior
It has been speculated since the 1970s that Allosaurus preyed on sauropods and other large dinosaurs by hunting in groups.
Such a depiction is common in semitechnical and popular dinosaur literature.
Although Allosaurus may have hunted in packs, it has been argued that Allosaurus and other theropods had largely aggressive interactions instead of cooperative interactions with other members of their own species.
The study in question noted that cooperative hunting of prey much larger than an individual predator, as is commonly inferred for theropod dinosaurs, is rare among vertebrates in general, and modern diapsid carnivores (including lizards, crocodiles, and birds) rarely cooperate to hunt in such a way.
Instead, they are typically territorial and will kill and cannibalize intruders of the same species, and will also do the same to smaller individuals that attempt to eat before they do when aggregated at feeding sites.
According to this interpretation, the accumulation of remains of multiple Allosaurus individuals at the same site, e.g. in the Cleveland-Lloyd Quarry, are not due to pack hunting, but to the fact that Allosaurus individuals were drawn together to feed on other disabled or dead allosaurs, and were sometimes killed in the process.
This could explain the high proportion of juvenile and subadult allosaurs present, as juveniles and subadults are disproportionally killed at modern group feeding sites of animals like crocodiles and Komodo dragons.
The same interpretation applies to Bakker's lair sites.
There is some evidence for cannibalism in Allosaurus, including Allosaurus shed teeth found among rib fragments, possible tooth marks on a shoulder blade, and cannibalized allosaur skeletons among the bones at Bakker's lair sites.
The left scapula and fibula of an Allosaurus fragilis specimen catalogued as USNM 4734 are both pathological, both probably due to healed fractures.
The specimen USNM 8367 preserved several pathological gastralia which preserve evidence of healed fractures near their middle.
Some of the fractures were poorly healed and "formed pseudoarthroses".
A specimen with a fractured rib was recovered from the Cleveland-Lloyd Quarry.
Another specimen had fractured ribs and fused vertebrae near the end of the tail.
An apparent subadult male Allosaurus fragilis was reported to have extensive pathologies, with a total of fourteen separate injuries.
The specimen MOR 693 had pathologies on five ribs, the sixth neck vertebra the third eighth and thirteenth back vertebrae, the second tail vertebra and its chevron, the gastralia right scapula, manual phalanx I left ilium metatarsals III and V, the first phalanx of the third toe and the third phalanx of the second.
The ilium had "a large hole... caused by a blow from above".
The near end of the first phalanx of the third toe was afflicted by an involucrum.
Paleoecology
Allosaurus was the most common large theropod in the vast tract of Western American fossil-bearing rock known as the Morrison Formation, accounting for 70 to 75% of theropod specimens, The Morrison Formation is interpreted as a semiarid environment with distinct wet and dry seasons, and flat floodplains.
Vegetation varied from river-lining forests of conifers, tree ferns, and ferns (gallery forests), to fern savannas with occasional trees such as the Araucaria-like conifer Brachyphyllum.
The Morrison Formation has been a rich fossil hunting ground.
The flora of the period has been revealed by fossils of green algae, fungi, mosses, horsetails, ferns, cycads, ginkgoes, and several families of conifers.
Animal fossils discovered include bivalves, snails, ray-finned fishes, frogs, salamanders, turtles, sphenodonts, lizards, terrestrial and aquatic crocodylomorphans, several species of pterosaur, numerous dinosaur species, and early mammals such as docodonts, multituberculates, symmetrodonts, and triconodonts.
Dinosaurs known from the Morrison include the theropods Ceratosaurus, Ornitholestes, Tanycolagreus, and Torvosaurus, the sauropods Haplocanthosaurus, Camarasaurus, Cathetosaurus, Brachiosaurus, Suuwassea, Apatosaurus, Brontosaurus, Barosaurus, Diplodocus, Supersaurus, Amphicoelias, and Maraapunisaurus, and the ornithischians Camptosaurus, Dryosaurus, and Stegosaurus.
Allosaurus is commonly found at the same sites as Apatosaurus, Camarasaurus, Diplodocus, and Stegosaurus.
The Late Jurassic formations of Portugal where Allosaurus is present are interpreted as having been similar to the Morrison but with a stronger marine influence.
Many of the dinosaurs of the Morrison Formation are the same genera as those seen in Portuguese rocks (mainly Allosaurus, Ceratosaurus, Torvosaurus, and Stegosaurus), or have a close counterpart (Brachiosaurus and Lusotitan, Camptosaurus and Draconyx).
Allosaurus coexisted with fellow large theropods Ceratosaurus and Torvosaurus in both the United States and Portugal.
Ceratosaurus, better known than Torvosaurus, differed noticeably from Allosaurus in functional anatomy by having a taller, narrower skull with large, broad teeth.
