The Great Plains (sometimes simply "the Plains") is a broad expanse of flat land (a plain), much of it covered in prairie, steppe, and grassland, located in the United States and Canada.
It lies west of the Mississippi River tallgrass prairie in the United States and east of the Rocky Mountains in the U.S. and Canada.
It embraces:
The entirety of Kansas, Nebraska, North Dakota, and South Dakota
* Parts of Colorado, Montana, New Mexico, Oklahoma, Texas, and Wyoming
The southern portions of Alberta, Saskatchewan, and Manitoba
The region is known for supporting extensive cattle ranching and dry farming.
The Canadian portion of the Plains is known as the Canadian Prairies.
It covers much of Alberta and southern Saskatchewan, and a narrow band of southern Manitoba.
Usage
The term "Great Plains" is used in the United States to describe a sub-section of the even more vast Interior Plains physiographic division, which covers much of the interior of North America.
It also has currency as a region of human geography, referring to the Plains Indians or the Plains States.
In Canada the term is rarely used; Natural Resources Canada, the government department responsible for official mapping, treats the Interior Plains as one unit consisting of several related plateaux and plains.
There is no region referred to as the "Great Plains" in The Atlas of Canada.
In terms of human geography, the term prairie is more commonly used in Canada, and the region is known as the Prairie Provinces or simply "the Prairies."
The North American Environmental Atlas, produced by the Commission for Environmental Cooperation, a NAFTA agency composed of the geographical agencies of the Mexican, American, and Canadian governments, uses the "Great Plains" as an ecoregion synonymous with predominant prairies and grasslands rather than as physiographic region defined by topography.
The Great Plains ecoregion includes five sub-regions: Temperate Prairies, West-Central Semi-Arid Prairies, South-Central Semi-Arid Prairies, Texas Louisiana Coastal Plains, and Tamaulipas-Texas Semi-Arid Plain, which overlap or expand upon other Great Plains designations.
Extent
The region is about east to west and north to south.
Much of the region was home to American bison herds until they were hunted to near extinction during the mid plains map.shtml map at the Center for Great Plains Studies, University of Nebraska-Lincoln.
brought the term Great Plains into more widespread usage.
Before that the region was almost invariably called the High Plains, in contrast to the lower Prairie Plains of the Midwestern states.
Today the term "High Plains" is used for a subregion of the Great Plains.
Geography
The Great Plains are the westernmost portion of the vast North American Interior Plains, which extend east to the Appalachian Plateau.
The United States Geological Survey divides the Great Plains in the United States into ten physiographic subdivisions:
* Coteau du Missouri or Missouri Plateau (which also extends into Canada), glaciated - east central South Dakota, northern and eastern North Dakota and northeastern Montana;
* Coteau du Missouri, unglaciated - western South Dakota, northeastern Wyoming, southwestern North Dakota and southeastern Montana;
* High Plains - southeastern Wyoming, southwestern South Dakota, western Nebraska (including the Sand Hills), eastern Colorado, western Kansas, western Oklahoma, eastern New Mexico, and northwestern Texas (including the Llano Estacado and Texas Panhandle);
* Plains Border - central Kansas and northern Oklahoma (including the Flint, Red and Smoky Hills);
The Great Plains consist of a broad stretch of country underlain by nearly horizontal strata extends westward from the 97th meridian west to the base of the Rocky Mountains, a distance of from .
It extends northward from the Mexican boundary far into Canada.
Although the altitude of the plains increases gradually from 600 or on the east to 4,000-5,000 or near the mountains, the local relief is generally small.
The semi-arid climate excludes tree growth and opens far-reaching views.
The plains are by no means a simple unit.
They are of diverse structure and of various stages of erosional development.
They are occasionally interrupted by buttes and escarpments.
They are frequently broken by valleys.
Yet on the whole, a broadly extended surface of moderate relief so often prevails that the name, Great Plains, for the region as a whole is well-deserved.
Paleontological finds in the area have yielded bones of mammoths, saber-toothed cats and other ancient animals, as well as dozens of other megafauna (large animals over ) - such as giant sloths, horses, mastodons, and American lion - that dominated the area of the ancient Great Plains for thousands to millions of years.
The vast majority of these animals became extinct in North America at the end of the Pleistocene (around 13,000 years ago).
Climate
In general, the Great Plains have a wide range of weather, with very cold and harsh winters and very hot and humid summers.
Wind speeds are often very high, especially in winter.
Grasslands are among the least protected biomes.
Humans have converted much of the prairies for agricultural purposes or to create pastures.
The 100th meridian roughly corresponds with the line that divides the Great Plains into an area that receives or more of rainfall per year and an area that receives less than .
In this context, the High Plains, as well as Southern Alberta, south-western Saskatchewan and Eastern Montana are mainly semi arid steppe land and are generally characterised by rangeland or marginal farmland.
The region (especially the High Plains) is periodically subjected to extended periods of drought; high winds in the region may then generate devastating dust storms.
The eastern Great Plains near the eastern boundary falls in the humid subtropical climate zone in the southern areas, and the northern and central areas fall in the humid continental climate.
Many thunderstorms occur in the plains in the spring through summer.
The southeastern portion of the Great Plains is the most tornado active area in the world and is sometimes referred to as Tornado Alley.
Flora
The Great Plains are part of the floristic North American Prairies Province, which extends from the Rocky Mountains to the Appalachians.
History
Original American contact
The first Americans (Paleo-Indians) arrived on the Great Plains thousands of years ago.
Historically, the Great Plains were the range of the Blackfoot, Crow, Sioux, Cheyenne, Arapaho, Comanche, and others.
Eastern portions of the Great Plains were inhabited by tribes who lived in semi-permanent villages of earth lodges, such as the Arikara, Mandan, Pawnee, and Wichita.
The first known contact between Europeans and Indians in the Great Plains occurred in Texas, Kansas, and Nebraska from 1540 to 1542 with the arrival of Francisco Vázquez de Coronado, a Spanish conquistador.
In that same period, Hernando de Soto crossed a west-northwest direction in what is now Oklahoma and Texas which is now known as the De Soto Trail.
The Spanish thought that the Great Plains were the location of the mythological Quivira and Cíbola, a place said to be rich in gold.
The fur trade brought thousands of colonial settlers into the Great Plains over the next 100 years.
Fur trappers made their way across much of the region, making regular contacts with Indians.
The United States acquired the Louisiana Purchase in 1803 and conducted the Lewis and Clark Expedition in 1804-1806, and more information became available concerning the Plains, and various pioneers entered the areas.
Fur trading posts were often the basis of later settlements.
Through the 19th century, more settlers migrated to the Great Plains as part of a vast westward expansion of population, and new settlements became dotted across the Great Plains.
The settlers also brought diseases against which the Indians had no resistance.
Between a half and two-thirds of the Plains Indians are thought to have died of smallpox by the time of Louisiana Purchase.
Pioneer settlement
After 1870, the new railroads across the Plains brought hunters who killed off almost all the bison for their hides.
The railroads offered attractive packages of land and transportation to American farmers, who rushed to settle the land.
They also took advantage of the homestead laws to obtain farms.
Land speculators and local boosters identified many potential towns, and those reached by the railroad had a chance, while the others became ghost towns.
Towns flourished if they were favored by proximity to the railroad.
Much of the Great Plains became open range where cattle roamed free, hosting ranching operations where anyone was free to run cattle.
In the spring and fall, ranchers held roundups where their cowboys branded new calves, treated animals, and sorted the cattle for sale.
Such ranching began in Texas and gradually moved northward.
Between 1866 and 1895, cowboys herded 10 million cattle north to rail heads such as Dodge City, Kansas and Ogallala, Nebraska; from there, cattle were shipped east.
The U.S. passed the Homestead Acts of 1862 to encourage agricultural development of the Great Plains and house a growing population.
It allowed a settler to claim up to of land, provided that he lived on it for a period of five years and cultivated it.
The provisions were expanded under the Kinkaid Act of 1904 to include a homestead of an entire section.
Hundreds of thousands of people claimed such homesteads, sometimes building houses out of the very turf of the land.
Many of them were not skilled farmers, and failures were frequent.
The Dominion Lands Act of 1871 served a similar function for establishing homesteads on the prairies in Canada.
Social life
The railroads opened up the Great Plains for settlement, making it possible to ship wheat and other crops at low cost to the urban markets in the East and overseas.
Homestead land was free for American settlers.
Railroads sold their land at cheap rates to immigrants in expectation that they would generate traffic as soon as farms were established.
Immigrants poured in, especially from Germany and Scandinavia.
On the plains, very few single men attempted to operate a farm or ranch by themselves; they understood the need for a hard-working wife and numerous children to handle the many responsibilities.
During the early years of settlement, farm women played an integral role in assuring family survival by working outdoors.
After approximately one generation, women increasingly left the fields, thus redefining their roles within the family.
New technology encouraged women to turn to domestic roles, including sewing and washing machines.
Media and government extension agents promoted the "scientific housekeeping" movement, along with county fairs which featured achievements in home cookery and canning, advice columns for women regarding farm book keeping, and home economics courses in the schools.
The eastern image of farm life in the prairies emphasized the isolation of the lonely farmer and wife, yet plains residents created busy social lives for themselves.
They often sponsored activities which combined work, food, and entertainment, such as barn raisings, corn huskings, quilting bees, Grange meetings, church activities and school functions.
Women organized shared meals and potluck events, as well as extended visits among families.
20th century
The region roughly centered on the Oklahoma Panhandle was known as the Dust Bowl during the late 1920s and early 1930s, including southeastern Colorado, southwestern Kansas, the Texas Panhandle, and extreme northeastern New Mexico.
The effects of an extended drought, inappropriate cultivation, and financial crises of the Great Depression forced many farmers off the land throughout the Great Plains.
From the 1950s on, many areas of the Great Plains have become productive crop-growing areas because of extensive irrigation on large land-holdings.
The United States is a major exporter of agricultural products.
The southern portion of the Great Plains lies over the Ogallala Aquifer, a huge underground layer of water-bearing strata.
Center pivot irrigation is used extensively in drier sections of the Great Plains, resulting in aquifer depletion at a rate that is greater than the ground's ability to recharge.
Population decline
The rural Plains have lost a third of their population since 1920.
Several hundred thousand square miles of the Great Plains have fewer than , the density standard that Frederick Jackson Turner used to declare the American frontier "closed" in 1893.
Many have fewer than .
There are more than 6,000 ghost towns in Kansas alone, according to Kansas historian Daniel Fitzgerald.
This problem is often exacerbated by the consolidation of farms and the difficulty of attracting modern industry to the region.
In addition, the smaller school-age population has forced the consolidation of school districts and the closure of high schools in some communities.
The continuing population loss has led some to suggest that the current use of the drier parts of the Great Plains is not sustainable, and there has been a proposal to return approximately of these drier parts to native prairie land.
Wind power
The Great Plains contributes substantially to wind power in the United States.
T. Boone Pickens developed wind farms after a career as a petroleum executive, and he called for the U.S. to invest $1 trillion to build an additional 200,000 MW of wind power in the Plains as part of his Pickens Plan.
He cited Sweetwater, Texas as an example of economic revitalization driven by wind power development.
International steppe-lands
Further reading
* Bonnifield, Paul.
The Dust Bowl: Men, Dirt, and Depression, University of New Mexico Press, Albuquerque, New Mexico, 1978, hardcover, .
* Courtwright, Julie.
Prairie Fire: A Great Plains History (University Press of Kansas, 2011) 274 pp.
* Danbom, David B. Sod Busting: How families made farms on the 19th-century Plains (2014)
* Eagan, Timothy.
The Worst Hard Time : the Untold Story of Those Who Survived the Great American Dust Bowl.
Boston : Houghton Mifflin Co., 2006.
* Forsberg, Michael, Great Plains: America's Lingering Wild, University of Chicago Press, Chicago, Illinois, 2009,
* Gilfillan, Merrill.
Chokecherry Places, Essays from the High Plains, Johnson Press, Boulder, Colorado, trade paperback, .
* Grant, Michael Johnston.
Down and Out on the Family Farm: Rural Rehabilitation in the Great Plains, 1929-1945, University of Nebraska Press, 2002,
* Hurt, R. Douglas.
The Big Empty: The Great Plains in the Twentieth Century (University of Arizona Press; 2011) 315 pages; the environmental, social, economic, and political history of the region.
* Hurt, R. Douglas.
The Great Plains during World War II.
University of Nebraska Press.
Pp.
xiii, 507.
* Mills, David W. Cold War in a Cold Land: Fighting Communism on the Northern Plains (2015) Col War era; https:/ Cold-War-Land-Fighting-Communism 080614694X/ excerpt
* Peirce, Neal R.
The Great Plains States of America: People, Politics, and Power in the Nine Great Plains States (1973)
* Raban, Jonathan.
Bad Land: An American Romance.
Vintage Departures, division of Vintage Books, New York, 1996.
Winner of the National Book Critics Circle Award for Nonfiction.
* Rees, Amanda.
The Great Plains Region: The Greenwood Encyclopedia of American Regional Cultures (2004)
* Stegner, Wallace.
Wolf Willow, A history, a story, and a memory of the last plains frontier, Viking Compass Book, New York, 1966, trade paperback,
* Wishart, David J. ed.
Encyclopedia of the Great Plains, University of Nebraska Press, 2004, .
http:/ encyclopedia/ complete text online
