The Mona Lisa (; or , ) is a half-length portrait painting by the Italian Renaissance artist Leonardo da Vinci that has been described as "the best known, the most visited, the most written about, the most sung about, the most parodied work of art in the world."
The Mona Lisa is also one of the most valuable paintings in the world.
It holds the Guinness World Record for the highest known insurance valuation in history at US$100 million in 1962 (equivalent to $ million in ).
The painting is thought by many to be a portrait of Lisa Gherardini, the wife of Francesco del Giocondo, and is in oil on a white Lombardy poplar panel.
It had been believed to have been painted between 1503 and 1506; however, Leonardo may have continued working on it as late as 1517.
Recent academic work suggests that it would not have been started before 1513.
It was acquired by King Francis I of France and is now the property of the French Republic, on permanent display at the Louvre Museum in Paris since 1797.
The subject's expression, which is frequently described as enigmatic, the monumentality of the composition, the subtle modelling of forms, and the atmospheric illusionism are novel qualities that have contributed to the continuing fascination and study of the work.
in Italian is a polite form of address originating as - similar to "Ma'am", "Madam", or "my lady" in English.
This became , and its contraction .
The title of the painting, though traditionally spelled "Mona" (as used by Vasari),
In response to the announcement of the discovery of this document, Vincent Delieuvin, the Louvre representative, stated "Leonardo da Vinci was painting, in 1503, the portrait of a Florentine lady by the name of Lisa del Giocondo.
About this we are now certain.
Unfortunately, we cannot be absolutely certain that this portrait of Lisa del Giocondo is the painting of the Louvre."
The model, Lisa del Giocondo,
was a member of the Gherardini family of Florence and Tuscany, and the wife of wealthy Florentine silk merchant Francesco del Giocondo.
The Italian name for the painting, , means 'jocund' ('happy' or 'jovial') or, literally, 'the jocund one', a pun on the feminine form of Lisa's married name, Giocondo.
In French, the title has the same meaning.
Before that discovery, scholars had developed several alternative views as to the subject of the painting.
Some argued that Lisa del Giocondo was the subject of a different portrait, identifying at least four other paintings as the Mona Lisa referred to by Vasari.
Several other women have been proposed as the subject of the painting.
Isabella of Aragon, Cecilia Gallerani, Costanza d'Avalos, Duchess of Francavilla,
The consensus of art historians in the 21st century maintains the long-held traditional opinion that the painting depicts Lisa del Giocondo.
Although the Louvre states that it was "doubtless painted between 1503 and 1506", art historian Martin Kemp says that there are some difficulties in confirming the dates with certainty.
Art historian Carmen C. Bambach has concluded that Leonardo probably continued refining the work until 1516 or 1517.
Leonardo's right hand was paralytic circa 1517, which may indicate why he left the Mona Lisa unfinished.
Circa 1505, Other later copies of the Mona Lisa, such as those in the National Museum of Art, Architecture and Design and The Walters Art Museum, also display large flanking columns.
As a result, it was thought that the Mona Lisa had been trimmed.
However, by 1993, Frank Zöllner observed that the painting surface had never been trimmed; this was confirmed through a series of tests in 2004.
while Zöllner states that the sketch may be after another Leonardo portrait of the same subject.-but this was likely an error.
A number of experts have argued that Leonardo made two versions (because of the uncertainty concerning its dating and commissioner, as well as its fate following Leonardo's death in 1519, and the difference of details in Raphael's sketch-which may be explained by the possibility that he made the sketch from memory).
The hypothetical first portrait, displaying prominent columns, would have been commissioned by Giocondo circa 1503, and left unfinished in Leonardo's pupil and assistant Salaì's possession until his death in 1524.
The second, commissioned by Giuliano de' Medici circa 1513, would have been sold by Salaì to Francis I in 1518 and is the one in the Louvre today.
Other believe that there was only one true Mona Lisa, but are divided as to the two aforementioned fates.
The famed painting was kept at the Palace of Fontainebleau, where it was kept until Louis XIV moved it to the Palace of Versailles, where it remained until the French Revolution.
In 1797, it went on permanent display at the Louvre.
Having been given access to the painting by the Louvre in 2004, Cotte spent ten years studying the painting with layer-amplification methods.
However, the alleged portrait does not fit with historical descriptions of the painting: both Vasari and Gian Paolo Lomazzo describe the subject as smiling, unlike the subject in Cotte's portrait.
Cotte admits that his reconstitution had been carried out only in support of his hypotheses and should not be considered as objective proof of an underlying portrait.
During the Franco-Prussian War (1870-1871), the painting was moved from the Louvre to the Brest Arsenal.
During World War II, it was again removed from the Louvre and taken first to the Château d'Amboise, then to the Loc-Dieu Abbey and Château de Chambord, then finally to the Ingres Museum in Montauban.
By 1911, the painting was still not popular among the lay-public.
On 21 August 1911, the painting was stolen from the Louvre.
The missing painting was first noticed the next day by painter Louis Béroud.
After some confusion as to whether the painting was being photographed somewhere, the Louvre was closed for a week for investigation.
French poet Guillaume Apollinaire came under suspicion and was arrested and imprisoned.
Apollinaire implicated his friend Pablo Picasso, who was brought in for questioning.
Both were later exonerated.
The real culprit was Louvre employee Vincenzo Peruggia, who had helped construct the painting's glass case.
He carried out the theft by entering the building during regular hours, hiding in a broom closet, and walking out with the painting hidden under his coat after the museum had closed.
After having kept the Mona Lisa in his apartment for two years, Peruggia grew impatient and was caught when he attempted to sell it to directors of the Uffizi Gallery in Florence.
It was exhibited in the Uffizi Gallery for over two weeks and returned to the Louvre on 4 January 1914.
Peruggia served six months in prison for the crime and was hailed for his patriotism in Italy.
On 30 December 1956, a rock was thrown at the painting in the Louvre, shattering its glass case and dislodging a speck of pigment near the left elbow, which was later restored.
The painting was protected by glass because a few years earlier a man who claimed to be in love with the painting had cut it with a razor blade and tried to steal it.
The use of bulletproof glass has shielded the Mona Lisa from subsequent attacks.
In April 1974, while the painting was on display at the Tokyo National Museum, a woman sprayed it with red paint as a protest against that museum's failure to provide access for disabled people.
On 2 August 2009, a Russian woman, distraught over being denied French citizenship, threw a ceramic teacup purchased at the Louvre; the vessel shattered against the glass enclosure.
In both cases, the painting was undamaged.
In recent decades, the painting has been temporarily moved to accommodate renovations to the Louvre on three occasions: between 1992 and 1995, from 2001 to 2005, and again in 2019.
A new queuing system introduced in 2019 reduces the amount of time museum visitors have to wait in line to see the painting.
After going through the queue, a group has about 30 seconds to see the painting.
Description
The Mona Lisa bears a strong resemblance to many Renaissance depictions of the Virgin Mary, who was at that time seen as an ideal for womanhood.
The depiction of the sitter in three-quarter profile is similar to late 15th-century works by Lorenzo di Credi and Agnolo di Domenico del Mazziere.
Zöllner notes that the sitter's general position can be traced back to Flemish models and that "in particular the vertical slices of columns at both sides of the panel had precedents in Flemish portraiture."
Woods-Marsden cites Hans Memling's portrait of Benedetto Portinari (1487) or Italian imitations such as .
The enigmatic woman is portrayed seated in what appears to be an open loggia with dark pillar bases on either side.
Behind her, a vast landscape recedes to icy mountains.
Winding paths and a distant bridge give only the slightest indications of human presence.
Leonardo has chosen to place the horizon line not at the neck, as he did with Ginevra de' Benci, but on a level with the eyes, thus linking the figure with the landscape and emphasizing the mysterious nature of the painting.
In 2007, French engineer Pascal Cotte announced that his ultra-high resolution scans of the painting provide evidence that Mona Lisa was originally painted with eyelashes and with visible eyebrows, but that these had gradually disappeared over time, perhaps as a result of overcleaning.
Cotte discovered the painting had been reworked several times, with changes made to the size of the Mona Lisa's face and the direction of her gaze.
He also found that in one layer the subject was depicted wearing numerous hairpins and a headdress adorned with pearls which was later scrubbed out and overpainted.
There has been much speculation regarding the painting's model and landscape.
For example, Leonardo probably painted his model faithfully since her beauty is not seen as being among the best, "even when measured by late quattrocento (15th century) or even twenty-first century standards."
Some art historians in Eastern art, such as Yukio Yashiro, argue that the landscape in the background of the picture was influenced by Chinese paintings,
Research in 2003 by Professor Margaret Livingstone of Harvard University said that Mona Lisa's smile disappears when observed with direct vision, known as foveal.
Because of the way the human eye processes visual information, it is less suited to pick up shadows directly; however, peripheral vision can pick up shadows well.
Research in 2008 by a geomorphology professor at Urbino University and an artist-photographer revealed likenesses of Mona Lisas landscapes to some views in the Montefeltro region in the Italian provinces of Pesaro and Urbino, and Rimini.
Conservation
The Mona Lisa has survived for more than 500 years, and an international commission convened in 1952 noted that "the picture is in a remarkable state of preservation."
This is partly due to a variety of conservation treatments the painting has undergone.
A detailed analysis in 1933 by Madame de Gironde revealed that earlier restorers had "acted with a great deal of restraint."
the 2004-05 conservation team was optimistic about the future of the work.
a Renaissance-era work consistent with the historical period of the Mona Lisa.
The edges of the painting have been trimmed at least once in its history to fit the picture into various frames, but no part of the original paint layer has been trimmed.
Since 2005 the painting has been illuminated by an LED lamp, and in 2013 a new 20 watt LED lamp was installed, specially designed for this painting.
The lamp has a Colour Rendering Index up to 98, and minimizes infrared and ultraviolet radiation which could otherwise degrade the painting.
The renovation of the gallery where the painting now resides was financed by the Japanese broadcaster Nippon Television.
About 6 million people view the painting at the Louvre each year.
Once part of King Francis I of France's collection, the Mona Lisa was among the first artworks to be exhibited in the Louvre, which became a national museum after the French Revolution.
Leonardo began to be revered as a genius, and the painting's popularity grew in the mid-19th century when French intelligentsia praised it as mysterious and a representation of the femme fatale.
The Baedeker guide in 1878 called it "the most celebrated work of Leonardo in the Louvre", The Mona Lisa was regarded as "just another Leonardo until early last century, when the scandal of the painting's theft from the Louvre and subsequent return kept a spotlight on it over several years."
From December 1962 to March 1963, the French government lent it to the United States to be displayed in New York City and Washington, D.C.
It was shipped on the new ocean liner SS France.
In New York, an estimated 1.7 million people queued "in order to cast a glance at the Mona Lisa for 20 seconds or so."
In 1974, the painting was exhibited in Tokyo and Moscow.
In 2014, 9.3 million people visited the Louvre.
Former director Henri Loyrette reckoned that "80 percent of the people only want to see the Mona Lisa."
Financial worth
Before the 1962-1963 tour, the painting was assessed for insurance at $100 million (equivalent to in ), making it, in practice, the most valued painting in the world.
The insurance was not purchased; instead, more was spent on security.
In 2014, a France 24 article suggested that the painting could be sold to help ease the national debt, although it was noted that the Mona Lisa and other such art works were prohibited from being sold due to French heritage law, which states that "Collections held in museums that belong to public bodies are considered public property and cannot be otherwise."
Legacy
The Mona Lisa began influencing contemporary Florentine painting even before its completion.
Raphael, who had been to Leonardo's workshop several times, promptly used elements of the portrait's composition and format in several of his works, such as Young Woman with Unicorn (c. 1506), and Portrait of Maddalena Doni (c. 1506).
Early commentators such as Vasari and André Félibien praised the picture for its realism, but by the Victorian era, writers began to regard the Mona Lisa as imbued with a sense of mystery and romance.
In 1859, Théophile Gautier wrote that the Mona Lisa was a "sphinx of beauty who smiles so mysteriously" and that "Beneath the form expressed one feels a thought that is vague, infinite, inexpressible.
One is moved, troubled ... repressed desires, hopes that drive one to despair, stir painfully."
Walter Pater's famous essay of 1869 described the sitter as "older than the rocks among which she sits; like the vampire, she has been dead many times, and learned the secrets of the grave; and has been a diver in the deep seas, and keeps their fallen day about her."
By the early 20th century, some critics started to feel the painting had become a repository for subjective exegeses and theories.
Upon the painting's theft in 1911, Renaissance historian Bernard Berenson admitted that it had "simply become an incubus, and he was glad to be rid of her."
Jean Metzinger's Le goûter (Tea Time) was exhibited at the 1911 Salon d'Automne and was sarcastically described as "la Joconde à la cuiller" (Mona Lisa with a spoon) by art critic Louis Vauxcelles on the front page of Gil Blas.
André Salmon subsequently described the painting as "The Mona Lisa of Cubism".
The avant-garde art world has made note of the Mona Lisas undeniable popularity.
Because of the painting's overwhelming stature, Dadaists and Surrealists often produce modifications and caricatures.
In 1883, Le rire, an image of a Mona Lisa smoking a pipe, by Sapeck (Eugène Bataille), was shown at the "Incoherents" show in Paris.
In 1919, Marcel Duchamp, one of the most influential modern artists, created L.H.O.O.Q., a Mona Lisa parody made by adorning a cheap reproduction with a moustache and goatee.
Duchamp added an inscription, which when read out loud in French sounds like "Elle a chaud au cul" meaning: "she has a hot ass", implying the woman in the painting is in a state of sexual excitement and intended as a Freudian joke.
According to Rhonda R. Shearer, the apparent reproduction is in fact a copy partly modelled on Duchamp's own face.
Salvador Dalí, famous for his surrealist work, painted Self portrait as Mona Lisa in 1954.
Andy Warhol created serigraph prints of multiple Mona Lisas, called Thirty Are Better than One, following the painting's visit to the United States in 1963.
The French urban artist known pseudonymously as Invader has created versions of the Mona Lisa on city walls in Paris and Tokyo using a mosaic style.
A 2014 New Yorker magazine cartoon parodies the supposed enigma of the Mona Lisa smile in an animation showing progressively more maniacal smiles.
Early versions and copies
Prado Museum La Gioconda
A version of Mona Lisa known as ("Woman by Leonardo da Vinci's hand") held in Madrid's Museo del Prado was for centuries considered to be a work by Leonardo.
However, since its restoration in 2012, it is considered to have been executed by one of Leonardo's pupils in his studio at the same time as Mona Lisa was being painted.
The Prado's conclusion that that the painting is probably by Salaì (1480-1524) or by Melzi (1493-1572) has been called into question by others.
The restored painting is from a slightly different perspective than the original Mona Lisa, leading to the speculation that it is part of the world's first stereoscopic pair.
However, a more recent report has demonstrated that this stereoscopic pair in fact gives no reliable stereoscopic depth.
Isleworth Mona Lisa
A version of the Mona Lisa known as the Isleworth Mona Lisa and also known as the Earlier Mona Lisa was first bought by an English nobleman in 1778 and was rediscovered in 1913 by Hugh Blaker, an art connoisseur.
The painting was presented to the media in 2012 by the Mona Lisa Foundation.
It is a painting of the same subject as Leonardo da Vinci's Mona Lisa.
The painting is claimed by a majority of experts to be mostly an original work of Leonardo dating from the early 16th century.
File:Mona Lisa (copy, Thalwil, Switzerland).JPG| Copy of Mona Lisa commonly attributed to Salaì
File:Gioconda (copia del Museo del Prado restaurada).jpg| The Prado Museum La Gioconda
File:Isleworthml.
JPG |The Isleworth Mona Lisa
File:Mona Lisa (copy, Hermitage).jpg|16th-century copy at the Hermitage by unknown artist
Citations
Bibliography
