The African elephant (Loxodonta) is a genus comprising two living elephant species, the African bush elephant (L. africana) and the smaller African forest elephant (L. cyclotis).
Both are herbivores and live in groups.
They have grey skin and differ in the size of their ears and tusks, and in the shape and size of their skulls.
Both species are listed as Vulnerable species on the IUCN Red List since 2004, and are threatened by habitat loss and fragmentation.
Poaching for the illegal ivory trade is a threat in several range countries as well.
Loxodonta is one of two existing genera of the family Elephantidae.
The name refers to the lozenge-shaped enamel of their molar teeth.
Fossil remains of Loxodonta species have been excavated in Africa, dating to the middle Pliocene.
Taxonomy
The first scientific description of the African elephant was written by Johann Friedrich Blumenbach in 1797 who proposed the scientific name Elephas africanus.
Loxodonte was proposed as generic name for the African elephant by Georges Cuvier in 1824.
This name refers to the lozenge-shaped enamel of the molar teeth, which differs significantly from the shape of the Asian elephant's molar enamel.
An anonymous author used the latinized spelling Loxodonta in 1827.
Anonymous was recognized as authority by the International Code of Zoological Nomenclature in 1999.
In 1936, Glover Morrill Allen considered this elephant to be a distinct species and called it 'forest elephant'.
Later authors considered it to be a subspecies.
In 1907, Richard Lydekker proposed six African elephant subspecies based on the different sizes and shapes of their ears.
They are all considered synonymous with the African bush elephant.
* Loxodonta atlantica was proposed as Elephas atlanticus by Auguste Pomel in 1879 based on a skull and bones found in Ternifine, Algeria.
* Loxodonta adaurora proposed by Vincent Maglio in 1970 was a complete skeleton found in Kanapoi, Kenya.
Phylogeny
Analysis of nuclear DNA sequences indicates that the genetic divergence between African bush and forest elephants dates 2.6 - 5.6 million years ago.
The divergence between the Asian elephant and the woolly mammoths is estimated 2.5 - 5.4 million years ago, which strongly supports their status as distinct species.
The African forest elephant was found to have a high degree of genetic diversity, perhaps reflecting periodic fragmentation of their habitat during the climatic changes in the Pleistocene.
Sequence analysis of DNA from fossils of the extinct Eurasian Palaeoloxodon antiquus shows it to be much closer related to the African forest elephant than to the African bush elephant.
The validity of Loxodonta has therefore been questioned.
Description
Skin, ears, and trunk
African elephants have a grey folded and up to thick skin that is covered with sparse bristled dark-brown to black hair.
Short tactile hair grows on the trunk, which has two finger-like processes on the tip.
Tusks and molars
Both male and female African elephants have tusks that grow from deciduous teeth called tushes, which are replaced by tusks when calves are about one year old.
Tusks are composed of dentin, which forms small diamond-shaped structures in the tusk's center that become larger at its periphery.
The dental formula of elephants is .
Size
The African bush elephant is the largest terrestrial animal.
Cows are tall at the shoulder and weigh , while bulls are tall and weigh .
The tallest recorded individual stood at the shoulder and weighed .
The African forest elephant is smaller with male shoulder heights of up to .
It is the third largest terrestrial animal.
Their thickset bodies rest on stocky legs.
Distribution and habitat
African elephants are distributed in Sub-Saharan Africa, where they inhabit Sahelian scrubland and arid regions, tropical rainforests, mopane and miombo woodlands.
African forest elephants occur only in Central Africa.
Behavior and ecology
Family
Both African elephant species live in family units comprising several adult cows, their daughters and their subadult sons.
Each family unit is led by an older cow known as the matriarch.
African forest elephant groups are less cohesive than African bush elephant groups, probably because of the lack of predators.
Elephants use some vocalisations that are beyond the hearing range of humans, to communicate across large distances.
Elephant mating rituals include the gentle entwining of trunks.
Feeding
While feeding, the African elephant uses its trunk to pluck leaves and its tusk to tear at branches, which can cause enormous damage to foliage.
Intelligence
African elephants are highly intelligent.
They have a very large and highly convoluted neocortex, a trait they share with humans, apes and some dolphin species.
They are amongst the world's most intelligent species.
With a mass of just over , the elephant brain is larger than that of any other terrestrial animal.
The elephant's brain is similar to a human brain in terms of structure and complexity; the elephant's cortex has as many neurons as that of a human brain, suggesting convergent evolution.
Elephants exhibit a wide variety of behaviors, including those associated with grief, learning, mimicry, art, play, a sense of humor, altruism, use of tools, compassion, cooperation, self-awareness, memory and possibly language.
All point to a highly intelligent species that is thought to be equal with cetaceans, and primates.
Reproduction
African elephants are at their most fertile between the ages of 25 and 45.
Calves are born after a gestation period of up to nearly two years.
and are in estrus for about 2 to 7 days.
They do not mate at a specific time; however, they are less likely to reproduce in times of drought than when water is plentiful.
The gestation period of an elephant is 22 months and fertile females usually give birth every 3-6 years, so if they live to around 50 years of age, they may produce 7 offspring.
Females are a scarce and mobile resource for the males so there is intense competition to gain access to estrous females.
Post sexual maturity, males begin to experience musth, a physical and behavioral condition that is characterized by elevated testosterone, aggression and more sexual activity.
Musth also serves a purpose of calling attention to the females that they are of good quality, and it cannot be mimicked as certain calls or noises may be.
Males sire few offspring in periods when they are not in musth.
During the middle of estrus, female elephants look for males in musth to guard them.
The females will yell, in a loud, low way to attract males from far away.
Male elephants can also smell the hormones of a female ready for breeding.
This leads males to compete with each other to mate, which results in the females mating with older, healthier males.
Females choose to a point who they mate with, since they are the ones who try to get males to compete to guard them.
However, females are not guarded in the early and late stages of estrus, which may permit mating by younger males not in musth.
Males over the age of 25 compete strongly for females in estrous, and are more successful the larger and more aggressive they are.
Bigger males tend to sire bigger offspring.
Wild males begin breeding in their thirties when they are at a size and weight that is competitive with other adult males.
Male reproductive success is maximal in mid-adulthood and then begins to decline.
However, this can depend on the ranking of the male within their group, as higher-ranking males maintain a higher rate of reproduction.
Most observed matings are by males in musth over 35 years of age.
Twenty-two long observations showed that age and musth are extremely important factors; "… older males had markedly elevated paternity success compared with younger males, suggesting the possibility of sexual selection for longevity in this species."
(Hollister-Smith, et al. 287).
Males usually stay with a female and her herd for about a month before moving on in search for another mate.
Less than a third of the population of female elephants will be in estrus at any given time and gestation period of an elephant is long, so it makes more evolutionary sense for a male to search for as many females as possible rather than stay with one group.
Threats
Based on vegetation types that provide suitable habitat for African elephants, it was estimated that in the early 19th century a maximum of 26,913,000 African elephants might have been present from the Sahel in the north to the Highveld in the south.
Decrease of suitable habitat was the major cause for the decline of elephant populations until the 1950s.
Hunting African elephants for the ivory trade accelerated the decline from the 1970s onwards.
The carrying capacity of remaining suitable habitats was estimated at 8,985,000 elephants at most by 1987.
In the 1970s and 1980s, the price for ivory rose, and poaching for ivory increased in particular in Central African range countries where access to elephant habitats was facilitated by logging and petroleum mining industries.
The first continental elephant census was carried out in 1976.
At the time, 1.34 million elephants were estimated to range over .
In the 1980s, it was difficult to carry out systematic surveys in several East African range countries due to civil wars.
The population in the Tanzanian Selous Game Reserve, once the largest of any reserve in the world, dropped from 109,000 in 1976 to 13,000 in 2013.
The government of Tanzania estimated that more than 85,000 elephants were lost to poaching in Tanzania between 2009 and 2014, representing a 60% loss.
By 2014 it was estimated that only 50,000 elephants remained in Central Africa.
The last major populations are present in Gabon and the Republic of Congo.
Conflicts between elephants and a growing human population are a major issue in elephant conservation.
According to the World Wide Fund for Nature, in 2014 the total population of African elephants was estimated to be around 700,000, and the Asian elephant population was estimated to be around 32,000.
The population of African elephants in Southern Africa is large and expanding, with more than 300,000 within the region; Botswana has 200,000 and Zimbabwe 80,000.
Large populations of elephants are confined to well-protected areas.
However, conservative estimates were that 23,000 African elephants were killed by poachers in 2013 and less than 20% of the African elephant range was under formal protection.
The International Union for Conservation of Nature released a report in September 2016 that estimates Africa's elephant population at 415,000.
They reported that in the past decade, this is a decline of 111,000 elephants.
This is reported as the worst decline in the past 25 years.
China was the biggest market for poached ivory but announced that it would phase out the legal domestic manufacture and sale of ivory products in May 2015, and in September of that year, China and the U.S.A. "said they would enact a nearly complete ban on the import and export of ivory."
In response Chinese consumers moved to purchasing their ivory through markets in Laos, leading conservation groups to request pressure be put on Laos to end the trade.
Conservation
In 1986, the African Elephant Database was initiated with the aim to monitor the status of African elephant populations.
This database includes results from aerial surveys, dung counts, interviews with local people and data on poaching.
In 1989, the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora listed the African elephant on CITES Appendix I.
This listing banned international trade of African elephants and their body parts by countries that signed the CITES agreement.
Hunting elephants is banned in the Central African Republic, Democratic Republic of Congo, Gabon, Côte d’Ivoire, and Senegal.
After the ban came into force in 1990, retail sales of ivory carvings in South Africa have plummeted by more than 95% within 10 years.
As a result of the trade ban, African elephant populations recovered in Southern African range countries.
The African Elephant Specialist Group has set up a Human-Elephant Conflict Task Force with the aim to develop conflict mitigation strategies.
In 2005, the West African Elephant Memorandum of Understanding was signed by 12 West African countries.
The Convention on the Conservation of Migratory Species of Wild Animals provided financial support for four years to implement the West African Elephant Conservation Strategy, which forms the central component of this intergovernmental treaty.
In 2019, the export of wild African elephants to zoos around the world was banned, with an exception added by the EU to allow export in "exceptional cases where … it is considered that a transfer to ex-situ locations will provide demonstrable in-situ conservation benefits for African elephants”.
Previously, export had been allowed in Southern Africa with Zimbabwe capturing and exporting more than 100 baby elephants to Chinese zoos since 2012.
In culture
Many African cultures revere the African Elephant as a symbol of strength and power.
It is also praised for its size, longevity, stamina, mental faculties, cooperative spirit, and loyalty.
The animal's religious importance is mostly totemic.
Many societies who believed that their chiefs would be reincarnated as elephants.
During the 10th century AD, the people of Igbo-Ukwu, near the Niger Delta, buried their leaders with elephant tusks.
South Africa, uses elephant tusks in their coat of arms to represent wisdom, strength, moderation and eternity.
The elephant is symbolically important to the nation of Ivory Coast (Côte d'Ivoire); the Coat of arms of Ivory Coast features an elephant head escutcheon as its focal point.
In the western African Kingdom of Dahomey the elephant was associated with the 19th century rulers of the Fon people, Guezo and his son Glele.
The animal is believed to evoke strength, royal legacy, and enduring memory as related by the proverbs: "There where the elephant passes in the forest, one knows" and "The animal steps on the ground, but the elephant steps down with strength."
Their flag depicted an elephant wearing a royal crown.
Notes
