A bean is a seed of one of several genera of the flowering plant family Fabaceae, which are used for human or animal food.
Terminology
The word "bean" and its Germanic cognates (e.g. German can mean a host of different species.
Seeds called "beans" are often included among the crops called "pulses" (legumes), the prescription only applies in specific contexts anyway.
Cultivation
Unlike the closely related pea, beans are a summer crop that needs warm temperatures to grow.
Maturity is typically 55-60 days from planting to harvest.
As the bean pods mature, they turn yellow and dry up, and the beans inside change from green to their mature colour.
As a vine, bean plants need external support, which may take the form of special "bean cages" or poles.
Native Americans customarily grew them along with corn and squash (the so-called Three Sisters), with the tall cornstalks acting as support for the beans.
In more recent times, the so-called "bush bean" has been developed which does not require support and has all its pods develop simultaneously (as opposed to pole beans which develop gradually).
This makes the bush bean more practical for commercial production.
History
Beans are one of the longest-cultivated plants.
Broad beans, also called fava beans, in their wild state the size of a small fingernail, were gathered in Afghanistan and the Himalayan foothills.
In a form improved from naturally occurring types, they were grown in Thailand from the early seventh millennium BCE, predating ceramics.
They were deposited with the dead in ancient Egypt.
Not until the second millennium BCE did cultivated, large-seeded broad beans appear in the Aegean, Iberia and transalpine Europe.
In the Iliad (8th century BCE) there is a passing mention of beans and chickpeas cast on the threshing floor.
Beans were an important source of protein throughout Old and New World history, and still are today.
The oldest-known domesticated beans in the Americas were found in Guitarrero Cave, an archaeological site in Peru, and dated to around the second millennium BCE.
Most of the kinds commonly eaten fresh or dried, those of the genus Phaseolus, come originally from the Americas, being first seen by a European when Christopher Columbus, while exploring what may have been the Bahamas, found them growing in fields.
Five kinds of Phaseolus beans were domesticated by pre-Columbian peoples: common beans (P. vulgaris) grown from Chile to the northern part of what is now the United States, and lima and sieva beans (P. lunatus), as well as the less widely distributed teparies (P. acutifolius), scarlet runner beans (P. coccineus) and polyanthus beans (P. polyanthus)
One especially famous use of beans by pre-Columbian people as far north as the Atlantic seaboard is the "Three Sisters" method of companion plant cultivation:
:In the New World, many tribes would grow beans together with maize (corn), and squash.
The corn would not be planted in rows as is done by European agriculture, but in a checkerboard/hex fashion across a field, in separate patches of one to six stalks each.
:Beans would be planted around the base of the developing stalks, and would vine their way up as the stalks grew.
All American beans at that time were vine plants, "bush beans" having been bred only more recently.
The cornstalks would work as a trellis for the beans, and the beans would provide much-needed nitrogen for the corn.
:Squash would be planted in the spaces between the patches of corn in the field.
They would be provided slight shelter from the sun by the corn, would shade the soil and reduce evaporation, and would deter many animals from attacking the corn and beans because their coarse, hairy vines and broad, stiff leaves are difficult or uncomfortable for animals such as deer and raccoons to walk through, crows to land on, etc.
Dry beans come from both Old World varieties of broad beans (fava beans) and New World varieties (kidney, black, cranberry, pinto, navy/haricot).
Beans are a heliotropic plant, meaning that the leaves tilt throughout the day to face the sun.
At night, they go into a folded "sleep" position.
Types
Currently, the world genebanks hold about 40,000 bean varieties, although only a fraction are mass-produced for regular consumption.
Some bean types include:
** Phaseolus vulgaris (common bean; includes the pinto bean, kidney bean, black bean, Appaloosa bean as well as green beans, and many others)
** Phaseolus polyanthus (a.k.a. P. dumosus, recognized as a separate species in 1995)
** Vigna unguiculata (cowpea; also includes the black-eyed pea, yardlong bean and others)
Health concerns
Toxins
Some kinds of raw beans contain a harmful tasteless toxin, lectin phytohaemagglutinin, that must be removed by cooking.
Red kidney beans are particularly toxic, but other types also pose risks of food poisoning.
A recommended method is to boil the beans for at least ten minutes; undercooked beans may be more toxic than raw beans.
Cooking beans, without bringing them to the boil, in a slow cooker at a temperature well below boiling may not destroy toxins.
Bean poisoning is not well known in the medical community, and many cases may be misdiagnosed or never reported; figures appear not to be available.
In the case of the UK National Poisons Information Service, available only to health professionals, the dangers of beans other than red beans were not flagged .
Beans are a major source of dietary protein in Kenya, Malawi, Tanzania, Uganda and Zambia.
Bacterial infection from bean sprouts
It is common to make beansprouts by letting some types of bean, often mung beans, germinate in moist and warm conditions; beansprouts may be used as ingredients in cooked dishes, or eaten raw or lightly cooked.
There have been many outbreaks of disease from bacterial contamination, often by salmonella, listeria, and Escherichia coli, of beansprouts not thoroughly cooked, some causing significant mortality.
Antinutrients
Many types of bean contain significant amounts of antinutrients that inhibit some enzyme processes in the body.
Phytic acid and phytates, present in grains, nuts, seeds and beans, interfere with bone growth and interrupt vitamin D metabolism.
Pioneering work on the effect of phytic acid was done by Edward Mellanby from 1939.
Nutrition
Beans are high in protein, complex carbohydrates, folate, and iron.
Soluble fiber can help lower blood cholesterol.
Consuming beans adds significant amounts of fiber and soluble fiber to a diet, with one cup of cooked beans providing between nine and thirteen grams of fiber.
Flatulence
Many edible beans, including broad beans and soybeans, contain oligosaccharides , a type of sugar molecule also found in cabbage.
An anti-oligosaccharide enzyme is necessary to properly digest these sugar molecules.
As a normal human digestive tract does not contain any anti-oligosaccharide enzymes, consumed oligosaccharides are typically digested by bacteria in the large intestine.
This digestion process produces flatulence-causing gases as a byproduct.
Since sugar dissolves in water, another method of reducing flatulence associated with eating beans is to drain the water in which the beans have been cooked.
Some species of mold produce alpha-galactosidase, an anti-oligosaccharide enzyme, which humans can take to facilitate digestion of oligosaccharides in the small intestine.
This enzyme, currently sold in the United States under the brand-names Beano and Gas-X Prevention, can be added to food or consumed separately.
In many cuisines beans are cooked along with natural carminatives such as anise seeds, coriander seeds and cumin.
One effective strategy is to soak beans in alkaline (baking soda) water overnight before rinsing thoroughly.
Sometimes vinegar is added, but only after the beans are cooked as vinegar interferes with the beans' softening.
Fermented beans will usually not produce most of the intestinal problems that unfermented beans will, since yeast can consume the offending sugars.
Production
The production data for legumes are published by FAO in three categories:
#Pulses dry: all mature and dry seeds of leguminous plants except soybeans and groundnuts.
#Oil crops: soybeans and groundnuts.
#Fresh vegetable: immature green fresh fruits of leguminous plants.
The following is a summary of FAO data.
Main crops of "Pulses, Total (dry)" are "Beans, dry 176" 26.83 million tons, "Peas, dry 187" 14.36 million tons, "Chick peas 191" 12.09 million tons, "Cow peas 195" 6.99 million tons, "Lentils 201" 6.32 million tons, "Pigeon peas 197" 4.49 million tons, "Broad beans, horse beans 181" 4.46 million tons.
In general, the consumption of pulses per capita has been decreasing since 1961.
Exceptions are lentils and cowpeas.
The world leader in production of Dry Beans (Phaseolus spp). is Myanmar (Burma), followed by India and Brazil.
In Africa, the most important producer is Tanzania.
No symbol
official figure, P
official figure, F
FAO estimate, *
Unofficial mirror data, C
Calculated figure A
Aggregate (may include official, semi-official or estimates)
Source: UN Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO)
Bibliography
