Leonhard Euler .
In St. Petersburg on 18 September 1783, after a lunch with his family, Euler was discussing the newly discovered planet Uranus and its orbit with a fellow academician Anders Johan Lexell, when he collapsed from a brain hemorrhage.
He died a few hours later.
Analysis
The development of infinitesimal calculus was at the forefront of 18th-century mathematical research, and the Bernoullis-family friends of Euler-were responsible for much of the early progress in the field.
Thanks to their influence, studying calculus became the major focus of Euler's work.
While some of Euler's proofs are not acceptable by modern standards of mathematical rigour
A first point of Euler's musical theory is the definition of "genres", i.e. of possible divisions of the octave using the prime numbers 3 and 5.
Euler describes 18 such genres, with the general definition 2mA, where A is the "exponent" of the genre (i.e. the sum of the exponents of 3 and 5) and 2m (where "m is an indefinite number, small or large, so long as the sounds are perceptible"), expresses that the relation holds independently of the number of octaves concerned.
The first genre, with A = 1, is the octave itself (or its duplicates); the second genre, 2m.3, is the octave divided by the fifth (fifth + fourth, C-G-C); the third genre is 2m.5, major third + minor sixth (C-E-C); the fourth is 2m.32, two fourths and a tone (C-F-B-C); the fifth is 2m.3.5 (C-E-G-B-C); etc.
Genres 12 (2m.33.5), 13 (2m.32.52) and 14 (2m.3.53) are corrected versions of the diatonic, chromatic and enharmonic, respectively, of the Ancients.
Genre 18 (2m.33.52) is the "diatonico-chromatic", "used generally in all compositions", and which turns out to be identical with the system described by Johann Mattheson.
Euler later envisaged the possibility of describing genres including the prime number 7.
Euler devised a specific graph, the Speculum musicum, to illustrate the diatonico-chromatic genre, and discussed paths in this graph for specific intervals, recalling his interest in the Seven Bridges of Königsberg (see above).
The device drew renewed interest as the Tonnetz in neo-Riemannian theory (see also Lattice (music)).
Euler further used the principle of the "exponent" to propose a derivation of the gradus suavitatis (degree of suavity, of agreeableness) of intervals and chords from their prime factors - one must keep in mind that he considered just intonation, i.e. 1 and the prime numbers 3 and 5 only.
Formulas have been proposed extending this system to any number of prime numbers, e.g. in the form
where pi are prime numbers and ki their exponents.
Personal philosophy and religious beliefs
Euler and his friend Daniel Bernoulli were opponents of Leibniz's monadism and the philosophy of Christian Wolff.
Euler insisted that knowledge is founded in part on the basis of precise quantitative laws, something that monadism and Wolffian science were unable to provide.
Euler's religious leanings might also have had a bearing on his dislike of the doctrine; he went so far as to label Wolff's ideas as "heathen and atheistic".
A definitive collection of Euler's works, entitled Opera Omnia, has been published since 1911 by the Euler Commission of the Swiss Academy of Sciences.
A complete chronological list of Euler's works is available at The Eneström Index.
File:Acta Eruditorum - II geometria, 1744 - BEIC 13411238.jpg|Illustration from Solutio problematis... a. 1743 propositi published in Acta Eruditorum, 1744
Image:Methodus inveniendi - Leonhard Euler - 1744.jpg|The title page of Euler's Methodus inveniendi lineas curvas.
Sources
Further reading
* Lexikon der Naturwissenschaftler, (2000), Heidelberg: Spektrum Akademischer Verlag.
* Hascher, Xavier and Papadopoulos, Athanase (editors).
Leonhard Euler :
Mathématicien, physicien et théoricien de la musique, Paris, CNRS Editions, 2015, 516 p. ()
* Heimpell, Hermann, Theodor Heuss, Benno Reifenberg (editors).
Die großen Deutschen, volume 2, Berlin: Ullstein Verlag.
