The Jamestown settlement in the Colony of Virginia was the first permanent English settlement in the Americas.
It was located on the northeast bank of the James (Powhatan) River about southwest of the center of modern Williamsburg.
It was established by the Virginia Company of London as "James Fort" on May 4, 1607 O.S.; (May 14, 1607 N.S.), and was considered permanent after a brief abandonment in 1610.
It followed several failed attempts, including the Lost Colony of Roanoke, established in 1585 on Roanoke Island.
Jamestown served as the colonial capital from 1616 until 1699.
The settlement was located within the country of Tsenacommacah, which belonged to the Powhatan Confederacy, and specifically in that of the Paspahegh tribe.
The natives initially welcomed and provided crucial provisions and support for the colonists, who were not agriculturally inclined.
Relations quickly soured, and the colonists would annihilate the Paspahegh in warfare within four years.
Despite the dispatch of more settlers and supplies, including the 1608 arrival of eight Polish and German colonists and the first two European women, In mid-1610, the survivors abandoned Jamestown, though they returned after meeting a resupply convoy in the James River.
In August 1619, the first recorded slaves from Africa to British North America arrived in what is now Old Point Comfort near the Jamestown colony, on a British privateer ship flying a Dutch flag.
The approximately 20 Africans from the present-day Angola had been removed by the British crew from a Portuguese slave ship, the "São João Bautista".
They most likely worked in the tobacco fields as slaves under a system of race-based indentured servitude.
The modern conception of slavery in the United States was formalized in 1640 (the John Punch hearing) and was fully entrenched in Virginia by 1660.
The London Company's second settlement in Bermuda claims to be the site of the oldest town in the English New World, as St. George's, Bermuda was officially established in 1612 as New London, whereas James Fort in Virginia was not converted into James Towne until 1619, and further did not survive to the present day.
In 1676, Jamestown was deliberately burned during Bacon's Rebellion, though it was quickly rebuilt.
In 1699, the colonial capital was moved to what is today Williamsburg, Virginia; Jamestown ceased to exist as a settlement, and remains today only as an archaeological site.
Today, Jamestown is one of three locations composing the Historic Triangle of Colonial Virginia, along with Williamsburg and Yorktown, with two primary heritage sites.
is the archaeological site on Jamestown Island and is a cooperative effort by Jamestown National Historic Site and Preservation Virginia.
Jamestown Settlement, a living history interpretive site, is operated by the Jamestown Yorktown Foundation, a state agency of the Commonwealth of Virginia.
Settlement
Spain, Portugal, and France moved quickly to establish a presence in the New World, while other European countries moved more slowly.
The English did not attempt to found colonies until many decades after the explorations of John Cabot, and early efforts were failures-most notably the Roanoke Colony which vanished about 1590.
1607-1609:
Arrival and beginning
Late in 1606, English colonizers set sail with a charter from the London Company to establish a colony in the New World.
The fleet consisted of the ships Susan Constant, Discovery, and Godspeed, all under the leadership of Captain Christopher Newport.
They made a particularly long voyage of four months, including a stop in the Canary Islands and subsequently Puerto Rico, and finally departed for the American mainland on April 10, 1607.
The expedition made landfall on April 26, 1607 at a place which they named Cape Henry.
Under orders to select a more secure location, they set about exploring what is now Hampton Roads and an outlet to the Chesapeake Bay which they named the James River in honor of King James I of England.
Captain Edward Maria Wingfield was elected president of the governing council on April 25, 1607.
On May 14, he selected a piece of land on a large peninsula some inland from the Atlantic Ocean as a prime location for a fortified settlement.
The river channel was a defensible strategic point due to a curve in the river, and it was close to the land, making it navigable and offering enough land for piers or wharves to be built in the future.
Perhaps the most favorable fact about the location was that it was uninhabited because the leaders of the nearby indigenous nations considered the site too poor and remote for agriculture.
The island was swampy and isolated, and it offered limited space, was plagued by mosquitoes, and afforded only brackish tidal river water unsuitable for drinking.
The Jamestown settlers arrived in Virginia during a severe drought, according to a research study conducted by the Jamestown Archaeological Assessment (JAA) team in the 1990s.
The JAA analyzed information from a study conducted in 1985 by David Stahle and others, who obtained drawings of 800 year-old baldcypress trees along the Nottoway and Blackwater rivers.
The lifespan of these trees is up to 1,000 years and their rings offer a good indication of an area's annual amount of rainfall.
The borings revealed that the worst drought in 700 years occurred between 1606 and 1612.
This severe drought affected the Jamestown colonists and Powhatan tribe's ability to produce food and obtain a safe supply of water.
The settlers also arrived too late in the year to get crops planted.
Many in the group were either gentlemen unused to work or their manservants, both equally unaccustomed to the hard labor demanded by the harsh task of carving out a viable colony.
In a few months, 80% of the party were dead; some of the survivors were deserting to the Indians whose land they had colonized.
Despite the hospitality of Wahunsenacawh, the presence of the English settlers and perhaps a further expedition up the James River by Captain Christopher Newport provoked the Paspahegh, Weyanock, and other groups to mount a series of attacks on the fort during a period of violence lasting from May 27 to July 14, 1607.
Two-thirds of the settlers died before ships arrived in 1608 with supplies and German and Polish craftsmen, who helped to establish the first manufactories in the colony.
As a result, glassware became the foremost American products to be exported to Europe at the time.
Clapboard had already been sent back to England beginning with the first returning ship.
The delivery of supplies in 1608 on the First and Second Supply missions of Captain Newport had also added to the number of hungry settlers.
It seemed certain at that time that the colony at Jamestown would meet the same fate as earlier English attempts to settle in North America, specifically the Roanoke Colony (Lost Colony) and the Popham Colony, unless there was a major relief effort.
The Germans who arrived with the Second Supply and a few others defected to the Powhatans, with weapons and equipment.
The Spanish were driven off by the timely arrival in July 1609 of Captain Samuel Argall in Mary and John, a larger ship than the Spanish reconnaissance ship La Asunción de Cristo.
Argall's voyage also prevented the Spanish from gaining knowledge of the weakness of the colony.
Don Pedro de Zúñiga, the Spanish ambassador to England, was desperately seeking this (in addition to spies) in order to get Philip III of Spain to authorise an attack on the colony.
The investors of the Virginia Company of London expected to reap rewards from their speculative investments.
With the Second Supply, they expressed their frustrations and made demands upon the leaders of Jamestown in written form.
They specifically demanded that the colonists send commodities sufficient to pay the cost of the voyage, a lump of gold, assurance that they had found the South Sea, and one member of the lost Roanoke Colony.
It fell to the third president of the Council Captain John Smith to deliver a bold and much-needed wake-up call in response to the investors in London, demanding practical laborers and craftsmen who could help make the colony more self-sufficient.
1609-1610: Starving Time and Third Supply
After Smith was forced to return to England due to an explosion which gave him deep burn wounds during a trading expedition, the colony was led by George Percy, who proved incompetent in negotiating with the native tribes.
There are indications that those in London comprehended and embraced Smith's message.
The Third Supply mission of 1609 was to be by far the largest and best equipped.
They also had a new purpose-built flagship, Sea Venture, constructed, and placed in the most experienced of hands, Christopher Newport.
On June 2, 1609, Sea Venture set sail from Plymouth as the flagship of a seven-ship fleet (towing two additional pinnaces) destined for Jamestown, Virginia as part of the Third Supply, carrying 214 settlers.
On July 24, the fleet ran into a strong storm, likely a hurricane, and the ships were separated.
Although some of the ships did make it to Jamestown, the leaders, and most of the supplies had been aboard Sea Venture, which fought the storm for three days before Admiral of the Company, Sir George Somers, deliberately drove it onto the reefs of Bermuda to prevent its foundering.
This allowed all aboard to be landed safely.
The survivors (including Lieutenant-General Sir Thomas Gates, Captain Christopher Newport, Sylvester Jordain, Stephen Hopkins, later of Mayflower, and secretary William Strachey) were stranded on Bermuda for approximately nine months.
During that time, they built two new ships, the pinnaces Deliverance and Patience.
The original plan was to build only one vessel, Deliverance, but it soon became evident that it would not be large enough to carry the settlers and all of the food (salted pork) that was being sourced on the islands.
While the Third Supply was stranded in Bermuda, the colony at Jamestown was in even worse shape.
In the "Starving Time" of 1609-1610, the Jamestown settlers faced rampant starvation for want of additional provisions.
During this time, lack of food drove people to eat snakes and even boil the leather from shoes for sustenance.
Only 60 of the original 214 settlers at Jamestown survived.
The ships from Bermuda arrived in Jamestown on May 23, 1610.
Many of the surviving colonists were near death, and Jamestown was judged to be unviable.
Everyone was boarded onto Deliverance and Patience, which set sail for England.
However, on June 10, 1610, the timely arrival of another relief fleet, bearing Governor Thomas West, 3rd Baron De La Warr (who would eventually give his name to the colony of Delaware), which met the two ships as they descended the James River, granted Jamestown a reprieve.
The Colonists called this The Day of Providence.
The fleet brought not only supplies, but also additional settlers.
All the settlers returned to the colony, though there was still a critical shortage of food.
Relations between the colonists and the Powhatans quickly deteriorated after De La Warr's arrival, eventually leading to conflict.
The Anglo-Powhatan War lasted until Samuel Argall captured Wahunsenacawh's daughter Matoaka, better known by her nickname Pocahontas, after which the chief accepted a treaty of peace.
1610-1624: Rising fortunes
Due to the aristocratic backgrounds of many of the new colonists, a historic drought and the communal nature of their work load, progress through the first few years was inconsistent at best.
By 1613, six years after Jamestown's founding, the organizers and shareholders of the Virginia Company were desperate to increase the efficiency and profitability of the struggling colony.
Without stockholder consent the Governor, Sir Thomas Dale, assigned plots to its "ancient planters" and smaller plots to the settlement's later arrivals.
Measurable economic progress was made, and the settlers began expanding their planting to land belonging to local native tribes.
That this turnaround coincided with the end of a drought that had begun the year before the English settlers' arrival probably indicates multiple factors were involved besides the colonists' ineptitude.
Among the colonists who survived the Third Supply was John Rolfe, who carried with him a cache of untested new tobacco seeds from Bermuda, which had grown wild there after being planted by shipwrecked Spaniards years before.
In 1614, Rolfe began to successfully harvest tobacco.
Prosperous and wealthy, he married Pocahontas, daughter of Chief Powhatan, bringing several years of peace between the English and natives.
However, at the end of a public relations trip to England, Pocahontas became sick and died on March 21, 1617.
The following year, her father also died.
Powhatan's brother, a fierce warrior named Opchanacanough, became head of the Powhatan Confederacy.
As the English continued to appropriate more land for tobacco farming, relations with the natives worsened.
Due to the high cost of the trans-atlantic voyage at this time, many English settlers came to Jamestown as indentured servants: in exchange for the passage, room, board, and the promise of land or money, these immigrants would agree to work for three to seven years.
Immigrants from continental Europe, mainly Germans, were usually redemptioners-they purchased some portion of their voyage on credit and, upon arrival, borrowed or entered into a work contract to pay the remainder of their voyage costs.
Of the first documented African slaves to arrive in British North America, on the frigate "White Lion" in 1619,
In 1619, the first representative assembly in America, the General Assembly, convened in the Jamestown Church, "to establish one equal and uniform government over all Virginia" which would provide "just laws for the happy guiding and governing of the people there inhabiting," Initially, only men of English origin were permitted to vote.
On June 30, 1619, in what was the first recorded strike in Colonial America, the Polish artisans protested and refused to work if not allowed to vote ("No Vote, No Work").
On July 21, 1619, the court granted the Poles equal voting rights.
Afterwards, the labor strike in mind.
Cotter worked with Edward B. Jelks and Harrington to survey the area's colonial sites.
In 1957 Cotter and J. Paul Hudson co-authored http:/ files 16277-h/16277-h.htm New Discoveries at Jamestown.
Cotter contributed, along with Jelks, Georg Neumann, and Johnny Hack, to the 1958 report Archaeological Excavations at Jamestown.
Present day
In the present time, as part of the Colonial National Historical Park, the Jamestown Island area is home to two heritage tourism sites related to the original fort and town.
Nearby, the Jamestown-Scotland Ferry service provides a link across the navigable portion of the James River for vehicles and affords passengers a view of Jamestown Island from the river.
, located at the original site of Jamestown, is administered by Preservation Virginia and the National Park Service.
The central 22½ acres of land, where the archaeological remains of the original James Fort were found, are owned by Preservation Virginia (formerly known as the Association for the Preservation of Virginia Antiquities); the remaining are held by the National Park Service and is part of the Colonial National Historical Park.
The site gained renewed importance when in 1996 the Jamestown Rediscovery project began excavations in search of the original James Fort site, originally in preparation for the quadricentennial of Jamestown's founding.
The primary goal of the archaeological campaign was to locate archaeological remains of "the first years of settlement at Jamestown, especially of the earliest fortified town; and the subsequent growth and development of the town".
Today, visitors to can view the site of the original 1607 James Fort, the 17th-century church tower and the site of the 17th-century town, as well as tour an archaeological museum called the Archaearium and view many of the close to two million artifacts found by Jamestown Rediscovery.
They also may participate in living history ranger tours and Archaeological tours given by the Jamestown Rediscovery staff.
Visitors can also often observe archaeologists from the Jamestown Rediscovery Project at work, as archaeological work at the site continues.
, the archaeological work and studies are ongoing.
In addition to their newsletter and website, new discoveries are frequently reported in the local newspaper, the Virginia Gazette based in nearby Williamsburg, and by other news media, often worldwide.
Jamestown Settlement
Jamestown Settlement is a living-history park and museum located from the original location of the colony and adjacent to Jamestown Island.
Initially created for the celebration of the 350th anniversary in 1957, Jamestown Settlement is operated by the Jamestown-Yorktown Foundation, and largely sponsored by the Commonwealth of Virginia.
The museum complex features a reconstruction of a Powhatan village, the James Fort as it was -1614, and seagoing replicas of the three ships that brought the first settlers, Susan Constant, Godspeed, Discovery.
Commemorations
With the national independence of the United States established by the end of the 18th century, Jamestown came to be looked at as a starting point.
Its founding in 1607 has been regularly commemorated, with the most notable events being held every fifty years.
200th anniversary (1807)
The of Jamestown on May 13-14, 1807, was called the Grand National Jubilee.
Over 3,000 people attended the event, many arriving on vessels which anchored in the river off the island.
As a celebration was planned, virtually no one thought that the actual isolated and long-abandoned original site of Jamestown would be suitable for a major event because Jamestown Island had no facilities for large crowds.
The original fort housing the Jamestown settlers was believed to have been long ago swallowed by the James River.
The general area in James City County near Jamestown was also considered unsuitable, as it was not very accessible in the day of rail travel before automobiles were common.
As the tricentennial of the 1607 Founding of the Jamestown neared, around 1904, despite an assumption in some quarters that Richmond would be a logical location, leaders in Norfolk began a campaign to have a celebration held there.
The decision was made to locate the international exposition on a mile-long frontage at Sewell's Point near the mouth of Hampton Roads.
This was about downstream from Jamestown in a rural section of Norfolk County.
It was a site which could become accessible by both long-distance passenger railroads and local streetcar service, with considerable frontage on the harbor of Hampton Roads.
This latter feature proved ideal for the naval delegations which came from points all around the world.
The Jamestown Exposition of 1907 was one of the many world's fairs and expositions that were popular in the early part of the 20th century.
Held from April 26, 1907 to December 1, 1907, attendees included US President Theodore Roosevelt, Kaiser Wilhelm II of Germany, the Prince of Sweden, Mark Twain, Henry H. Rogers, and dozens of other dignitaries and famous persons.
A major naval review featuring the United States' Great White Fleet was a key feature.
U.S. Military officials and leaders were impressed by the location, and the Exposition site later formed the first portion of the large U.S. Naval Station Norfolk in 1918 during World War I.
350th Anniversary (1957): Jamestown Festival
With America's increased access to automobiles, and with improved roads and transportation, it was feasible for the 350th anniversary celebration to be held at Jamestown itself in 1957.
Although erosion had cut off the land bridge between Jamestown Island and the mainland, the isthmus was restored and new access provided by the completion of the National Park Service's Colonial Parkway which led to Williamsburg and Yorktown, the other two portions of Colonial Virginia's Historic Triangle.
There were also improvements of state highways.
The north landing for the popular Jamestown Ferry and a portion of State Route 31 were relocated.
In addition to the Virginia State Quarter, Jamestown was also the subject of two United States commemorative coins celebrating the 400th anniversary of its settlement.
A silver dollar and a gold five dollar coin were issued in 2007.
2019 Commemoration
In 2019 Jamestown, in cooperation with Williamsburg, will hold a commemoration that marks the 400th anniversary of three landmark events in American history: the first meeting of the General Assembly, the arrival of the first Africans to English North America, and the first Thanksgiving.
In popular culture
A fictional romantic adventure set at Jamestown, To Have and to Hold, was the bestselling novel in the United States in 1900.
The novel was later adapted into two feature films, in 1916 and 1922.
A highly fictionalized version of the Jamestown settlement is depicted in the animated Disney film Pocahontas (1995) as well as its direct-to-video sequel Pocahontas II: Journey to a New World (1998).
Among other inaccuracies it is shown as being near mountains, when it was actually located on the Tidewater region.
* A feature-length film, The New World (2005), directed by Terrence Malick, covers the story of Jamestown's colonization.
Although the historical details are accurate in most ways, the plot focuses on a dramatized relationship between John Smith, played by Colin Farrell, and Pocahontas, played by Q'orianka Kilcher.
It also features John Rolfe, played by Christian Bale.
Many scenes were filmed on-location along the James and Chickahominy Rivers and at Henricus Historical Park in Chesterfield County, Virginia.
* Another feature-length film, First Landing: The Voyage from England to Jamestown (2007), documents the 1607 landing of English colonists.
* In 2017, Sky 1 launched a new series based in Jamestown.
The series, named after its eponymous setting, revolves around the societal change triggered by the arrival of women to the settlement to marry the male citizens of the area, and is made by the producers of Downton Abbey.
The story of Bartholomew Gosnold and the establishment of Jamestown is told in the 2018 musical To Look For America written by Richard Digance and Eric Sedge.
Attribution:
Further reading
* Christopher M. B. Allison, "Jamestown's Relics: Sacred Presence in the English New World."
Essay.
In Conversations: An Online Journal of the Center for the Study of Material and Visual Cultures of Religion (2016).
doi:10.22332 conversations jamestown-s-relics-sacred-presence-english-new-world Jamestown’s Relics: Sacred Presence in the English New World
* Bernard Bailyn, The Barbarous Years: The Peopling of British North America: The Conflict of Civilizations, 1600-1675 (Vintage, 2012)
* Warren M. Billings (Editor), The Old Dominion in the Seventeenth Century: A Documentary History of Virginia, 1606-1700 (University of North Carolina Press, 2007)
* Warren M. Billings, "A Little Parliament; The Virginia General Assembly in the Seventeenth Century";
* Dorothy Hoobler and Thomas Hoobler, Captain John Smith: Jamestown and the Birth of an American Dream (John Wiley and Sons, 2006)
* James Horn, A Land as God Made It (Perseus Books, 2005)
* James Horn, "1619; Jamestown and the Forging of American Democracy"; (New York, Basic Books, 2018)
* Margaret Huber, Powhatan Lords of Life and Death: Command and Consent in Seventeenth-Century Virginia (University of Nebraska Press, 2008)
* William M. Kelso, Jamestown, The Buried Truth (University of Virginia Press, 2006)
* James M. Lindgren, Preserving the Old Dominion: Historic Preservation and Virginia Traditionalism (University of Virginia, 1993)
* A. Bryant Nichols Jr., Captain Christopher Newport: Admiral of Virginia (Sea Venture, 2007)
* David A. Price, Love and Hate in Jamestown (Alfred A. Knopf, 2003)
* Helen C. Rountree, The Powhatan Indians of Virginia: Their Traditional Culture (University of Oklahoma Press, 2013)
* Ed Southern (Editor), Jamestown Adventure, The: Accounts of the Virginia Colony, 1605-1614 (Blair, 2011)
* Jocelyn R. Wingfield, Virginia's True Founder: Edward Maria Wingfield and His Times (Booksurge, 2007)
* Benjamin Woolley, Savage Kingdom: The True Story of Jamestown, 1607, and the Settlement of America (Harper Perennial, 2008)
