Genoa ( ; ; ; English, historically, and ) is the capital of the Italian region of Liguria and the sixth-largest city in Italy.
In 2015, 594,733 people lived within the city's administrative limits.
As of the 2011 Italian census, the Province of Genoa, which in 2015 became the Metropolitan City of Genoa, counted 855,834 resident persons.
Over 1.5 million people live in the wider metropolitan area stretching along the Italian Riviera.
Located on the Gulf of Genoa in the Ligurian Sea, Genoa has historically been one of the most important ports on the Mediterranean: it is currently the busiest in Italy and in the Mediterranean Sea and twelfth-busiest in the European Union.
Genoa has been nicknamed la Superba ("the proud one") due to its glorious past and impressive landmarks.
Part of the old town of Genoa was inscribed on the World Heritage List (UNESCO) in 2006 as , among others.
Genoa, which forms the southern corner of the Milan-Turin-Genoa industrial triangle of Northwest Italy, is one of the country's major economic centers.
The city has hosted massive shipyards and steelworks since the 19th century, and its solid financial sector dates back to the Middle Ages.
The Bank of Saint George, founded in 1407, is among the oldest in the world and has played an important role in the city's prosperity since the middle of the 15th century.
A number of leading Italian companies are based in the city, including Fincantieri, Selex ES, Ansaldo Energia, Ansaldo STS, Edoardo Raffinerie Garrone, Piaggio Aerospace, Mediterranean Shipping Company and Costa Cruises.
Flag
The flag of Genoa is a St. George's Cross, a red cross on a white field.
The patron saint of Genoa was Saint Lawrence until at least 958, but the Genoese transferred their allegiance to Saint George at some point during the 11th or 12th century, most likely with the rising popularity of the military saint during the Crusades.
Genoa also had a banner displaying a cross since at latest 1218, possibly as early as 1113.
But the cross banner was not associated with the saint; indeed, the saint had his own flag, the vexillum beati Georgii (first mentioned 1198), a red flag showing George and the dragon.
A depiction of this flag is shown in the Genoese annals under the year 1227.
The Genoese flag with the red cross was used alongside this "Saint George's flag", from at least 1218, known as the insignia cruxata comunis Janue ("cross ensign of the commune of Genoa").
The saint's flag was the city's main war flag, but the cross flag was used alongside it in the 1240s.
The Saint George's flag (i.e. the flag depicting the saint) remained the main flag of Genoa at least until the 1280s.
The flag now known as the "St. George's Cross" seems to have replaced it as Genoa's main flag at some point during the 14th century.
The Book of Knowledge of All Kingdoms (c. 1385) shows it, inscribed with the word iustiçia, and described as:
There is some debate as to whether the flag of England derives from the flag of Genoa.
While some historians point to a lack of evidence, others say that the English adopted the flag on their ships in 1190 in order to benefit from the protection of the Genoese fleet.
History
Genoa is a port city by birth, establishing itself as the merchant capital of the newly established Republic of Genoa in 1005 and maintaining its autonomy until 1797.
Genoa was a powerful port and briefly entered in conflict with Venice over the Mediterranean Trade.
Genoa always struggled to rule itself, with many inner conflicts among the nobility weakening the Republic.
This inability to rule itself caused Genoa to put themselves twice under French rule, once in 1391 then in 1458.
The Black Death in 1348 hit Genoa hard and contributed to its decline.
Genoa also owned the island of Corsica but sold it to France in 1768 due to financial struggles.
It was 1796 that the Republic of Genoa finally ended, replaced by French ruled Ligurian Republic.
Since 1815 after the "Congresso di Vienna" Genoa joined the Regno di Sardegna (Sardinia Kingdom).
Italian unification of 1861 resulted in Genoa becoming the maritime hub of the new Italian state.
Genoese establishment of trade routes along the Mediterranean brought wealth and political power to the city.
The fleet’s participation in the Crusades allowed Genoa to further establish prosperous trading colonies in the Holy Land.
The Genoese trading station of Caffa in Crimea brought the Black Death to Europe, through infected rats on ships fleeing siege in 1346.
Genoa is also a windy city, especially during winter when northern winds often bring cool air from the Po Valley (usually accompanied by lower temperatures, high pressure and clear skies).
Another typical wind blows from southeast, mostly as a consequence of Atlantic disturbances and storms, bringing humid and warmer air from the sea.
Snowfall is sporadic, but does occur almost every year, albeit big amounts in the city centre are rare.
Annual average relative humidity is 68%, ranging from 63% in February to 73% in May.
Economy
The Genoa metropolitan area had a GDP amounting to $30.1 billion in 2011, or $33,003 per capita.
Ligurian agriculture has increased its specialisation pattern in high-quality products (flowers, wine, olive oil) and has thus managed to maintain the gross value-added per worker at a level much higher than the national average (the difference was about 42% in 1999).
The value of flower production represents over 75% of the agriculture sector turnover, followed by animal farming (11.2%) and vegetable growing (6.4%).
Steel, once a major industry during the booming 1950s and 1960s, phased out after the late 1980s crisis, as Italy moved away from the heavy industry to pursue more technologically advanced and less polluting productions.
So the Ligurian industry has turned towards a widely diversified range of high-quality and high-tech products (food, shipbuilding (in Sestri Ponente and in metropolitan area - Sestri Levante), electrical engineering and electronics, petrochemicals, aerospace etc.).
Nonetheless, the regions still maintains a flourishing shipbuilding sector (yacht construction and maintenance, cruise liner building, military shipyards).
ranks first in Italy, second in terms of twenty-foot equivalent units after the transshipment port of Gioia Tauro, with a trade volume of over 2 million TEUs.
The main destinations for the cargo-passenger traffic are Sicily, Sardinia, Corsica, Barcelona, and the Canary Islands.
Some companies based in Genoa include Ansaldo STS, Ansaldo Energia, Edoardo Raffinerie Garrone, Piaggio Aerospace, Registro Italiano Navale, Banca Carige, SLAM, and Costa Cruises.
Erzelli science technology park
The western area of Genoa hosts the Erzelli GREAT Campus, an under construction science technology park which houses the high-tech corporations Siemens, Ericsson, Esaote, and robotics laboratories of the Italian Institute of Technology (IIT).
The Erzelli GREAT Campus science park is undergoing a process of enlargement, and in the future will host the new Faculty of Engineering of University of Genoa.
The project has been struggling in recent years with enterprises laying off their employees and no real growth.
Transport
Ports
Several cruise and ferry lines serve the passenger terminals in the old port, with a traffic of 3.2 million passengers in 2007.
MSC Cruises chose Genoa as one of its main home ports, in competition with the Genoese company Costa Cruises, which moved its home port to Savona.
The quays of the passenger terminals extend over an area of , with 5 equipped berths for cruise vessels and 13 for ferries, for an annual capacity of 4 million ferry passengers, 1.5 million cars and 250,000 trucks.
The historical maritime station of Ponte dei Mille is today a technologically advanced cruise terminal, with facilities designed after the world's most modern airports, to ensure fast embarking and disembarking of latest generation ships carrying thousand passengers.
A third cruise terminal is currently under construction in the redesigned area of Ponte Parodi, once a quay used for grain traffic.
The Costa Concordia cruise ship, owned by Costa Cruises, was docked at the port before being dismantled.
Air transport
The Airport of Genoa is built on an artificial peninsula, west of the city.
The airport is currently operated by Aeroporto di Genova S.P.A., which has recently upgraded the airport complex, that now connects Genoa with several daily flights to Rome, Naples, Paris, London, Madrid and Munich.
In 2008, 1,202,168 passengers travelled through the airport, with an increase of international destinations and charter flights.
Public transport
The main railway stations are Genoa Brignole in the east and Genoa Principe in the west.
Genoa Brignole is close to the business districts and the exhibition centre, while the Principe is close to the port, the university and the historical centre.
From these two stations depart the main trains connecting Genoa to France, Turin, Milan and Rome.
Genoa's third most important station is Genoa Sampierdarena, which serves the densely populated neighbourhood of Sampierdarena.
23 other local stations serve the other neighbourhoods on the 30-kilometre-long coast line from Nervi to Voltri and on the northern line through Bolzaneto and the Polcevera Valley.
The municipal administration of Genoa plans to transform these urban railway lines to be part of the rapid transit system, which now consists of the Metropolitana di Genova (Genoa Metro), a light metro connecting Brin to the city centre.
The metro line was extended to Brignole Station in December 2012.
Trains currently pass through Corvetto station between De Ferrari and Brignole without stopping.
A possible further extension towards the eastern, densely populated boroughs was planned, but the municipal administration intends to improve the public transport by investing in new tram lines instead of completing the extension of the light metro.
The current stations of the metro line are Brin-Certosa, Dinegro, Principe, Darsena, San Giorgio, Sant'Agostino and De Ferrari, and the line is long.
The city's hilly nature has influenced its public transport.
The city is served by three funicular railways (the Zecca-Righi funicular, the Sant'Anna funicular and the Quezzi funicular), the Principe-Granarolo rack railway, and ten public lifts.
The city's metro, bus and trolleybus network is operated by AMT (Azienda Mobilità e Trasporti S.p.A.).
The Drin Bus is a demand responsive transport service that connects the hilly, low-density areas of Genoa.
The average time people spend commuting on public transit in Genova, for example to and from work, is 54 min on a weekday.
10% of public transit riders ride for more than 2 hours every day.
The average time people wait at a stop or station for public transit is 12 min, while 13% of riders wait over 20 minutes on average every day.
The average distance people usually ride in a single trip with public transit is 4 km, while 2% travel for over 12 km in a single direction.
Demographics
At the beginning of 2011, there were 608,493 people residing in Genoa, of whom 47% were male and 53% were female.
The city is characterised by rapid aging and a long history of demographic decline, that has shown a partial slowdown in the last decade.
Genoa has the lowest birth rate and is the most aged of any large Italian city.
Minors (children ages 18 and younger) totalled only 14.12% of the population compared to pensioners who number 26.67%.
This compares with the Italian average of 18.06% (minors) and 19.94% (pensioners).
The median age of Genoa's residents is 47, compared to the Italian average of 42.
The current birth rate of the city is only 7.49 births per 1,000 inhabitants, compared to the national average of 9.45. , 94.23% of the population was Italian.
The largest immigrant group is from the Americas , the Buridda, the and the .
Two sophisticated recipes of Genoese cuisine are: the Cappon magro and the (a song by Fabrizio De André is titled A Çimma and is dedicated to this Genoese recipe).
Originating in Genoa is Pandolce that gave rise to Genoa cake.
The city lands its name to a special paste used to prepare cakes and pastries called Genoise and to the Pain de Gênes.
In Genoa there are many food markets in typical nineteenth-century iron structures as Mercato del Ferro, Mercato Dinegro, Mercato di Via Prè, Mercato di piazza Sarzano, Mercato del Carmine, Mercato della Foce, Mercato Romagnosi.
The instead is in masonry and has a circular structure.
People
Genoa has left an extraordinary impression on many noted personalities.
Friedrich Nietzsche loved Genoa and wrote some of his works there.
Sigmund Freud and Ezra Pound lived near Genoa in Rapallo.
Anton Chekhov said that Genoa "is the most beautiful city in the world," and Richard Wagner wrote: "I have never seen anything like this Genoa!
it is something indescribably beautiful".
Among the personalities of the 19th and 20th centuries who wrote about Genoa were Heinrich Heine, Osip Mandelstam, Aleksandr Ivanovich Herzen, Mary Shelley, Oscar Wilde, John Ruskin Charles Dickens, Mark Twain, Joseph Conrad, Vicente Blasco Ibáñez, Gustave Flaubert, Alexandre Dumas, Louis Énault, Valery Larbaud, Albert Camus, Paul Valéry, F. Scott Fitzgerald, Paul Klee.
Giuseppe Verdi, Giacomo Puccini, and Pietro Mascagni.
Verdi in his work, Simon Boccanegra, is inspired by the medieval history of the city.
The poets Dino Campana, Camillo Sbarbaro and Giorgio Caproni have made Genoa a recurring element of their poetic work.
Famous Genoese include Sinibaldo and Ottobuono Fieschi (Popes Innocent IV and Adrian V), Giovanni Battista Cybo (Pope Innocent VIII) and Giacomo della Chiesa (Pope Benedict XV), navigators Christopher Columbus, Antonio de Noli, Enrico Alberto d'Albertis, Enrico de Candia (Henry, Count of Malta) and Andrea Doria, composers Niccolò Paganini and Michele Novaro, Italian patriots Giuseppe Mazzini, Goffredo Mameli and Nino Bixio, writer and translator Fernanda Pivano, poet Edoardo Sanguineti, Communist politician Palmiro Togliatti, architect Renzo Piano, art curator and critic Germano Celant, Physics 2002 Nobel Prize winner Riccardo Giacconi, Literature 1975 Nobel Prize winner Eugenio Montale, the court painter Giovanni Maria delle Piane (Il Mulinaretto) from the Delle Piane family, artists Vanessa Beecroft, Enrico Accatino, comedians Gilberto Govi, Paolo Villaggio, Beppe Grillo, Luca Bizzarri, Paolo Kessisoglu and Maurizio Crozza; singer-songwriters Fabrizio de André, Ivano Fossati, Umberto Bindi, Bruno Lauzi and Francesco Baccini, while Luigi Tenco and Gino Paoli are also known as Genoese singer-songwriters, although they are respectively from Cassine and Monfalcone; actor Vittorio Gassman, and actress Moana Pozzi, Giorgio Parodi who conceived the motorcycle company Moto Guzzi with Carlo Guzzi and Giovanni Ravelli.
Some reports say the navigator and explorer Giovanni Caboto (John Cabot) was also from Genoa, others say he was from Savona.
Saints from Genoa include Romulus, Syrus, Catherine of Genoa.
Among the latest generations, musicians like Andrea Bacchetti, Giulio Plotino, Sergio Ciomei, Lorenzo Cavasanti, Stefano Bagliano and Fabrizio Cipriani, as well as academics and authors like Michele Giugliano and Roberto Dillon, help in keeping the name of the city on the international spotlight in different fields among the arts, technology and culture.
Museums
Promenades
Corso Italia runs for in the quartiere of Albaro, linking two neighbourhoods of Foce and Boccadasse.
The promenade, which was built in 1908, overlooks the sea, towards the promontory of Portofino.
The main landmarks are the small lighthouse of Punta Vagno, the San Giuliano Abbey, and the Lido of Albaro.
, promenade overlooking the sea and long, Nervi.
Promenade of the upper ring road, so-called "Circonvallazione a Monte" that includes: Corso Firenze, Corso Paganini, Corso Magenta, Via Solferino, Corso Armellini.
Walks can be made from the centre of Genoa following one of the many ancient paths between tall palaces and the "Creuze" to reach the higher areas of the city where there are magnificent places like Belvedere Castelletto, the "Righi's district", the "Santuario di Nostra Signora di Loreto", the "Santuario della Madonnetta", the "Santuario di San Francesco da Paola".
Monte Fasce gives a complete view of the city.
To reach the hinterland of the Province of Genoa one can use the Genoa - Casella Old Railway, of railway between the Genoese mountains.
Education and research
The first organised forms of higher education in Genoa date back to the 13th century when private colleges were entitled to award degrees in Medicine, Philosophy, Theology, Law, Arts.
Today the University of Genoa, founded in the 15th century, is one of the largest in Italy, with 11 faculties, 51 departments and 14 libraries.
In 2007-2008, the University had 41,000 students and 6,540 graduates.
Genoa is also home to other Colleges, Academies or Museums:
The ISICT-istituto superiore di studi in tecnologie dell'informazione e della comunicazione
The Italian Institute of Technology was established in 2003 jointly by the Italian Ministry of Education, Universities and Research and the Italian Minister of Economy and Finance, to promote excellence in basic and applied research.
The main fields of research of the Institute are Neuroscience, Robotics, Nanotechnology, Drug discovery.
The central research labs and headquarters are located in Morego, in the neighbourhood of Bolzaneto.
Clemson University, based in South Carolina, United States has a villa in Genoa where architecture students and students in related fields can attend for a semester or year-long study program.
Florida International University (FIU), based in Miami, Florida, United States also has a small campus in Genoa, with the University of Genoa, which offers classes within the FIU School of Architecture.
Science
Genoa is the birthplace of Giovanni Battista Baliani and Vincentio Reinieri, of the geneticist Luigi Luca Cavalli-Sforza, of the Nobel Prize astrophysicist Riccardo Giacconi and of the astronaut Franco Malerba.
The city is home to the Erzelli Hi-Tech Park, to the Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia, to the Istituto idrografico della Marina and annually hosts the Festival della Scienza.
The city has an important tradition in the fields of the geology, paleontology, botany and naturalistic studies, among the most eminent personalities remember: Lorenzo Pareto, Luigi d'Albertis, Enrico Alberto d'Albertis, Giacomo Doria and Arturo Issel, we point the Orto Botanico dell'Università di Genova.
Very important and renowned is the Istituto Giannina Gaslini.
In 1846 the city hosted the eighth Meeting of Italian Scientists and in 1902 Luigi Carnera discovered an asteroid and called it "485 Genua", dedicating it to the Latin name of Genoa.
Cityscape
Main sights
Notable to the city are the Palazzi dei Rolli, included in UNESCO
World Heritage Site .
Genoa's historic centre is articulated in a maze of squares and narrow caruggi (typical Genoese alleys).
It joins a medieval dimension with following 16th century and Baroque interventions (the ancient Via Aurea, now Via Garibaldi).
Near Via Garibaldi, through the public elevator Castelletto Levante, one can reach one of the most scenic places in the city, Belvedere Castelletto.
The centre of Genoa is connected to its upper part by ancient paths caught between tall palaces, called creuze.
Walking along these small paths one can reach magnificent places like the Santuario di Nostra Signora di Loreto.
Very beautiful is the upper ring road so-called Circonvallazione a Monte that includes Corso Firenze, Corso Paganini, Corso Magenta, Via Solferino, and Corso Armellini.
San Lorenzo cathedral has a splendid portal and the dome designed by Galeazzo Alessi.
Inside is found the treasure of the Cathedral where among other objects there is also what is said to be the Holy Chalice.
The symbols of the city are the Lanterna (the lighthouse) ( high), old and standing lighthouse visible in the distance from the sea (beyond ), and the monumental fountain of Piazza De Ferrari, recently restored, out-and-out core of the city's life.
Near Piazza De Ferrari and Teatro Carlo Felice is the Mazzini Gallery, a typical nineteenth-century structure with many elegant shops and coffee bars.
Another tourist destination is the ancient seaside district of Boccadasse (which means "the mouth of the donkey"), with its multicolour boats, set as a seal to Corso Italia, the promenade which runs along the Lido d'Albaro, and known for its ice-creams.
After Boccadasse you can continue along the sea up to Sturla.
Just out of the city centre, but still part of the of coast included in the municipality's territory, are Nervi, natural doorway to the Ligurian East Riviera, and Pegli, the point of access to the West Riviera.
Nervi offers many attractions: the promenade overlooking the sea called ; parks covered with lush tropical vegetation; numerous villas and palaces open to the public that now house museums .
The East Riviera of Genoa called Riviera di Levante is part of the Italian Riviera.
East Riviera is full of interesting towns to visit, and then from Genoa to east are: Bogliasco, Pieve Ligure, Sori, Recco, Camogli, Portofino, Santa Margherita Ligure, Rapallo, Zoagli, Chiavari, Lavagna and Sestri Levante.
In the west, Pegli is the site of the famous Villa Durazzo-Pallavicini and Arenzano is a seaside town at the foot of the Parco naturale regionale del Beigua.
The new Genoa based its rebirth upon the restoration of the green areas of the immediate inland parts, among them the Parco naturale regionale del Beigua, and upon the construction of facilities such as the Aquarium of Genoa in the Old Harbour - the biggest in Italy and one of the major in Europe - and its Marina (the tourist small port which holds hundreds of pleasure boats).
All of these are inside the restored Expo Area, arranged in occasion of the Columbian Celebrations of 1992.
Near the city are Camogli and San Fruttuoso abbey accessible by a daily ferry from the Old Harbour (Porto Antico) of Genoa.
In the seabed in front of the San Fruttuoso abbey there is the Christ of the Abyss.
From the Old Harbour one can reach by boat other famous seaside places around Genoa such as Portofino or a little more distant, Lerici and the Cinque Terre.
The regained pride gave back to the city the consciousness of being capable of looking to the future without forgetting its past.
The resumption of several flourishing hand-crafting activities, far-back absent from the caruggi of the old town, is a direct evidence of it.
The restoration of many of Genoa's churches and palaces in the 1980s and the 1990s contributed to the city's rebirth.
A notable example the Renaissance, Basilica of Santa Maria Assunta, sitting on the top of the hill of Carignano and visible from almost every part of the city.
The total restoration of Doge's Palace and of the Old Harbour, and the rebuilding of Teatro Carlo Felice, destroyed by bombing in the Second World War, were two more points of strength for the realisation of a new Genoa.
Genoa could not renounce, especially as from the 1960s, to a great renewal, which as happened in several other metropolis, should necessarily get through the realisation of big public housing complexes, whose quality, utility and functionality has been and still is controversial for those residents living there.
Concerning this, the most known cases are those of the so-called "Biscione", a development in the shape of a long snake, situated on the hills of the populous district of Marassi, and the one of the group of houses known as "Le Lavatrici" (the washing machines), in the district of Prà.
Beyond a complete restyling of the area, the ancient port zone nearby the Mandraccio opening, in Porta Siberia, was enriched by Genoese architect Renzo Piano with a large sphere made of metal and glass, installed in the port's waters, not far from the Aquarium of Genoa, and unveiled in 2001 in occasion of the G8 Summit held in Genoa.
The sphere (called by the citizens "Piano's bubble" or "The Ball"), after hosting an exposition of fens from Genoa's Botanical Gardens, currently houses the reconstruction of a tropical environment, with several plants, little animals and butterflies.
Piano also designed the subway stations and, in the hills area, the construction - in collaboration with UNESCO - of Punta Nave, base of the Renzo Piano Building Workshop.
Nearby the Old Harbour is the so-called "Matitone", a skyscraper in shape of a pencil, that lays side by side with the group of the WTC towers, core of the San Benigno development, today base of part of the Municipality's administration and of several companies.
Churches
St. Lawrence Cathedral (Cattedrale di San Lorenzo) is the city's cathedral, built in a Gothic-Romanesque style.
Other notable historical churches are the Commandery of the Saint John's Order called , San Matteo, San Donato, Santa Maria di Castello, Sant'Agostino (deconsecrated since the 19th century, sometimes is used for theatrical representations), Santo Stefano, Santi Vittore e Carlo, Basilica della Santissima Annunziata del Vastato, San Pietro in Banchi, Santa Maria delle Vigne, Nostra Signora della Consolazione, San Siro, , Santa Maria Assunta di Carignano and .
San Bartolomeo degli Armeni houses the Image of Edessa and San Pancrazio after the World War II was entrusted to the ligurian delegation of the Sovereign Military Order of Malta.
These churches and basilicas are built in Romanesque (San Donato, Santa Maria di Castello, Commenda di San Giovanni di Pré), Gothic (San Matteo, Santo Stefano, Sant'Agostino), Baroque (San Siro) or Renaissance (Santa Maria Assunta di Carignano, San Pietro in Banchi) appearance, or a mix of different styles (Nostra Signora della Consolazione, Santissima Annunziata del Vastato; this last has a Baroque interior and a Neoclassicist façade).
Another well known Genoese church is the shrine of Saint Francis of Paola, notable for the outer courtyard overlooking the port and the memorial to all those who died at sea.
This church is of artistic mention in that the tile depictions of the Via Crucis Stations along the brick path to the church.
Near Genoa is found the Shrine of Nostra Signora della Guardia, (the sanctuary is said to have inspired the writer Umberto Eco in making his novel The Name of the Rose).
Another interesting church in the neighborhoods of Genoa is San Siro di Struppa.
The city was the birthplace of several popes (Innocent IV, Adrian V, Innocent VIII, and Benedict XV) and various saints (Syrus of Genoa, Romulus of Genoa, Catherine of Genoa, and Virginia Centurione Bracelli).
The Archbishop of Genoa Jacobus de Voragine, wrote the Golden Legend.
Also from Genoa were: Giovanni Paolo Oliva, the Superior General of the Society of Jesus; Girolamo Grimaldi-Cavalleroni, the Archbishop of Aix; Ausonio Franchi, priest, philosopher, and theologian; Cardinal Giuseppe Siri; and the priests Francesco Repetto, Giuseppe Dossetti, Gianni Baget Bozzo, and Andrea Gallo.
The present archbishop of Genoa, Cardinal Angelo Bagnasco, comes from a Genoese family but was born in Pontevico, near Brescia (see also Archdiocese of Genoa).
Buildings and palaces
The main features of central Genoa include the Piazza De Ferrari, around which are the Opera and the Palace of the Doges.
The Palazzo di San Giorgio was the headquarters of the Bank of Saint George and was the place where Marco Polo and Rustichello da Pisa composed The Travels of Marco Polo.
Outside the city walls is Christopher Columbus House, where Christopher Columbus is said to have lived as a child.
The current building is an 18th-century reconstruction of the original which was destroyed by the French naval bombing of 1684.
Strada Nuova (now Via Garibaldi), in the old city, was inscribed on the World Heritage List in 2006.
This district was designed in the mid-16th century to accommodate Mannerist palaces of the city's most eminent families.
In Genoa there are 114 noble palaces (see also ): among these 42 are inscribed on the World Heritage List.
Among the Palazzi dei Rolli the most famous are Palazzo Rosso (now a museum), Palazzo Bianco, , , , Palazzo Reale, Palazzo Angelo Giovanni Spinola, Palazzo Pietro Spinola di San Luca, Palazzo Spinola di Pellicceria, Palazzo Cicala.
Palazzo Bianco and Palazzo Rosso are also known as Musei di Strada Nuova.
The famous art college is also located on this street.
The Genoese artistic renaissance begins with the construction of commissioned by Andrea Doria: the architects were Giovanni Angelo Montorsoli and Giovanni Ponzello, the interior was painted by Perino del Vaga and the garden fountain was realised by Taddeo Carlone.
In 1548 Galeazzo Alessi, with the project of , designed a new prototype of Genoese palace that would be an inspiration to other architects working in Genoa as Bartolomeo Bianco, Pietro Antonio Corradi, Rocco Lurago, Giovan Battista Castello, and Bernardino Cantone.
Peter Paul Rubens wrote Palazzi di Genova in 1622, a book dedicated to the palaces of Genoa.
Scattered around the city are many villas, built between the fifteenth and the twentieth centuries.
Among the best known are: , Villa Durazzo-Pallavicini, , , , Villa Giustiniani-Cambiaso, , , , , , , Villa delle
Peschiere, , , and .
As it regards the 19th century remember the architects Ignazio Gardella (senior), and Carlo Barabino which among other things, realises together with Giovanni Battista Resasco, the Monumental Cemetery of Staglieno.
The cemetery is renowned for its statues and sepulchral monuments that preserve the mortal remains of notable personalities, including Giuseppe Mazzini, Fabrizio De André, and Constance Lloyd (Oscar Wilde's wife).
In the first half of the 19th century they are completed the and the .
In 1901 realised the Silos Granari.
The city is rich in testimony of the Gothic Revival like Albertis Castle, , and Mackenzie Castle designed by the architect Gino Coppedè.
Genoa is also rich of Art Nouveau works, among which: , , Hotel Bristol Palace, and .
Works of Rationalist architecture of the first half of the 20th century are Torre Piacentini and Piazza della Vittoria where Arco della Vittoria, both designed by the architect Marcello Piacentini.
Other architects who have changed the face of Genoa in the 20th century are: Ignazio Gardella, who realised the Piazza Rossetti and the residential complex so-called , , Aldo Rossi, , Franco Albini who designed the interiors of Palazzo Rosso, and .
The Edoardo Chiossone Museum of Oriental Art, designed by Mario Labò, has one of the largest collections of Oriental art in Europe.
Other notable architectural works include: the Old Harbour's new design with the Aquarium, the and the by Renzo Piano, the Palasport di Genova, the Matitone skyscraper, and the , by Jean Nouvel.
Genoa was home to the Ponte Morandi by Riccardo Morandi, built in 1967, collapsed in 2018 and demolished February-June, 2019.
Old harbour
The old harbour ("porto antico" in Italian) is the ancient part of the port of Genoa.
The harbour gave access to outside communities creating a good geographical situation for the city.
The city is spread out geographically along a section of the Liguria coast, which makes trading by ship possible.
Before the development of car, train, and airplane travel, the main outside access for the city was the sea, as the surrounding mountains made trade north by land more difficult than coastal trade.
Trade routes have always connected Genoa on an international scale, with increasingly farther reach starting from trade along Europe's coastline before the medieval period to today's connection across continents.
In its heyday the Genoese Navy was a prominent power in the Mediterranean.
As the Genoa harbour was so important to the merchants for their own economic success, other nearby harbours and ports were seen as competition for a landing point for foreign traders.
In the 16th century, the Genovese worked to destroy the local shipping competition, the Savona harbour.
Walls and fortresses
The city of Genoa during its long history at least since the 9th century had been protected by different line of defensive walls.
Large portions of these walls remain today, and Genoa has more and longer walls than any other city in Italy.
The main city walls are known as "Ninth century walls", "Barbarossa Walls" (12th century), "Fourteenth century walls", "Sixteenth century walls" and "New Walls" ("Mura Nuove" in Italian).
The more imposing walls, built in the first half of the 17th century on the ridge of hills around the city, have a length of almost .
Some fortresses stand along the perimeter of the "New Walls" or close them.
Parks
Genoa has of public parks in the city centre, such as Villetta Di Negro which is right in the heart of the town, overlooking the historical centre.
Many bigger green spaces are situated outside the centre: in the east are the Parks of Nervi () overlooking the sea, in the west the beautiful gardens of Villa Durazzo Pallavicini and its Giardino botanico Clelia Durazzo Grimaldi.
().
The numerous villas and palaces of the city also have their own gardens, like Palazzo del Principe, Villa Doria, Palazzo Bianco and Palazzo Tursi, Palazzo Nicolosio Lomellino, Albertis Castle, Villa Rosazza, Villa Croce, Villa Imperiale Cattaneo, Villa Bombrini, Villa Brignole Sale Duchessa di Galliera, Villa Serra and many more.
The city is surrounded by natural parks such as Parco naturale regionale dell'Antola, Parco naturale regionale del Beigua, Aveto Natural Regional Park and the Ligurian Sea Cetacean Sanctuary.
Aquarium of Genoa
The Aquarium of Genoa (in ) is the largest aquarium in Italy and among the largest in Europe.
Built for Genoa Expo '92, it is an educational, scientific and cultural centre.
Its mission is to educate and raise public awareness as regards conservation, management and responsible use of aquatic environments.
It welcomes over 1.2 million visitors a year.
Control of the entire environment, including the temperature, filtration and lighting of the tanks was provided by local Automation Supplier Orsi Automazione, acquired in 2001 by Siemens.
The Aquarium of Genoa is co-ordinating the AquaRing EU project.
It also provides scientific expertise and a great deal of content for AquaRing, including documents, images, academic content and interactive online courses, via its Online Resource Centre.
International relations
Genoa is twinned with:
Genoa has bilateral agreements with the following sister cities:
Consulates
Notable people
* List of diplomats of Great Britain to the Republic of Genoa
Bibliography
See also:
* Gino Benvenuti.
Le repubbliche marinare.
Amalfi, Pisa, Genova e Venezia.
Netwon Compton, Rome, 1989.
* Steven A. Epstein; Genoa & the Genoese, 958-1528 University of North Carolina Press, 1996; https:/ PM.qst?a
o&d
72341660 online edition
* Steven A. Epstein; "Labour and Port Life in Medieval Genoa."
Mediterranean Historical Review.
3 (1988): 114-40.
* Steven A. Epstein; "Business Cycles and the Sense of Time in Medieval Genoa."
Business History Review 62 (1988): 238-60.
* Face Richard.
"Secular History in Twelfth-Century Italy: Caffaro of Genoa."
Journal of Medieval History 6 (1980): 169-84.
* Hughes Diane Owen.
"Kinsmen and Neighbors in Medieval Genoa."
In The Medieval City, edited by Harry A. Miskimin, David Herlihy, and Adam L. Udovitch, 1977, 3-28.
* Hughes Diane Owen.
"Urban Growth and Family Structure in Medieval Genoa."
Past and Present 66 (1975): 3-28.
* Lopez Robert S. "Genoa."
In Dictionary of the Middle Ages, pp.
* Vitale Vito.
Breviario della storia di Genova.
Vols.
Genoa, 1955.
* Giuseppe Felloni - Guido Laura "Genova e la storia della finanza: una serie di primati ?"
"Genoa and the history of finance: a series of firsts ?"
9 November 2004, ( )
* Van Doosselaere, Quentin, Commercial Agreements and Social Dynamics in Medieval Genoa (New York: Cambridge University Press, 2009).
* Гавриленко О. А., Сівальньов О. М., Цибулькін В. В. Генуезька спадщина на теренах України; етнодержавознавчий вимір.
- Харків: Точка, 2017.- 260 с. -
