Caps Lock is a button on a computer keyboard that causes all letters of Latin and Cyrillic based scripts to be generated in capital letters.
It is a toggle key: each press reverses its action.
Some keyboards also implement a light, so as to give visual feedback about whether it is on or off.
Exactly what Caps Lock does depends on the keyboard hardware, the operating system, the device driver, and the keyboard layout.
Usually, the effect is limited to letter keys; letters of Latin-based scripts are capitalised, while letters of other scripts (e.g. Arabic, Hebrew, Hindi) and non-letter characters are generated normally.
History
The Caps Lock key originated as a Shift lock key on mechanical typewriters.
An early innovation in typewriters was the introduction of a second character on each typebar, thereby doubling the number of characters that could be typed, using the same number of keys.
The second character was positioned above the first on the face of each typebar, and the typewriter's Shift key caused the entire type apparatus to move, physically shifting the positioning of the typebars relative to the ink ribbon.
Just as in modern computer keyboards, the shifted position was used to produce capitals and secondary characters.
The Shift lock key was introduced so the shift operation could be maintained indefinitely without continuous effort.
It mechanically locked the typebars in the shifted position, causing the upper character to be typed upon pressing any key.
Because the two shift keys on a typewriter required more force to operate and were meant to be pressed by the little finger, it could be difficult to hold the shift down for more than two or three consecutive strokes, therefore the introduction of the Shift lock key was also meant to reduce finger muscle pain caused by repetitive typing.
Mechanical typewriter shift lock is typically set by pushing both Shift and lock at the same time, and released by pressing Shift by itself.
Computer Caps Lock is set and released by the same key, and the Caps Lock behavior in most QWERTY keyboard layouts differs from the Shift lock behavior in that it capitalizes letters but does not affect other keys, such as numbers or punctuation.
Some early computer keyboards, such as the Commodore 64, had a Shift lock but no Caps Lock; others, such as the BBC Micro, had both, only one of which could be enabled at a time.
Abolition
There are some proposals to abolish the caps-lock key as being obsolete.
Pieter Hintjens, the CEO of iMatix, started a "Capsoff" organization proposing hardware manufacturers delete the caps-lock key.
Google has removed the Caps Lock on the Chromebook keyboard (replacing it with a with a "search' button); the caps-lock function is then reproduced using an "alt" key combination.
GNOME and other desktop environments.
Default Russian, Ukrainian layouts for FreeBSD specifies Caps Lock as input language switcher.
In Microsoft Windows, however, third-party utilities are needed to enable this behavior.
In such configurations, the original Caps Lock function is reached with the combination.
Precautions
Most apps that request users to input a password do not display it on screen, so as not to expose it to prying eyes.
A user who does not pay proper attention to the Caps Lock indicator, however, might end up typing the wrong password (in which all small letters become capital letters or vice versa).
As such, help guides, tech support materials, and app user interfaces may include warnings on checking the Caps Lock state before typing a password.
In Microsoft Windows login screens, a warning that Caps Lock is on is shown in a balloon near the field.
In macOS, when Caps Lock is on, a Caps Lock symbol (⇪) is displayed inside a password field.
Placement
Since its inception, the IBM PC keyboard had a Caps Lock.
In the first version for PC/XT, Caps Locks was located to the bottom right of the letter keys area.
However, subsequent models switched the places of the Caps Lock key and the Control key.
As such, Caps Lock has since been placed on left edge of the keyboard, above the Shift key and below the Tab key, next to letter A.
This layout has become the de facto popular standard.
The keyboards of some early computer terminals, including the Teletype Model 33 ASR and Lear-Siegler ADM-3A, the Apple II and a few Apple Keyboard models retained the Control key where PC/XT first had it; Caps Lock was either absent on these device or was placed elsewhere.
This layout was preserved for later workstation systems and is often associated with Unix workstations.
Keyboards from Sun Microsystems came in two layouts; "Unix" and "PC-style", with the Unix layout having the traditional placing of the Control key and other keys.
The Amiga computers all had both the Control key and Caps Lock key in this spot at half the width.
Some users of keyboards with Caps Lock on the left remap the keys to exchange Control and Caps Lock, finding the traditional location more ergonomic for using programs benefiting from use of the Control key.
Keyboard layout preferences specifically to address this need are available in some operating systems.
Some keyboards even provide a switch on the bottom to logically swap the two keys in hardware.
The Happy Hacking Keyboard and the keyboards produced for OLPC XO computers also have the Control key in this location, while not including a Caps Lock.
Beginning with the Google Cr-48, Chromebooks have omitted Caps Lock in favor of a dedicated "Search" key.
However, holding down Alt and pressing the Search Key enables Caps Lock, which is enabled until Shift is pressed.
International Caps Lock Day
June 28 and October 22 are semiannually observed as INTERNATIONAL CAPS LOCK DAY as a parody holiday created in October 2000 by Derek Arnold, a user on Metafilter.
The second observation on June 28 was added by Arnold in memory of American pitchman Billy Mays.
