Anna Mary Robertson Moses (September 7, 1860 - December 13, 1961), known by her nickname Grandma Moses, was an American folk artist.
She began painting in earnest at the age of 78 and is often cited as an example of an individual who successfully began a career in the arts at an advanced age.
Her works have been shown and sold in the United States and abroad and have been marketed on greeting cards and other merchandise.
Moses' paintings are displayed in the collections of many museums.
Sugaring Off was sold for US $1.2 million in 2006.
Moses appeared on magazine covers, television, and in a documentary of her life.
She wrote an autobiography (My Life's History), won numerous awards, and was awarded two honorary doctoral degrees.
The New York Times said of her: "The simple realism, nostalgic atmosphere and luminous color with which Grandma Moses portrayed simple farm life and rural countryside won her a wide following.
She was able to capture the excitement of winter's first snow, Thanksgiving preparations and the new, young green of oncoming spring...
In person, Grandma Moses charmed wherever she went.
A tiny, lively woman with mischievous gray eyes and a quick wit, she could be sharp-tongued with a sycophant and stern with an errant grandchild."
She was a live-in housekeeper for a total of 15 years, starting at 12 years of age.
One of her employers noticed her appreciation for their prints made by Currier and Ives, and they supplied her with art materials to create drawings.
Moses and her husband began their married life in Virginia, where they worked on farms.
In 1905, they returned to the Northeastern United States and settled in Eagle Bridge, New York.
The couple had ten children, five of whom survived infancy.
She expressed an interest in art throughout her life, including embroidery of pictures with yarn, until arthritis made this pursuit too painful.
Early life
Anna Mary Robertson was born in Greenwich, New York on September 7, 1860; she was the third of ten children born to Margaret Shanahan Robertson and Russell King Robertson.
She was raised with four sisters and five brothers.
Her father ran a flax mill and was a farmer.
She was inspired to paint by taking art lessons at school.
Moses first painted as a child, using lemon and grape juice to make colors for her "landscapes".
At 12 years of age, she left home and began to work for a wealthy neighboring family, performing chores on their farm.
She continued to keep house, cook and sew for wealthy families for 15 years.
One of the families that she worked for-the Whitesides-noticed her interest in their Currier and Ives prints and purchased chalk and wax crayons so that she could create her own artwork.
The Mount Airy Farm House in which the Moses family lived still stands (2018)
To supplement the family income, Anna made potato chips and churned butter from the milk of a cow that she purchased with her savings.
Later, the couple bought a farm.
Anna Mary was known as either "Mother Moses" or "Grandma Moses," and although she first exhibited as "Mrs. Moses," the press dubbed her "Grandma Moses," and the nickname stuck.
Decorative arts
As a young wife and mother, Moses was creative in her home; for example, in 1918 she used housepaint to decorate a fireboard.
Beginning in 1932, Moses made embroidered pictures of yarn for friends and family.
It was her father's encouragement that fed her passion to paint and this dream was able to manifest later in her life.
Style
Moses painted scenes of rural life
Her early style is less individual and more realistic or primitive, despite her lack of knowledge of, or perhaps rejection of, basic perspective.
Initially she created simple compositions or copied existing images.
As her career advanced she created complicated, panoramic compositions of rural life.
Moses initially charged $3 to $5 for a painting, depending upon its size, and as her fame increased her works were sold for $8,000 to $10,000.
A German fan of her work said, "There emanates from her paintings a light-hearted optimism; the world she shows us is beautiful and it is good.
You feel at home in all these pictures, and you know their meaning.
The unrest and the neurotic insecurity of the present day make us inclined to enjoy the simple and affirmative outlook of Grandma Moses."
It was not as common as her winter landscapes.
Originally purchased in the 1940s for under $10, the piece was assigned an insurance value of $60,000 by the appraiser, Alan Fausel.
* Otto Kallir of the Galerie St. Etienne gave Grandma Moses' painting Fourth of July (1951) to the White House as a gift in 1952.
The painting also appears on a U.S. commemorative stamp that was issued in Grandma Moses' honor in 1969.
* Norman Rockwell and Grandma Moses were friends who lived over the Vermont-New York state border from each other.
Moses lived in Eagle Bridge, New York and after 1938 the Rockwells had a house in nearby Arlington, Vermont.
Grandma Moses appears on the far left edge in the Norman Rockwell painting Christmas Homecoming, which was printed on The Saturday Evening Posts December 25, 1948 cover.
Collections
Some of the public collections of her work are:
* Bennington Museum in Bennington, Vermont, holds the largest public collection of Moses's paintings
* Hirshhorn Museum and Sculpture Garden, Washington D.C.
* Maier Museum of Art at Randolph-Macon Woman's College, Virginia
* Memorial Art Gallery of the University of Rochester, New York
* National Museum of Women in the Arts, Washington D.C.
Works
Some of her works are:
Dividing of the Ways, 1947, oil and tempera on masonite, Collection American Folk Art Museum, New York
Notes
