Crème brûlée (; ), also known as burnt cream or Trinity cream, is a dessert consisting of a rich custard base topped with a texturally contrasting layer of hardened caramelized sugar.
It is normally served slightly chilled; the heat from the caramelizing process tends to warm the custard producing a cool center.
The custard base is traditionally flavored with vanilla, but can have a variety of other flavorings.
History
The earliest known recipe for crème brûlée appears in François Massialot's 1691 cookbook Cuisinier royal et bourgeois.
The name "burnt cream" was used in the 1702 English translation.
In 1740 Massialot referred to a similar recipe as crême à l'Angloise; 'English cream'.
The dish then vanished from French cookbooks until the 1980s.
It became extremely popular in the 1980s, "a symbol of that decade's self-indulgence and the darling of the restaurant boom", probably popularized by Sirio Maccioni at his New York restaurant Le Cirque.
He claimed to have made it "the most famous and by far the most popular dessert in restaurants from Paris to Peoria".
Technique
Crème brûlée is usually served in individual ramekins.
Discs of caramel may be prepared separately and put on top just before serving, or the caramel may be formed directly on top of the custard immediately before serving.
To do this, sugar is sprinkled onto the custard, then caramelized under a salamander broiler or with a butane torch.
Two styles exist to make crème brûlée.
The common format is to create a "hot" custard, traditionally by whisking egg yolks in a double boiler with sugar and incorporate the cream, with vanilla following once the custard is off the heat.
Likewise, this can be achieved by .
Hot/boiling water is poured into the large pan holding the ramekins until it reaches halfway up the sides; the pan is then placed into an oven until the custard center is jiggly and the edges set.
Pulling the crème brûlée out at this point ensures a creamy dessert.
Bibliography
* "Origin of Crème Brûlée", Petits Propos Culinaires 31:61 (March 1989).
