Vitellius (; ; 24 September 1522 December 69 AD) was Roman Emperor for eight months, from 16 April to 22 December 69 AD.
Vitellius was proclaimed emperor following the quick succession of the previous emperors Galba and Otho, in a year of civil war known as the Year of the Four Emperors.
Vitellius was the first to add the honorific cognomen Germanicus to his name instead of Caesar upon his accession.
Like his direct predecessor, Otho, Vitellius attempted to rally public support to his cause by honoring and imitating Nero who remained widely popular in the empire.
His claim to the throne was soon challenged by legions stationed in the eastern provinces, who proclaimed their commander Vespasian emperor instead.
War ensued, leading to a crushing defeat for Vitellius at the Second Battle of Bedriacum in northern Italy.
Once he realised his support was wavering, Vitellius prepared to abdicate in favor of Vespasian.
He was not allowed to do so by his supporters, resulting in a brutal battle for Rome between Vitellius' forces and the armies of Vespasian.
He was eventually executed in Rome by Vespasian's soldiers on 22 December 69.
Family
He was the son of Lucius Vitellius Veteris and his wife Sextilia, and had one brother, Lucius Vitellius the Younger.
Suetonius recorded two different accounts of the origins of the gens Vitellia, one making them descendants of past rulers of Latium, the other describing their origins as lowly.
Suetonius makes the sensible remark that both accounts might have been made by either flatterers or enemies of Vitellius-except that both were in circulation before Vitellius became emperor.
Since his father was a member of the equestrian class and achieved the senatorial rank only later in his lifetime, Vitellius became the first emperor not to be born in the senatorial family.
Suetonius also recorded that when Vitellius was born his horoscope so horrified his parents that his father tried to prevent Aulus from becoming a consul.
In his youth he was one of the noble companions of Tiberius' retirement on Capri and there befriended Caligula, whose favour he won, according to Suetonius, by sharing in his passion for chariot racing and games of dice.
He married firstly before the year 40 a woman named Petronia, daughter of Publius Petronius or Gaius Petronius Pontius Nigrinus, by whom he had a son, Aulus Vitellius Petronianus, the universal heir of his mother and grandfather, whom Vitellius had killed in 69 in order to inherit his fortune.
He married secondly, around the year 50, a woman named Galeria Fundana, perhaps the granddaughter of Gaius Galerius, Prefect of Egypt in 23.
They had two children, a son called Aulus Vitellius Germanicus or Novis, the Younger, and a daughter, Vitellia, who married the Legatus Decimus Valerius Asiaticus.
Public service
Political and military career
He was Consul in 48, and proconsular governor of Africa in either 60 or 61, in which capacity he is said to have acquitted himself with credit.
At the end of 68, Galba, to the general astonishment, selected him to command the army of Germania Inferior, and here Vitellius made himself popular with his subalterns and with the soldiers by outrageous prodigality and excessive good nature, which soon proved fatal to order and discipline.
Bid for power
He owed his elevation to the throne to Caecina and Fabius Valens, commanders of two legions on the Rhine.
Through these two men a military revolution was speedily accomplished; they refused to renew their vows of allegiance to Emperor Galba on 1 January 69, and early in 69 Vitellius was proclaimed emperor at Cologne.
More accurately, he was proclaimed Emperor of the armies of Germania Inferior and Superior.
Emperor
Administration
Suetonius, whose father had fought for Otho at Bedriacum, gives an unfavourable account of Vitellius' brief administration: he describes him as unambitious and notes that Vitellius showed indications of a desire to govern wisely, but that Valens and Caecina encouraged him in a course of vicious excesses which threw his better qualities into the background.
Other writers, namely Tacitus and Cassius Dio, disagree with some of Suetonius' assertions, even though their own accounts of Vitellius are scarcely positive ones.
Despite his short reign he made two important contributions to Roman government which outlasted him.
Tacitus describes them both in his Histories:
*Vitellius ended the practice of centurions selling furloughs and exemptions of duty to their men, a change Tacitus describes as being adopted by 'all good emperors'.
*He also expanded the offices of the Imperial administration beyond the imperial pool of freedmen, allowing those of the Equites to take up positions in the Imperial civil service.
Vitellius also banned astrologers from Rome and Italy on 1 October, 69.
Some astrologers responded to his decree by anonymously publishing a decree of their own: "Decreed by all astrologers in blessing on our State Vitellius will be no more on the appointed date."
In response, Vitellius executed any astrologers he came across.
Furthermore, Vitellius continued Otho's policies in regard to Nero's memory, in that he honored the dead emperor and sacrificed to his spirit.
He also had Nero's songs performed in public, and attempted to imitate Nero who remained extremely popular among the lower classes of the Roman Empire.
Challenges
In July 69, Vitellius learned that the armies of the eastern provinces had proclaimed a rival emperor: their commander, Titus Flavius Vespasianus.
As soon as it was known that the armies of the East, Dalmatia, and Illyricum had declared for Vespasianus, Vitellius sent several legions under Caecina to prevent the Eastern armies from entering Italy, but Caecina, dissatisfied with Vitellius's poor administration, attempted without success to defect to Vespasian.
This undermined the morale of the Vitellian legions, and they were decisively defeated at the Second Battle of Bedriacum.
Fabius Valens was then sent by Vitellius to rally supporting armies in Gaul, but forces loyal to Vespasian captured and executed him soon after.
Vitellius, now deserted by many of his adherents, prepared to resign the title of emperor.
Years before there was a prediction that he would fall into the power of a man from Gaul; the man who slew him was Antonius Primus of Tolosa and whose surname was Becco which means "Rooster's beak" (Gallus means both "a cock" and "a Gaul").
Portrayals in art
Vitellius is also shown in the painting Decadence of the Romans by Thomas Couture.
Fictional portrayals
*Vitellius is a character in Kate Quinn's novel Daughters of Rome (2011), set in AD 68-79.
*He is also a prominent character in Simon Scarrow's Eagles of the Empire series, where he is introduced as a rival to Vespasian and an adversary to the main characters, Macro and Cato, during the Roman invasion of Britain.
*Vitellius is a character in M.C. Scott's novel Rome, The Art of War (2013).
Although emperor in the novel, his brother Lucius is portrayed as being the more powerful and skilled in intrigue and ruthlessness.
*He is also introduced in chapter XX of Henry Venmore-Rowland's novel The Last Caesar (2012), as the newly appointed Governor of Lower Germania at the beginning of AD 69.
*Lindsey Davis' crime novel The Silver Pigs, the first in her series featuring Marcus Didius Falco, notes that a recipe for mushy peas was named after Vitellius.
*Steven Saylor devotes a chapter to Vitellius in his novel Empire.
Notes
