The king cobra (Ophiophagus hannah), also known as the hamadryad, is a venomous snake species in the family Elapidae, endemic to forests from India through Southeast Asia.
It is threatened by habitat destruction and has been listed as Vulnerable on the IUCN Red List since 2010.
Adult king cobras are long.
The longest known individual measured .
It is the national reptile of India.
Taxonomy
Hamadryas hannah was the scientific name used by Danish naturalist Theodore Edward Cantor in 1836 who described four king cobra specimens, three captured in the Sundarbans and one in the vicinity of Kolkata.
Naja bungarus was proposed by Hermann Schlegel in 1837 who described a king cobra zoological specimen from Java.
In 1838, Cantor proposed the name Hamadryas ophiophagus for the king cobra and explained that it has dental features intermediate between the genera Naja and Bungarus.
Naia vittata proposed by Walter Elliot in 1840 was a king cobra caught offshore near Chennai that was floating in a basket.
Hamadryas elaps proposed by Albert Günther in 1858 were king cobra specimens from the Philippines and Borneo.
Günther considered both N. bungarus and N. vittata a variety of H. elaps.
The genus Ophiophagus was proposed by Günther in 1864.
Naja ingens proposed by in northern Sumatra.
Ophiophagus hannah was accepted as the valid name for the king cobra by Charles Mitchill Bogert in 1945 who argued that it differs significantly from Naja species.
A genetic analysis using cytochrome b, and a multigene analysis showed that the king cobra was an early offshoot of a genetic lineage giving rise to the mambas, rather than the Naja cobras.
A phylogenetic analysis of mitochondrial DNA showed that specimens from Surattani and Nakhon Si Thammarat Provinces in southern Thailand form a deeply divergent clade from those from northern Thailand, which grouped with specimens from Myanmar and Guangdong in southern China.
Description
The king cobra's skin is olive green with black and white bands on the trunk that converge to the head.
The head is covered by 15 drab coloured and black edged shields.
The muzzle is rounded, and the tongue black.
It has two fangs and 3-5 maxillar teeth in the upper jaw, and two rows of teeth in the lower jaw.
The nostrils are between two shields.
The large eyes have a golden iris and round pupils.
Its hood is oval shaped and covered with olive green smooth scales and two black spots between the two lowest scales.
Its cylindrical tail is yellowish green above and marked with black.
Adult king cobras are long.
The longest known individual measured .
Ventral scales are uniformly oval shaped.
Dorsal scales are placed in an oblique arrangement.
The king cobra is sexually dimorphic, with males being larger and paler in particular during the breeding season.
Males captured in Kerala measured up to and weighed up to .
Females captured had a maximum length of and a weight of .
It differs from other cobra species by size and hood.
It is larger, has a narrower and longer stripe on the neck.
The head of a mature snake can be quite massive and bulky in appearance.
Like all snakes, it can expand its jaws to swallow large prey items.
It has proteroglyph dentition, meaning it has two short, fixed fangs in the front of the mouth, which channel venom into the prey.
These are behind the usual "nine-plate" arrangement typical of colubrids and elapids, and are unique to the king cobra.
The king cobra typically weighs about .
A captive one at the London Zoo grew to before being euthanised upon the outbreak of World War II.
The heaviest wild specimen was caught at Royal Island Club in Singapore in 1951, which weighed and measured .
An individual kept at Bronx Zoo weighed and was long in 1972.
Distribution and habitat
The king cobra has a wide distribution in South and Southeast Asia.
It occurs up to an elevation of from the Terai in India and southern Nepal to the Brahmaputra River basin in Bhutan and northeast India, Bangladesh and to Myanmar, southern China, Cambodia, Thailand, Laos, Vietnam, Malaysia, Singapore, Indonesia and the Philippines.
In the Eastern Ghats, it occurs from coastal Odisha to Andhra Pradesh.
In the Western Ghats, it was recorded in Maharashtra, Karnataka and Kerala.
It also occurs on Baratang Island.
Behaviour and ecology
Like other snakes, a king cobra receives chemical information via its forked tongue, which picks up scent particles and transfers them to a sensory receptor (Jacobson's organ) located in the roof of its mouth.
In Singapore, one was observed swallowing a clouded monitor.
When food is scarce, it also feeds on other small vertebrates, such as birds, and rodents.
In some cases, the cobra constricts its prey, such as birds and larger rodents, using its muscular body, though this is uncommon.
After a large meal, it lives for many months without another one because of its slow metabolic rate.
It usually slinks off when disturbed, but is known to aggressively defend incubating eggs and attack intruders rapidly.
When alarmed, it raises the front part of its body, extends the hood, shows the fangs and hisses loudly.
When biting, it retains its grip for up to eight minutes.
Wild king cobras encountered in Singapore appeared to be placid, but reared up and stroke in self defense when cornered.
Most victims bitten by king cobras are snake charmers.
Hospital records in Thailand indicate that bites from king cobras are very uncommon.
It can be easily irritated by closely approaching objects or sudden movements.
When raising its body, the king cobra can still move forward to strike with a long distance, and people may misjudge the safe zone.
It can deliver multiple bites in a single attack.
Growling hiss
The hiss of the king cobra is a much lower pitch than many other snakes and many people thus liken its call to a "growl" rather than a hiss.
While the hisses of most snakes are of a broad-frequency span ranging from roughly 3,000 to 13,000 Hz with a dominant frequency near 7,500 Hz, king cobra growls consist solely of frequencies below 2,500 Hz, with a dominant frequency near 600 Hz, a much lower-sounding frequency closer to that of a human voice.
Comparative anatomical morphometric analysis has led to a discovery of tracheal diverticula that function as low-frequency resonating chambers in king cobra and its prey, the rat snake, both of which can make similar growls.
Reproduction
The female is gravid for 50 to 59 days.
Most nests are located at the base of trees, are up to high in the center and wide at the base.
They consist of several layers and have mostly one chamber, into which the female lays eggs.
Clutch size ranges from 7 to 43 eggs, with 6 to 38 eggs hatching after incubation periods of 66 to 105 days.
Temperature inside nests is not steady but varies depending on elevation from .
Female stay by their nests between two and 77 days.
Hatchlings are between long and weigh .
Other components have cardiotoxic effects.
It can deliver up to venom in dry weight per bite, with a toxicity in mice of 1.28 mg kg through subcutaneous injection,
and 1.644 mg/kg through intraperitoneal injection.
The toxins affect the victim's central nervous system, resulting in severe pain, blurred vision, vertigo, drowsiness, and eventually paralysis.
If the envenomation is serious, it progresses to cardiovascular collapse, and the victim falls into a coma.
Death soon follows due to respiratory failure.
The affected person can die within 30 minutes of envenomation.
Large quantities of antivenom may be needed to reverse the progression of symptoms.
A polyvalent antivenom produced by the Thai Red Cross Society can effectively neutralize venom of the king cobra.
In Thailand, a concoction of turmeric root has been clinically shown to create a strong resilience against the venom of the king cobra when ingested.
Proper and immediate treatments are critical to avoid death.
Successful precedents include a client who recovered and was discharged in 10 days after being treated by accurate antivenom and inpatient care.
Clinical mortality rates vary between different regions and depend on many factors, such as local medical advancement.
A Thai survey reports 10 deaths out of 35 patients received for king cobra bites, whose fatality rate posed (28%) is higher than those of other cobra species.
Department of Clinical Toxinology in University of Adelaide gives this serpent a general untreated fatality rate of 50-60%, implying that the snake has about a half chance to deliver bites involving nonfatal quantities of venom.
Threats
In Southeast Asia, the king cobra is threatened foremost by habitat destruction owing to deforestation and expansion of agricultural land.
It is also threatened by poaching for its meat, skin and for use in traditional Chinese medicine.
Cultural significance
A ritual in Myanmar involves a king cobra and a female snake charmer.
The charmer is a priestess who is usually tattooed with three pictograms and kisses the snake on the top of its head at the end of the ritual.
Members of the Pakokku clan tattoo themselves with ink mixed with cobra venom on their upper bodies in a weekly inoculation that potentially might protect them from the snake, though no scientific evidence supports this.
Cobra stones or gems or pearls are believed to develop from the cobra's hood.
