The Democratic Unionist Party (DUP) is a unionist political party in Northern Ireland favouring British identity.
It was founded in 1971 during the Troubles by Ian Paisley, who led the party for the next 37 years.
Now led by Arlene Foster, it is equal with Sinn Féin in having the most seats in the Northern Ireland Assembly, and it is the sixth-largest party in the House of Commons of the United Kingdom.
Following the 2017 general election, the party agreed to support a Conservative minority government on a case-by-case basis on matters of mutual concern.
The DUP evolved from the Protestant Unionist Party and has historically strong links to the Free Presbyterian Church of Ulster, the church Paisley founded.
During the Troubles, the DUP opposed attempts to resolve the conflict that would involve sharing power with Irish nationalists or republicans, and rejected attempts to involve the Republic of Ireland in Northern Irish affairs.
It campaigned against the Sunningdale Agreement of 1973, the Anglo-Irish Agreement of 1985, and the Good Friday Agreement of 1998.
The party has been linked to various loyalist paramilitary groups, namely Ulster Resistance (URM) and Third Force.
The URM was formed on 10 November 1986 by DUP politicians Paisley, Peter Robinson and Ivan Foster, with the stated aim to "take direct action as and when required" to bring down the Agreement and defeat republicanism.
Recruitment rallies were held in towns across Northern Ireland and thousands were said to have joined.
The party has been described as right-wing
For most of the DUP's history, the Ulster Unionist Party was the largest unionist party in Northern Ireland, but by 2004 the DUP had overtaken the UUP in terms of seats in the Northern Ireland Assembly and Parliament.
Following the St Andrews Agreement in 2006, the DUP agreed to enter into power-sharing devolved government in Northern Ireland with Sinn Féin.
Despite reports of divisions within the party, a majority of the party executive voted in favour of power-sharing in 2007.
However, the DUP's sole Member of the European Parliament (MEP), Jim Allister, and seven DUP councillors left the party in opposition to its plans to share power with Sinn Féin, founding the Traditional Unionist Voice.
Peter Robinson became DUP leader in 2008, and was succeeded in turn by Arlene Foster in 2015.
History
1970s
The Democratic Unionist Party evolved from the Protestant Unionist Party, which itself grew out of the Ulster Protestant Action movement.
The DUP was founded on 30 September 1971 by Ian Paisley, leader of the Protestant Unionist Party, and Desmond Boal, formerly of the Ulster Unionist Party.
Paisley, a well-known Protestant fundamentalist minister, was the founder and leader of the Free Presbyterian Church of Ulster.
He would lead both the DUP and the Free Presbyterian Church for the next 37 years, and his party and church would be closely linked.
When the DUP formed, Northern Ireland was in the midst of an ethnic-nationalist conflict known as the Troubles, which began in 1969 and would last for the next thirty years.
The conflict began amid a campaign to end discrimination against the Catholic unionist government and police force.
This protest campaign was opposed, often violently, by unionists who viewed it as an Irish republican front.
Paisley had led the unionist opposition to the civil rights movement.
The DUP were more hardline or loyalist than the UUP and its founding arguably stemmed from worries of the Ulster Protestant working class that the UUP was not paying them enough heed.
The DUP opposed the Sunningdale Agreement of 1973.
The Agreement was an attempt to resolve the conflict by setting up a new assembly and government for Northern Ireland in which unionists and Irish nationalists would share power.
The Agreement also proposed the creation of a Council of Ireland, which would facilitate co-operation between the governments of Northern Ireland and the Republic of Ireland.
The DUP won eight seats in the 1973 election to the Assembly.
Along with other anti-Agreement unionists, the DUP formed the United Ulster Unionist Council (UUUC) to oppose the Agreement.
In the February 1974 UK election, the UUUC won 11 out of 12 Northern Ireland seats, while the pro-Agreement unionists failed to win any.
On 15 May 1974, anti-Agreement unionists called a general strike aimed at bringing down the Agreement.
The strike coordinating committee included DUP leader Paisley, the other UUUC leaders, and the leaders of the loyalist paramilitary groups.
The strike lasted fourteen days and brought Northern Ireland to a standstill.
Loyalist paramilitaries helped enforce the strike by blocking roads and intimidating workers.
On the third day of the strike, loyalists detonated four car bombs in Dublin and Monaghan, killing 33 civilians.
The strike led to the downfall of the Agreement on 28 May.
Following the downfall of the Agreement, in 1975 the British government set up a Constitutional Convention, an elected body of unionists and nationalists which would seek agreement on a political settlement for Northern Ireland.
In the election to the Convention, the UUUC (which included the DUP) won 53% of the vote.
The UUUC opposed a power-sharing government and recommended only a return to majority rule (i.e. unionist rule).
As this was unacceptable to nationalists, the Convention was dissolved.
The DUP opposed UK membership of the European Economic Community (EEC).
In June 1979, in the first election to the European Parliament, Paisley won one of the three Northern Ireland seats.
He topped the poll, with 29.8% of the first preference votes.
He retained that seat in every European election until 2004, when he was replaced by Jim Allister, who resigned from the DUP in 2007 while retaining his seat.
The DUP helped organize a loyalist 'Day of Action' on 23 November 1981, to pressure the British government to take a harder line against the IRA.
Paisley addressed a Third Force rally in Newtownards, where thousands of masked and uniformed men marched before him.
He declared: "My men are ready to be recruited under the crown to destroy the vermin of the IRA.
But if they refuse to recruit them, then we will have no other decision to make but to destroy the IRA ourselves!"
In December, Paisley claimed that the Third Force had 15,000-20,000 members.
James Prior, Secretary of State for Northern Ireland, replied that private armies would not be tolerated.
On 23 June 1986, DUP politicians occupied the Stormont Parliament Building in protest at the Agreement, while 200 supporters protested outside and clashed with police.
On 10 November 1986, a rally was held in which DUP politicians Paisley, Robinson and Ivan Foster announced the formation of the Ulster Resistance Movement (URM).
This was a loyalist paramilitary group whose purpose was to "take direct action as and when required" to bring down the Agreement and defeat republicanism.
In early January 1994, the Ulster Defence Association released a document calling for the repartition of Ireland with the goal of making Northern Ireland wholly Protestant.
The plan was to be implemented should the British Army withdraw from Northern Ireland.
The Irish Catholic/nationalist-majority areas would be handed over to the Republic, and those left in the rump state would be "expelled, nullified, or interned".
These proposals have been refined and re-stated in further policy documents including Moving on and Facing Reality.
In the 2003 Northern Ireland Assembly election, the DUP won 30 seats, the most of any party.
In January 2004, it became the largest Northern Ireland party at Westminster, when MP Jeffrey Donaldson joined after defecting from the UUP.
In December 2004, English MP Andrew Hunter took the DUP whip after earlier withdrawing from the Conservative Party, giving the party seven seats, in comparison to the UUP's five, Sinn Féin's four, and the Social Democratic and Labour Party's (SDLP) three.
In the 2005 UK general election, the party reinforced its position as the largest unionist party, winning nine seats, making it the fourth largest party in terms of seats in the British House of Commons behind Labour, the Conservatives and the Liberal Democrats.
In terms of votes, the DUP was the fourth largest party on the island of Ireland.
At the local government election of 2005, the DUP emerged as the largest party at local government level with 182 councillors across Northern Ireland's 26 district councils.
The DUP had a majority of the members on Castlereagh Borough Council, which had long been a DUP stronghold and was home to party leader Peter Robinson, also in Ballymena Borough Council, home to the party's founder Ian Paisley, and finally Ards Borough Council.
As well as outright control on these councils, the DUP was also the largest party in eight other councils - Antrim Borough Council, Ballymoney Borough Council, Banbridge District Council, Belfast City Council, Carrickfergus Borough Council, Coleraine Borough Council, Craigavon Borough Council and Newtownabbey Borough Council.
On 11 April 2006, it was announced that three DUP members were to be elevated to the House of Lords: Maurice Morrow, Wallace Browne, the former Lord Mayor of Belfast, and Eileen Paisley, a vice-president of the DUP and wife of DUP Leader Ian Paisley.
None, however, sit as DUP peers.
On 27 October 2006, the DUP issued a four-page letter in the Belfast Telegraph newspaper asking "Are the terms of Saint Andrew's a basis of moving forward to devolution?", with responses to be received to its party headquarters by 8 November.
It was part of the party's policy of consultation with its electorate before entering a power-sharing government.
On 24 November 2006, Ian Paisley refused to nominate himself as First Minister of Northern Ireland designate.
There was confusion between all parties whether he actually said that if Sinn Féin supported policing and the rule of law that he would nominate himself on 28 March 2007 after the Assembly elections on 7 March 2007.
The Assembly meeting was brought to an abrupt end when the building had to be evacuated because of a security breach.
Paisley later released a statement through the press office stating that he did in fact imply that if Sinn Féin supported policing and the rule of law, he would go into a power-sharing government with them.
This was following a statement issued by 12 DUP MLAs stating that what Ian Paisley had said in the chamber could not be interpreted as a nomination.
In February 2007, the DUP suggested that it would begin to impose fines up to £20,000 on members disobeying the party whip on crucial votes.
On 24 March 2007 the DUP party executive overwhelmingly endorsed a resolution put to them by the party officers that did not agree to an establishment of devolution and an executive in Northern Ireland by the Government's deadline of 26 March, but did agree to setting up an executive on 8 May 2007.
Robinson leadership
On 31 May 2008, the party's central Executive Committee met at the offices of Castlereagh Borough Council where Ian Paisley formally stepped down as party leader and Peter Robinson was ratified as the new leader, with Nigel Dodds as his deputy.
On 11 June 2008, the party supported the government's proposal to detain terrorist suspects for up to 42 days as part of the Counter-Terrorism Bill, leading The Independent newspaper to dub all of the party's nine MPs as part of "Brown's dirty dozen".
The Times reported that the party had been given "sweeteners for Northern Ireland" and "a peerage for the Rev Ian Paisley", amongst other offers, to secure the bill.
Members of the DUP were lambasted by the press and voters, after MPs' expenses reports were leaked to the media.
Several newspapers referred to the "Swish Family Robinson" after Peter Robinson, and his wife Iris, claimed £571,939.41 in expenses with a further £150,000 being paid to family members.
Further embarrassment was caused to the party when its deputy leader, Nigel Dodds, had the highest expenses claims of any Northern Ireland MP, ranking 13th highest out of all UK MPs.
Details of all MPs' expenses claims since 2004 were published in July 2009 under the Freedom of Information Act 2000.
In January 2010, Peter Robinson was at the centre of a high-profile scandal relating to his 60-year-old MP/MLA wife Iris Robinson's infidelity with a 19-year-old man, and alleged serious financial irregularities associated with the scandal.
In the 2010 general election, the party suffered a major upset when its leader, Peter Robinson, lost his Belfast East seat to Naomi Long of the APNI on a swing of 22.9%.
However, the party maintained its position elsewhere, fighting off a challenge from the Ulster Conservatives and Unionists - New Force in Antrim South and Strangford and from Jim Allister's Traditional Unionist Voice in Antrim North.
The DUP were strongly criticised after the Red Sky scandal in which DUP ministers attempted to influence a decision at a meeting of the Northern Ireland Housing Executive.
The decision related to a £8 million contract of east Belfast firm Red Sky.
The Housing Executive cancelled Red Sky's contract after a BBC Spotlight investigation into the company, which was shown to be overcharging taxpayers.
The DUP cited "sectarian bias" in relation to the decision.
The party suspended DUP councillor Jenny Palmer, who sat on the Executive board, after she confessed that DUP special adviser Stephen Brimstone pressured her into changing her vote at the meeting.
In the 2015 general election, when the result was expected to be a hung parliament, the issue of DUP and the UK Independence Party forming a coalition government with the UK Conservative Party was considered by Nigel Farage (leader of UKIP).
The then Deputy Prime Minister and leader of the Liberal Democrats, Nick Clegg, warned against this "Blukip" coalition, with a spoof website highlighting imagined policies from this coalition - such as reinstating the death penalty, scrapping all benefits for under 25s and charging for hospital visits.
Additionally, issues were raised about the continued existence of the BBC (as the DUP, UKIP and Conservatives had made a number of statements criticising the institution) and support for same-sex marriage.
However, in an interview with BBC Radio 5 Live deputy leader of the DUP Nigel Dodds told BBC Newsline that the DUP was "against discrimination based on religion ... or sexual orientation".
Foster leadership
Arlene Foster became leader of the DUP on 17 December 2015, and served as First Minister of Northern Ireland from January 2016 to January 2017.
Two days before the UK Brexit referendum, held on 23 June 2016, the DUP paid £282,000 for a four-page glossy wrap-around to the free newspaper Metro, which is distributed in major towns and cities in the British mainland, but not Northern Ireland, advocating a 'Leave' vote.
On 4 October 2016, First Minister Arlene Foster and DUP MPs held a champagne reception at the Conservative Party conference, marking what some have described as an "informal coalition" or an "understanding" between the two parties to account for the Conservatives' narrow majority in the House of Commons.
The relationship between the parties was formalised after the 2017 United Kingdom general election with the signing of the Conservative-DUP agreement.
This was reciprocated in November, when Damian Green and Conservative Chief Whip Julian Smith attended the DUP's conference, with Smith giving a keynote address.
The third such annual DUP reception at the Conservative conference took place in October 2018, with Chancellor of the Exchequer Philip Hammond and former Foreign Secretary Boris Johnson addressing the DUP conference a month later.
Prominent Conservative MPs such as Environment Secretary Michael Gove, Leader of the House of Commons Andrea Leadsom, Defence Secretary Gavin Williamson, former International Development Secretary Priti Patel, Sports Minister Tracey Crouch, Defence Select Committee chair Julian Lewis, and European Research Group chair Jacob Rees-Mogg headlined various fundraising events for the DUP from 2017 onwards.
Former UK Independence Party leader Nigel Farage also spoke at a DUP fundraiser in May 2018, with his main financial backer, Arron Banks, stating that he would support a bid by Farage to seek office as a DUP candidate after the end of his tenure as Member of the European Parliament in 2019.
In her capacity as Minister of Enterprise, Trade and Investment in 2012, Foster oversaw the establishment of a green energy scheme, which led to the Renewable Heat Incentive scandal.
The scheme gave a perverse incentive to use more energy and increase their carbon footprint to those who signed up to it since they could claim £1.60 for every £1 spent on heating with, for example, wood pellets.
With no cost controls, it could cost the public purse up to £490 million.
Foster refused to resign or step aside during any inquiry into her role in the scheme, which in January 2017 led Martin McGuinness to resign and the Northern Ireland Executive to collapse.
A snap election followed after Sinn Féin refused to re-nominate a deputy First Minister.
In this Northern Ireland Assembly election, held in March 2017, the DUP lost 10 seats, leaving them only one seat and 1,200 votes ahead of Sinn Féin, a result described by the Belfast Telegraph as "catastrophic".
The withdrawal of the party whip from Jim Wells in May 2018 left the DUP on 27 seats, the same number as Sinn Féin.
In the 2017 UK general election, the DUP had 10 seats overall, 3 seats ahead of Sinn Féin.
With no party having received an outright majority in the UK Parliament, the DUP entered into an agreement to support government by the Conservative Party.
A DUP source said: "The alternative is intolerable.
For as long as Corbyn leads Labour, we will ensure there’s a Tory PM."
It supports marching rights for the loyalist Orange Order, which many DUP members are members of; is also in favour of flying the British Union Flag from government buildings all year round.
The DUP assert that "Irish and Gaelic culture should not be allowed to dominate funding" in Northern Ireland and have blocked proposed laws that would promote and protect the Irish language.
The DUP are staunch supporters of the British security forces and their role in the Northern Ireland conflict.
The party wants to prevent British soldiers and police officers from being prosecuted for killings committed during the conflict.
Ulster loyalism
The party has also been described as right-wing populist The party has historic links with the far-right in Northern Ireland; it is linked to the Ulster loyalist faction of unionism, which has been identified as a form of ethnic nationalism.
The DUP was also recently endorsed at the 2017 general election by the Loyalist Communities Council, an umbrella group of loyalist paramilitary groups, which are proscribed terrorist organisations.
However, the party leadership strongly rejected the endorsement, with party leader Arlene Foster stating: "We did not seek that statement, we did not seek endorsement from any paramilitary organisation and indeed I fundamentally reject an endorsement from anyone that's involved with paramilitarism or criminality."
Euroscepticism and foreign policy
The DUP is a Eurosceptic party that supported the UK's withdrawal from the European Union in 2016 Brexit referendum and was the only party in the Stormont power executive to campaign for leave.
The party opposes a hard Irish border, and wishes to maintain the Common Travel Area.
East Antrim MP Sammy Wilson caused controversy in March 2016 during a BBC Spotlight episode discussing the implications of the EU referendum, when he was recorded agreeing with a member of the public who said that they wanted to leave the European Union and "get the ethnics out".
Wilson stated "You are absolutely right".
Wilson claimed he was agreeing with the desire to leave the European Union, not the "ethnics out" call.
Wilson was criticised by the Polish consul in Northern Ireland and various other political parties.
The DUP strongly oppose the Northern Ireland backstop seeing it as weakening Northern Ireland's place within the United Kingdom, and this opposition is regarded by a number of commentators as the main reason why the withdrawal agreement has not been ratified by the Parliament of the United Kingdom.
Since 2018, the DUP have said the Northern Ireland backstop must be removed from the Brexit withdrawal agreement if they are to continue to support Theresa May's government in the House of Commons, although the party has said that it is open to a time limit on the backstop.
The DUP voted "No" in all three meaningful votes on the EU Withdrawal Agreement negotiated by Theresa May.
With regards to foreign policy, the DUP "takes a staunchly pro-Israel line, hewing to the hawkish end of the Israeli spectrum."
Social policies
The DUP is socially conservative and has strong links to the Free Presbyterian Church of Ulster, the small church founded by Reverend Ian Paisley.
The vast majority of DUP members are evangelical Christians and, on average, 65% of its representatives since the party was founded have been Free Presbyterians.
The party also has links with the Caleb Foundation, a Protestant fundamentalist pressure group.
The DUP has opposed LGBT rights in Northern Ireland.
Party leaders-as well as many prominent party members-have condemned homosexuality, and a 2014 survey found that two-thirds of party members believe homosexuality is wrong.
The DUP campaigned against the legalisation of homosexual acts, which it believed to be a "harmful deviance" linked to paedophilia, in Northern Ireland through the "Save Ulster from Sodomy" campaign between 1977-82, and the party has vetoed the legalisation of same-sex marriage in Northern Ireland since 2015, making Northern Ireland the only region of the UK where same-sex marriage is not permitted.
Former DUP minister Jim Wells called the issue a "red line" for power-sharing talks, adding that "Peter will not marry Paul in Northern Ireland".
The party attempted to introduce a "conscience clause" into law in Northern Ireland, which would let businesses refuse to provide a service if it went against their religious beliefs.
This came after a Christian-owned bakery was taken to court for refusing to make a cake bearing a pro-gay marriage slogan.
Opponents argued that the clause would allow discrimination against LGBT people.
The party maintains that it is "pro-life" and members have campaigned strongly against any extension of abortion rights to Northern Ireland, unanimously opposing a bill by Labour MP Diana Johnson to protect women in England and Wales from criminal prosecution if they ended a pregnancy using pills bought online.
They have opposed extra funding for international family planning programmes.
and for museums to include creationism in their exhibits.
In 2007, a DUP spokesman confirmed that these views were in line with party policy.
Economic and fiscal policies
The DUP is in favour of keeping the "triple lock" for pensions,
The DUP has also revived calls for a 25-mile sea bridge to link Northern Ireland with Scotland.
Calls for a feasibility study into the £20,000,000,000 project have previously been made.
Leadership
Founder Ian Paisley led the party from its foundation in 1971 onwards, and retired as leader of the party in spring 2008.
Paisley was replaced by former deputy leader Peter Robinson on 31 May 2008, who in turn was replaced by Arlene Foster on 17 December 2015.
Party leader
The following are the terms of office as party leader and as First Minister of Northern Ireland:
Deputy leader
Northern Ireland Executive Ministers
Westminster
;Party leaders at Westminster
;Party spokespersons at Westminster
Representatives
Parliament of the United Kingdom
Members of the House of Commons following 8 June 2017 general election:
* Paul Girvan - South Antrim gained from UUP on 8 June 2017
Emma Little-Pengelly - Belfast South gained from SDLP on 8 June 2017
Members of the House of Lords
* William McCrea, Baron McCrea of Magherafelt and Cookstown
Northern Ireland Assembly
Members of the Northern Ireland Assembly elected in May 2016:
European Parliament
Members elected in 2014
Election results
General election results
Northern Ireland Assembly election results
* List of Northern Ireland Members of the House of Lords
