French cuisine consists of the cooking traditions and practices from France.
French cuisine developed throughout the centuries influenced by the many surrounding cultures of Spain, Italy, Switzerland, Germany and Belgium, in addition to its own food traditions on the long western coastlines of the Atlantic, the Channel and of course inland.
In the 14th century Guillaume Tirel, a court chef known as "Taillevent", wrote Le Viandier, one of the earliest recipe collections of medieval France.
In the 17th century, chefs François Pierre La Varenne and Marie-Antoine Carême spearheaded movements that shifted French cooking away from its foreign influences and developed France's own indigenous style.
Cheese and wine are a major part of the cuisine.
They play different roles regionally and nationally, with many variations and appellation d'origine contrôlée (AOC) (regulated appellation) laws.
French cuisine was made important in the 20th century by Auguste Escoffier to become the modern haute cuisine; Escoffier, however, left out much of the local culinary character to be found in the regions of France and was considered difficult to execute by home cooks.
Gastro-tourism and the Guide Michelin helped to acquaint people with the rich bourgeois and peasant cuisine of the French countryside starting in the 20th century.
Gascon cuisine has also had great influence over the cuisine in the southwest of France.
Many dishes that were once regional have proliferated in variations across the country.
Knowledge of French cooking has contributed significantly to Western cuisines.
Its criteria are used widely in Western cookery school boards and culinary education.
In November 2010, French gastronomy was added by the UNESCO to its lists of the world's "intangible cultural heritage".
History
Middle Ages
In French medieval cuisine, banquets were common among the aristocracy.
Multiple courses would be prepared, but served in a style called service en confusion, or all at once.
Food was generally eaten by hand, meats being sliced off in large pieces held between the thumb and two fingers.
The sauces were highly seasoned and thick, and heavily flavored mustards were used.
Pies were a common banquet item, with the crust serving primarily as a container, rather than as food itself, and it was not until the very end of the Late Middle Ages that the shortcrust pie was developed.
Meals often ended with an issue de table, which later changed into the modern dessert, and typically consisted of dragées (in the Middle Ages, meaning spiced lumps of hardened sugar or honey), aged cheese and spiced wine, such as hypocras.
The ingredients of the time varied greatly according to the seasons and the church calendar, and many items were preserved with salt, spices, honey, and other preservatives.
Late spring, summer, and autumn afforded abundance, while winter meals were more sparse.
Livestock were slaughtered at the beginning of winter.
Beef was often salted, while pork was salted and smoked.
Bacon and sausages would be smoked in the chimney, while the tongue and hams were brined and dried.
Cucumbers were brined as well, while greens would be packed in jars with salt.
Fruits, nuts and root vegetables would be boiled in honey for preservation.
Whale, dolphin and porpoise were considered fish, so during Lent, the salted meats of these sea mammals were eaten.
According to Brace, bread was referred to as the basic dietary item for the masses, and it was also used as a foundation for soup.
In fact, bread was so important that harvest, interruption of commerce by wars, heavy flour exploration, and prices and supply were all watched and controlled by the French Government.
Among the underprivileged, constant fear of famine was always prevalent.
From 1725 to 1789, there was fourteen years of bad yields to blame for low grain supply.
In Bordeaux, during 1708-1789, thirty-three bad harvests occurred.
More important to Carême's career was his contribution to the refinement of French cuisine.
The basis for his style of cooking was his sauces, which he named mother sauces.
Often referred to as fonds, meaning "foundations", these base sauces, espagnole, velouté, and béchamel, are still known today.
Each of these sauces was made in large quantities in his kitchen, then formed the basis of multiple derivatives.
Carême had over one hundred sauces in his repertoire.
In his writings, soufflés appear for the first time.
Although many of his preparations today seem extravagant, he simplified and codified an even more complex cuisine that existed beforehand.
Central to his codification of the cuisine were Le Maître d'hôtel français (1822), Le Cuisinier parisien (1828) and L'Art de la cuisine française au dix-neuvième siècle (1833-5).
Mid-20th century - late 20th century
The 1960s brought about innovative thought to the French cuisine, especially because of the contribution of Portuguese immigrants who had come to the country fleeing the forced drafting to the Colonial Wars Portugal was fighting in Africa.
Many new dishes were introduced, as well as techniques.
This period is also marked by the appearance of the nouvelle cuisine.
The term "nouvelle cuisine" has been used many times in the history of French cuisine which emphasized the freshness, lightness and clarity of flavor and inspired by new movements in world cuisine.
In the 1740s, Menon first used the term, but the cooking of Vincent La Chapelle and François Marin was also considered modern.
In the 1960s, Henri Gault and Christian Millau revived it to describe the cooking of Paul Bocuse, Jean and Pierre Troisgros, Michel Guérard, Roger Vergé and Raymond Oliver.
These chefs were working toward rebelling against the "orthodoxy" of Escoffier's cuisine.
Some of the chefs were students of Fernand Point at the Pyramide in Vienne, and had left to open their own restaurants.
Gault and Millau "discovered the formula" contained in ten characteristics of this new style of cooking.
By the mid-1980s food writers stated that the style of cuisine had reached exhaustion and many chefs began returning to the haute cuisine style of cooking, although much of the lighter presentations and new techniques remained.
Paris and Île-de-France
Paris and Île-de-France are central regions where almost anything from the country is available, as all train lines meet in the city.
Over 9,000 restaurants exist in Paris and almost any cuisine can be obtained here.
High-quality Michelin Guide-rated restaurants proliferate here.
Champagne, Lorraine, and Alsace
Game and ham are popular in Champagne, as well as the special sparkling wine simply known as Champagne.
Fine fruit preserves are known from Lorraine as well as the quiche Lorraine.
Alsace is influenced by the German cuisine, especially the one from the Palatinate and Baden region.
As such, beers made in the area are similar to the style of bordering Germany.
Dishes like choucroute (the French word for sauerkraut) are also popular.
The Gratin Dauphinois is traditionally made in an old large baking dish rubbed with garlic.
Layers of successively potatoes, salt, pepper and cream are piled up to the top of the dish.
It will be baked in the oven at low temperature for 2 hours.
Fruit and young vegetables are popular in the cuisine from the Rhône valley, as are great wines like Hermitage AOC, Crozes-Hermitage AOC and Condrieu AOC.
Walnuts and walnut products and oil from Noix de Grenoble AOC, lowland cheeses, like St. Marcellin, St. Félicien and Bleu du Vercors-Sassenage.
Poultry from Bresse, guinea fowl from Drôme and fish from the Dombes, a light yeast-based cake, called Pogne de Romans and the regional speciality, Raviole du Dauphiné, and there is the short-crust "Suisse", a Valence biscuit speciality.
Lakes and mountain streams in Rhône-Alpes are key to the cuisine as well.
Lyon and Savoy supply sausages while the Alpine regions supply their specialty cheeses like Beaufort, Abondance, Reblochon, Tomme and Vacherin.
Mères lyonnaises are female restaurateurs particular to this region who provide local gourmet establishments.
Celebrated chefs from this region include Fernand Point, Paul Bocuse, the Troisgros brothers and Alain Chapel.
The Chartreuse Mountains, also in the region, are the source of the green and yellow Digestif liquor, Chartreuse produced by the monks of the Grande Chartreuse.
Honey is a prized ingredient in the region.
Seafood proliferates throughout the coastal area and is heavily represented in the cuisine.
Goat cheeses, air-dried sausages, lamb, beef, and chicken are popular here.
Garlic* and anchovies are used in many of the region's sauces, as in Poulet Provençal, which uses white wine, tomatoes, herbs, and sometimes anchovies, and Pastis is found everywhere that alcohol is served.
The cuisine uses a large amount of vegetables for lighter preparations.
Truffles are commonly seen in Provence during the winter.
Thirteen desserts in Provence are the traditional Christmas dessert, e.g. quince cheese, biscuits, almonds, nougat, apple, and fougasse.
Rice is grown in the Camargue, which is the northernmost rice growing area in Europe, with Camargue red rice being a specialty.
Moreover, they do not freeze well.
Foods and ingredients
French regional cuisines use locally grown vegetables, such as pomme de terre (potato), blé (wheat), haricots verts (a type of French green bean), carotte (carrot), poireau (leek), navet (turnip), aubergine (eggplant), courgette (zucchini), and échalotte (shallot).
French regional cuisines use locally grown fungi, such as truffe (truffle), champignon de Paris (button mushroom), chanterelle ou girolle (chanterelle), pleurote (en huître) (oyster mushrooms), and cèpes (porcini).
Common fruits include oranges, tomatoes, tangerines, peaches, apricots, apples, pears, plums, cherries, strawberries, raspberries, redcurrants, blackberries, grapes, grapefruit, and blackcurrants.
Varieties of meat consumed include poulet (chicken), pigeon (squab), canard (duck), oie (goose, the source of foie gras), bœuf (beef), veau (veal), porc (pork), agneau (lamb), mouton (mutton), caille (quail), cheval (horse), grenouille (frog), and escargot (snails).
Commonly consumed fish and seafood include cod, canned sardines, fresh sardines, canned tuna, fresh tuna, salmon, trout, mussels, herring, oysters, shrimp and calamari.
Eggs are fine quality and often eaten as: omelettes, hard-boiled with mayonnaise, scrambled plain, scrambled haute cuisine preparation, œuf à la coque.
Herbs and seasonings vary by region, and include fleur de sel, herbes de Provence, tarragon, rosemary, marjoram, lavender, thyme, fennel, and sage.
Fresh fruit and vegetables, as well as fish and meat, can be purchased either from supermarkets or specialty shops.
Street markets are held on certain days in most localities; some towns have a more permanent covered market enclosing food shops, especially meat and fish retailers.
These have better shelter than the periodic street markets.
File:Herbesdeprovence.jpg|Herbes de provence
File:Charetveau.jpg|Charolais cattle
File:Champignons Agaricus.jpg|Champignon de Paris
File:HaricotsVerts2.JPG|Haricots verts
File:France-AOC Piment d'Espelette-2005-08-05.jpg|Piments d'Espelette
File:Fleur de sel2.jpg|Fleur de sel de Guérande
File:Wine grapes03.jpg|Grappe de raisin
File:Bressehühner-1.jpg|Poulet de Bresse
File:Wheat close-up.JPG|Blé (Wheat)
File:Truffe noire du Périgord.jpg|Black
Périgord truffle
Structure of meals
Breakfast
Le petit déjeuner (breakfast) is traditionally a quick meal consisting of tartines (slices) of French bread with butter and honey or jam (sometimes brioche), along with café au lait (also called "café crème"), or black coffee, or tea and rarely hot chicory.
Children often drink hot chocolate in bowls or cups along with their breakfasts.
Croissants, pain aux raisins or pain au chocolat (also named chocolatine in the south of France) are mostly included as a weekend treat.
Breakfast of some kind is always served in cafés opening early in the day.
There are also savoury dishes for breakfast.
An example is "le petit déjeuner gaulois" or "petit déjeuner fermier" with the famous long narrow bread slices with soft white cheese topped or boiled ham, called mouillettes, which is dipped in a soft-boiled egg and some fruit juice and hot drink.
Another variation called "le petit déjeuner chasseur", meant to be very hearty, is served with pâté and other charcuterie products.
A more classy version is called "le petit déjeuner du voyageur", where delicatessens serve gizzard, bacon, salmon, omelet, or croque-monsieur, with or without soft-boiled egg and always with the traditional coffee chocolate along fruits or fruit juice.
When the egg is cooked sunny-side over the croque-monsieur, it is called a croque-madame.
In Germinal and other novels, Émile Zola also reported the briquet: two long bread slices stuffed with butter, cheese and or ham.
It can be eaten as a standing/walking breakfast, or meant as a "second" one before lunch.
In the movie Bienvenue chez les Ch'tis, Philippe Abrams (Kad Merad) and Antoine Bailleul (Dany Boon) share together countless breakfasts consisting of tartines de Maroilles (a rather strong cheese) along with their hot chicory.
Lunch
Le déjeuner (lunch) is a two-hour mid-day meal or a one-hour lunch break.
In some smaller towns and in the south of France, the two-hour lunch may still be customary.
Sunday lunches are often longer and are taken with the family.
In large cities, a majority of working people and students eat their lunch at a corporate or school cafeteria, which normally serve complete meals as described above; it is not usual for students to bring their own lunch to eat.
For companies that do not operate a cafeteria, it is mandatory for white-collar workers to be given lunch vouchers as part of their employee benefits.
These can be used in most restaurants, supermarkets and traiteurs; however, workers having lunch in this way typically do not eat all three dishes of a traditional lunch due to price and time constraints.
In smaller cities and towns, some working people leave their workplaces to return home for lunch.
Also, an alternative, especially among blue-collar workers, is eating sandwiches followed by a dessert; both dishes can be found ready-made at bakeries and supermarkets for budget prices.
Dinner
Le dîner (dinner) often consists of three courses, hors d'œuvre or entrée (appetizers or introductory course, sometimes soup), plat principal (main course), and a cheese course or dessert, sometimes with a salad offered before the cheese or dessert.
Yogurt may replace the cheese course, while a simple dessert would be fresh fruit.
The meal is often accompanied by bread, wine and mineral water.
Most of the time the bread would be a baguette which is very common in France and is made almost every day.
Main meat courses are often served with vegetables, along with potatoes, rice or pasta.
Restaurants often open at 7:30 pm for dinner, and stop taking orders between the hours of 10:00 pm and 11:00 pm.
Some restaurants close for dinner on Sundays.
Food establishments
History
The modern restaurant has its origins in French culture.
Prior to the late 18th century, diners who wished to "dine out" would visit their local guild member's kitchen and have their meal prepared for them.
However, guild members were limited to producing whatever their guild registry delegated to them.
These guild members offered food in their own homes to steady clientele that appeared day-to-day but at set times.
The guest would be offered the meal table d'hôte, which is a meal offered at a set price with very little choice of dishes, sometimes none at all.
The first steps toward the modern restaurant were locations that offered restorative bouillons, or restaurants - these words being the origin of the name "restaurant".
This step took place during the 1760s-1770s.
These locations were open at all times of the day, featuring ornate tableware and reasonable prices.
These locations were meant more as meal replacements for those who had "lost their appetites and suffered from jaded palates and weak chests."
In 1782 Antoine Beauvilliers, pastry chef to the future Louis XVIII, opened one of the most popular restaurants of the time - the Grande Taverne de Londres - in the arcades of the Palais-Royal.
Other restaurants were opened by chefs of the time who were leaving the failing monarchy of France, in the period leading up to the French Revolution.
It was these restaurants that expanded upon the limited menus of decades prior, and led to the full restaurants that were completely legalized with the advent of the French Revolution and abolition of the guilds.
This and the substantial discretionary income of the French Directory's nouveau riche helped keep these new restaurants in business.
Restaurant staff
Larger restaurants and hotels in France employ extensive staff and are commonly referred to as either the kitchen brigade for the kitchen staff or dining room brigade system for the dining room staff.
This system was created by Georges Auguste Escoffier.
This structured team system delegates responsibilities to different individuals who specialize in certain tasks.
The following is a list of positions held both in the kitchen and dining rooms brigades in France:
Further reading
* Patrick Rambourg, Histoire de la cuisine et de la gastronomie françaises, Paris, Ed.
Perrin (coll.
tempus n° 359), 2010, 381 pages.
* Bryan Newman, " Behind the French Menu",
