The Moon, occasionally distinguished as Luna, is an astronomical body that orbits the Earth as its only permanent natural satellite.
It is the fifth-largest satellite in the Solar System, and the largest among planetary satellites relative to the size of the planet that it orbits (its primary).
The Moon is, after Jupiter's satellite Io, the second-densest satellite in the Solar System among those whose densities are known.
The Moon is thought to have formed about 4.51 billion years ago, not long after Earth.
The most widely accepted explanation is that the Moon formed from the debris left over after a giant impact between Earth and a Mars-sized body called Theia.
New research of moon rocks, although not rejecting the Theia hypothesis, suggests that the moon may be older than previously thought.
The Moon is in synchronous rotation with Earth, and thus always shows the same side to Earth, the near side.
The near side is marked by dark volcanic maria that fill the spaces between the bright ancient crustal highlands and the prominent impact craters.
After the Sun, the Moon is the second-brightest regularly visible celestial object in Earth's sky.
Its surface is actually dark, although compared to the night sky it appears very bright, with a reflectance just slightly higher than that of worn asphalt.
Its gravitational influence produces the ocean tides, body tides, and the slight lengthening of the day.
The Moon's average orbital distance is , or 1.28 light-seconds.
This is about thirty times the diameter of Earth.
The Moon's apparent size in the sky is almost the same as that of the Sun, since the star is about 400 times the lunar distance and diameter.
Therefore, the Moon covers the Sun nearly precisely during a total solar eclipse.
This matching of apparent visual size will not continue in the far future because the Moon's distance from Earth is gradually increasing.
The Moon was first reached in September 1959 by the Soviet Union's Luna 2, an unmanned spacecraft, followed by the first successful soft landing by Luna 9 in 1966.
The United States' NASA Apollo program achieved the only manned lunar missions to date, beginning with the first manned orbital mission by Apollo 8 in 1968, and six manned landings between 1969 and 1972, with the first being Apollo 11 in July 1969.
These missions returned lunar rocks which have been used to develop a geological understanding of the Moon's origin, internal structure, and the Moon's later history.
Since the 1972 Apollo 17 mission the Moon has been visited only by unmanned spacecraft.
Both the Moon's natural prominence in the earthly sky and its regular cycle of phases as seen from Earth have provided cultural references and influences for human societies and cultures since time immemorial.
Such cultural influences can be found in language, lunar calendar systems, art, and mythology.
Name and etymology
The usual English proper name for Earth's natural satellite is "the Moon", which in nonscientific texts is usually not capitalized.
The modern English adjective pertaining to the Moon is lunar, derived from the Latin word for the Moon, luna.
The adjective selenic (usually only used to refer to the chemical element selenium) is so rarely used to refer to the Moon that this meaning is not recorded in most major dictionaries.
It is derived from the Ancient Greek word for the Moon, (selḗnē), from which is however also derived the prefix "seleno-", as in selenography, the study of the physical features of the Moon, as well as the element name selenium.
Both the Greek goddess Selene and the Roman goddess Diana were alternatively called Cynthia.
The names Luna, Cynthia, and Selene are reflected in terminology for lunar orbits in words such as apolune, pericynthion, and selenocentric.
The name Diana comes from the Proto-Indo-European *diw-yo, "heavenly", which comes from the PIE root *dyeu- "to shine," which in many derivatives means "sky, heaven, and god" and is also the origin of Latin dies, "day".
Formation
The Moon formed 4.51 billion years ago, some 60 million years after the origin of the Solar System.
Several forming mechanisms have been proposed, including the fission of the Moon from Earth's crust through centrifugal force
The prevailing hypothesis is that the Earth-Moon system formed after an impact of a Mars-sized body (named Theia) with the proto-Earth (giant impact).
The impact blasted material into Earth's orbit and then the material accreted and formed the Moon.
The Moon's far side has a crust that is thicker than that of the near side.
This is thought to be because the Moon fused from two different bodies.
This hypothesis, although not perfect, perhaps best explains the evidence.
Eighteen months prior to an October 1984 conference on lunar origins, Bill Hartmann, Roger Phillips, and Jeff Taylor challenged fellow lunar scientists: "You have eighteen months.
Go back to your Apollo data, go back to your computer, do whatever you have to, but make up your mind.
Don't come to our conference unless you have something to say about the Moon's birth."
At the 1984 conference at Kona, Hawaii, the giant impact hypothesis emerged as the most consensual theory.
Before the conference, there were partisans of the three "traditional" theories, plus a few people who were starting to take the giant impact seriously, and there was a huge apathetic middle who didn’t think the debate would ever be resolved.
Afterward, there were essentially only two groups: the giant impact camp and the agnostics.
Giant impacts are thought to have been common in the early Solar System.
Computer simulations of giant impacts have produced results that are consistent with the mass of the lunar core and the angular momentum of the Earth-Moon system.
These simulations also show that most of the Moon derived from the impactor, rather than the proto-Earth.
However, more recent simulations suggest a larger fraction of the Moon derived from the proto-Earth.
Other bodies of the inner Solar System such as Mars and Vesta have, according to meteorites from them, very different oxygen and tungsten isotopic compositions compared to Earth.
However, Earth and the Moon have nearly identical isotopic compositions.
The isotopic equalization of the Earth-Moon system might be explained by the post-impact mixing of the vaporized material that formed the two,
The impact released a lot of energy and then the released material re-accreted into the Earth-Moon system.
This would have melted the outer shell of Earth, and thus formed a magma ocean.
Similarly, the newly formed Moon would also have been affected and had its own lunar magma ocean; its depth is estimated from about to .
In 2001, a team at the Carnegie Institute of Washington reported the most precise measurement of the isotopic signatures of lunar rocks.
To their surprise, the rocks from the Apollo program had the same isotopic signature as rocks from Earth, however they differed from almost all other bodies in the Solar System.
Indeed, this observation was unexpected, because most of the material that formed the Moon was thought to come from Theia and it was announced in 2007 that there was less than a 1% chance that Theia and Earth had identical isotopic signatures.
Other Apollo lunar samples had in 2012 the same titanium isotopes composition as Earth,
Internal structure
The Moon is a differentiated body.
It has a geochemically distinct crust, mantle, and core.
The Moon has a solid iron-rich inner core with a radius possibly as small as and a fluid outer core primarily made of liquid iron with a radius of roughly .
Around the core is a partially molten boundary layer with a radius of about .
This structure is thought to have developed through the fractional crystallization of a global magma ocean shortly after the Moon's formation 4.5 billion years ago.
Crystallization of this magma ocean would have created a mafic mantle from the precipitation and sinking of the minerals olivine, clinopyroxene, and orthopyroxene; after about three-quarters of the magma ocean had crystallised, lower-density plagioclase minerals could form and float into a crust atop.
Surface geology
The topography of the Moon has been measured with laser altimetry and stereo image analysis.
Its most visible topographic feature is the giant far-side South Pole-Aitken basin, some in diameter, the largest crater on the Moon and the second-largest confirmed impact crater in the Solar System.
At deep, its floor is the lowest point on the surface of the Moon.
The highest elevations of the surface are located directly to the northeast, and it has been suggested might have been thickened by the oblique formation impact of the South Pole-Aitken basin.
Other large impact basins such as Imbrium, Serenitatis, Crisium, Smythii, and Orientale also possess regionally low elevations and elevated rims.
Similar shrinkage features exist on Mercury.
A recent study of over 12000 images from the orbiter has observed that Mare Frigoris near the north pole, a vast basin assumed to be geologically dead, has been cracking and shifting.
Since the Moon doesn't have tectonic plates, its tectonic activity is slow and cracks develop as it loses heat over the years.
Volcanic features
The dark and relatively featureless lunar plains, clearly seen with the naked eye, are called maria (Latin for "seas"; singular mare), as they were once believed to be filled with water; they are now known to be vast solidified pools of ancient basaltic lava.
Although similar to terrestrial basalts, lunar basalts have more iron and no minerals altered by water.
The majority of these lavas erupted or flowed into the depressions associated with impact basins.
Several geologic provinces containing shield volcanoes and volcanic domes are found within the near side "maria".
Almost all maria are on the near side of the Moon, and cover 31% of the surface of the near side, This is thought to be due to a concentration of heat-producing elements under the crust on the near side, seen on geochemical maps obtained by Lunar Prospectors gamma-ray spectrometer, which would have caused the underlying mantle to heat up, partially melt, rise to the surface and erupt.
Most of the Moon's mare basalts erupted during the Imbrian period, 3.0-3.5 billion years ago, although some radiometrically dated samples are as old as 4.2 billion years.
Moonquakes and releases of gas also indicate some continued lunar activity.
Just prior to this, evidence has been presented for 2-10 million years younger basaltic volcanism inside Lowell crater, Orientale basin, located in the transition zone between the near and far sides of the Moon.
An initially hotter mantle and/or local enrichment of heat-producing elements in the mantle could be responsible for prolonged activities also on the far side in the Orientale basin.
The lighter-colored regions of the Moon are called terrae, or more commonly highlands, because they are higher than most maria.
They have been radiometrically dated to having formed 4.4 billion years ago, and may represent plagioclase cumulates of the lunar magma ocean.
The concentration of maria on the Near Side likely reflects the substantially thicker crust of the highlands of the Far Side, which may have formed in a slow-velocity impact of a second moon of Earth a few tens of millions of years after their formation.
Impact craters
The other major geologic process that has affected the Moon's surface is impact cratering, with craters formed when asteroids and comets collide with the lunar surface.
There are estimated to be roughly 300,000 craters wider than on the Moon's near side alone.
The lunar geologic timescale is based on the most prominent impact events, including Nectaris, Imbrium, and Orientale, structures characterized by multiple rings of uplifted material, between hundreds and thousands of kilometers in diameter and associated with a broad apron of ejecta deposits that form a regional stratigraphic horizon.
Blanketed on top of the Moon's crust is a highly comminuted and impact gardened surface layer called regolith, formed by impact processes.
The finer regolith, the lunar soil of silicon dioxide glass, has a texture resembling snow and a scent resembling spent gunpowder.
The regolith of older surfaces is generally thicker than for younger surfaces: it varies in thickness from in the highlands and in the maria.
Beneath the finely comminuted regolith layer is the megaregolith, a layer of highly fractured bedrock many kilometers thick.
Comparison of high-resolution images obtained by the Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter has shown a contemporary crater-production rate significantly higher than previously estimated.
A secondary cratering process caused by distal ejecta is thought to churn the top two centimeters of regolith a hundred times more quickly than previous models suggested - on a timescale of 81,000 years.
Lunar swirls
Lunar swirls are enigmatic features found across the Moon's surface.
They are characterized by a high albedo, appear optically immature (i.e. the optical characteristics of a relatively young regolith), and have often a sinuous shape.
Their shape is often accentuated by low albedo regions that wind between the bright swirls.
Presence of water
Liquid water cannot persist on the lunar surface.
When exposed to solar radiation, water quickly decomposes through a process known as photodissociation and is lost to space.
However, since the 1960s, scientists have hypothesized that water ice may be deposited by impacting comets or possibly produced by the reaction of oxygen-rich lunar rocks, and hydrogen from solar wind, leaving traces of water which could possibly persist in cold, permanently shadowed craters at either pole on the Moon.
Computer simulations suggest that up to of the surface may be in permanent shadow.
In 1998, the neutron spectrometer on the Lunar Prospector spacecraft showed that high concentrations of hydrogen are present in the first meter of depth in the regolith near the polar regions.
In 2009, LCROSS sent a impactor into a permanently shadowed polar crater, and detected at least of water in a plume of ejected material.
The data revealed the distinct reflective signatures of water-ice, as opposed to dust and other reflective substances.
The ice deposits were found on the North and South poles, although it is more abundant in the South, where water is trapped in permanently shadowed craters and crevices, allowing it to persist as ice on the surface since they are shielded from the sun.
The anomalies greatly influence the orbit of spacecraft about the Moon.
There are some puzzles: lava flows by themselves cannot explain all of the gravitational signature, and some mascons exist that are not linked to mare volcanism.
Magnetic field
The Moon has an external magnetic field of about 1-100 nanoteslas, less than one-hundredth that of Earth.
The Moon does not currently have a global dipolar magnetic field and only has crustal magnetization likely acquired early in its history when a dynamo was still operating.
Theoretically, some of the remnant magnetization may originate from transient magnetic fields generated during large impacts through the expansion of plasma clouds.
These clouds are generated during large impacts in an ambient magnetic field.
This is supported by the location of the largest crustal magnetizations situated near the antipodes of the giant impact basins.
Atmosphere
The Moon has an atmosphere so tenuous as to be nearly vacuum, with a total mass of less than .
The surface pressure of this small mass is around 3 × 10−15 atm (0.3 nPa); it varies with the lunar day.
Its sources include outgassing and sputtering, a product of the bombardment of lunar soil by solar wind ions.
Elements that have been detected include sodium and potassium, produced by sputtering (also found in the atmospheres of Mercury and Io); helium-4 and neon from the solar wind; and argon-40, radon-222, and polonium-210, outgassed after their creation by radioactive decay within the crust and mantle.
The absence of such neutral species (atoms or molecules) as oxygen, nitrogen, carbon, hydrogen and magnesium, which are present in the regolith, is not understood.
Past thicker atmosphere
In October 2017, NASA scientists at the Marshall Space Flight Center and the Lunar and Planetary Institute in Houston announced their finding, based on studies of Moon magma samples retrieved by the Apollo missions, that the Moon had once possessed a relatively thick atmosphere for a period of 70 million years between 3 and 4 billion years ago.
This atmosphere, sourced from gases ejected from lunar volcanic eruptions, was twice the thickness of that of present-day Mars.
The ancient lunar atmosphere was eventually stripped away by solar winds and dissipated into space.
Seasons
The Moon's axial tilt with respect to the ecliptic is only 1.5424°, and just close to the winter solstice in north polar Hermite Crater.
This is the coldest temperature in the Solar System ever measured by a spacecraft, colder even than the surface of Pluto.
Earth-Moon system
File:Earth-moon-to-scale.svg|Scale model of the Earth-Moon system: Sizes and distances are to scale.
Orbit
The Moon makes a complete orbit around Earth with respect to the fixed stars about once every 27.3 days (its sidereal period).
However, because Earth is moving in its orbit around the Sun at the same time, it takes slightly longer for the Moon to show the same phase to Earth, which is about 29.5 days (its synodic period).
years, which affects other aspects of lunar motion.
These follow-on effects are mathematically described by Cassini's laws.
The Earth and the Moon's barycentre, their common center of mass, is located beneath Earth's surface.
The Earth revolves around the Earth-Moon barycentre once a sidereal month, with 1/81 the speed of the Moon, or about per second.
This motion is superimposed on the much larger revolution of the Earth around the Sun at a speed of about per second.
The surface area of the Moon is slightly less than the areas of North and South America combined.
Appearance from Earth
The Moon is in synchronous rotation as it orbits Earth; it rotates about its axis in about the same time it takes to orbit Earth.
This results in it always keeping nearly the same face turned towards Earth.
However, because of the effect of libration, about 59% of the Moon's surface can actually be seen from Earth.
The side of the Moon that faces Earth is called the near side, and the opposite the far side.
The far side is often inaccurately called the "dark side", but it is in fact illuminated as often as the near side: once every 29.5 Earth days.
During new moon, the near side is dark.
The Moon had once rotated at a faster rate, but early in its history, its rotation slowed and became tidally locked in this orientation as a result of frictional effects associated with tidal deformations caused by Earth.
With time, the energy of rotation of the Moon on its axis was dissipated as heat, until there was no rotation of the Moon relative to Earth.
In 2016, planetary scientists, using data collected on the much earlier NASA Lunar Prospector mission, found two hydrogen-rich areas on opposite sides of the Moon, probably in the form of water ice.
It is speculated that these patches were the poles of the Moon billions of years ago, before it was tidally locked to Earth.
The Moon has an exceptionally low albedo, giving it a reflectance that is slightly brighter than that of worn asphalt.
Despite this, it is the brightest object in the sky after the Sun.
The full Moon's angular diameter is about 0.52° (on average) in the sky, roughly the same apparent size as the Sun (see ).
The Moon's highest altitude at culmination varies by its phase and time of year.
The full moon is highest in the sky during winter (for each hemisphere).
The 18.61-year nodal cycle has an influence on lunar standstill.
When the ascending node of the lunar orbit is in the vernal equinox, the lunar declination can reach up to plus or minus 28° each month.
This means the Moon can pass overhead if viewed from latitudes up to 28° north or south (of the Equator), instead of only 18°.
The orientation of the Moon's crescent also depends on the latitude of the viewing location; an observer in the tropics can see a smile-shaped crescent Moon.
The Moon is visible for two weeks every 27.3 days at the North and South Poles.
Zooplankton in the Arctic use moonlight when the Sun is below the horizon for months on end.
The distance between the Moon and Earth varies from around to at perigee (closest) and apogee , respectively.
On 14 November 2016, it was closer to Earth when at full phase than it has been since 1948, 14% closer than its farthest position in apogee.
Reported as a "supermoon", this closest point coincided within an hour of a full moon, and it was 30% more luminous than when at its greatest distance because its angular diameter is 14% greater and \scriptstyle1.14^2\approx1.30.
At lower levels, the human perception of reduced brightness as a percentage is provided by the following formula:
:\text\%=100 \times \sqrt
When the actual reduction is 1.00 1.14.
This gives a maximum perceived increase of 14% between apogee and perigee moons of the same phase.
There has been historical controversy over whether features on the Moon's surface change over time.
Today, many of these claims are thought to be illusory, resulting from observation under different lighting conditions, poor astronomical seeing, or inadequate drawings.
However, outgassing does occasionally occur and could be responsible for a minor percentage of the reported lunar transient phenomena.
Recently, it has been suggested that a roughly diameter region of the lunar surface was modified by a gas release event about a million years ago.
The Moon's appearance, like the Sun's, can be affected by Earth's atmosphere.
Common optical effects are the 22° halo ring, formed when the Moon's light is refracted through the ice crystals of high cirrostratus clouds, and smaller coronal rings when the Moon is seen through thin clouds.
The illuminated area of the visible sphere (degree of illumination) is given by (1-\cos e) 2), where e is the elongation and the Sun).
Tidal effects
The gravitational attraction that masses have for one another decreases inversely with the square of the distance of those masses from each other.
As a result, the slightly greater attraction that the Moon has for the side of Earth closest to the Moon, as compared to the part of the Earth opposite the Moon, results in tidal forces.
Tidal forces affect both the Earth's crust and oceans.
The most obvious effect of tidal forces is to cause two bulges in the Earth's oceans, one on the side facing the Moon and the other on the side opposite.
This results in elevated sea levels called ocean tides.
As a result, the timing of the tides at most points on the Earth is a product of observations that are explained, incidentally, by theory.
While gravitation causes acceleration and movement of the Earth's fluid oceans, gravitational coupling between the Moon and Earth's solid body is mostly elastic and plastic.
The result is a further tidal effect of the Moon on the Earth that causes a bulge of the solid portion of the Earth nearest the Moon that acts as a torque in opposition to the Earth's rotation.
This "drains" angular momentum and rotational kinetic energy from Earth's spin, slowing the Earth's rotation.
(roughly the rate at which human fingernails grow).
Atomic clocks also show that Earth's day lengthens by about 15 microseconds every year, slowly increasing the rate at which UTC is adjusted by leap seconds.
Left to run its course, this tidal drag would continue until the spin of Earth and the orbital period of the Moon matched, creating mutual tidal locking between the two.
As a result, the Moon would be suspended in the sky over one meridian, as is already currently the case with Pluto and its moon Charon.
However, the Sun will become a red giant engulfing the Earth-Moon system long before this occurrence.
In a like manner, the lunar surface experiences tides of around amplitude over 27 days, with two components: a fixed one due to Earth, because they are in synchronous rotation, and a varying component from the Sun.
Eclipses
Eclipses only occur when the Sun, Earth, and Moon are all in a straight line (termed "syzygy").
Solar eclipses occur at new moon, when the Moon is between the Sun and Earth.
In contrast, lunar eclipses occur at full moon, when Earth is between the Sun and Moon.
The apparent size of the Moon is roughly the same as that of the Sun, with both being viewed at close to one-half a degree wide.
The Sun is much larger than the Moon but it is the vastly greater distance that gives it the same apparent size as the much closer and much smaller Moon from the perspective of Earth.
The variations in apparent size, due to the non-circular orbits, are nearly the same as well, though occurring in different cycles.
This makes possible both total (with the Moon appearing larger than the Sun) and annular (with the Moon appearing smaller than the Sun) solar eclipses.
In a total eclipse, the Moon completely covers the disc of the Sun and the solar corona becomes visible to the naked eye.
Because the distance between the Moon and Earth is very slowly increasing over time,
Because the Moon's orbit around Earth is inclined by about 5.145° (5° 9') to the orbit of Earth around the Sun, eclipses do not occur at every full and new moon.
For an eclipse to occur, the Moon must be near the intersection of the two orbital planes.
Because the Moon is continuously blocking our view of a half-degree-wide circular area of the sky, the related phenomenon of occultation occurs when a bright star or planet passes behind the Moon and is occulted: hidden from view.
In this way, a solar eclipse is an occultation of the Sun.
Because the Moon is comparatively close to Earth, occultations of individual stars are not visible everywhere on the planet, nor at the same time.
Because of the precession of the lunar orbit, each year different stars are occulted.
Observation and exploration
Before spaceflight
One of the earliest-discovered possible depictions of the Moon is a 5000-year-old rock carving Orthostat 47 at Knowth, Ireland.
Understanding of the Moon's cycles was an early development of astronomy: by the , Babylonian astronomers had recorded the 18-year Saros cycle of lunar eclipses, and Indian astronomers had described the Moon's monthly elongation.
Although the Chinese of the Han Dynasty believed the Moon to be energy equated to qi, their 'radiating influence' theory also recognized that the light of the Moon was merely a reflection of the Sun, and Jing Fang (78-37 BC) noted the sphericity of the Moon.
In the 2nd century AD, Lucian wrote the novel A True Story, in which the heroes travel to the Moon and meet its inhabitants.
In 499 AD, the Indian astronomer Aryabhata mentioned in his Aryabhatiya that reflected sunlight is the cause of the shining of the Moon.
The astronomer and physicist Alhazen (965-1039) found that sunlight was not reflected from the Moon like a mirror, but that light was emitted from every part of the Moon's sunlit surface in all directions.
Shen Kuo (1031-1095) of the Song dynasty created an allegory equating the waxing and waning of the Moon to a round ball of reflective silver that, when doused with white powder and viewed from the side, would appear to be a crescent.
In Aristotle's (384-322 BC) description of the universe, the Moon marked the boundary between the spheres of the mutable elements , and the imperishable stars of aether, an influential philosophy that would dominate for centuries.
However, in the , Seleucus of Seleucia correctly theorized that tides were due to the attraction of the Moon, and that their height depends on the Moon's position relative to the Sun.
In the same century, Aristarchus computed the size and distance of the Moon from Earth, obtaining a value of about twenty times the radius of Earth for the distance.
These figures were greatly improved by Ptolemy (90-168 AD): his values of a mean distance of 59 times Earth's radius and a diameter of 0.292 Earth diameters were close to the correct values of about 60 and 0.273 respectively.
Archimedes (287-212 BC) designed a planetarium that could calculate the motions of the Moon and other objects in the Solar System.
During the Middle Ages, before the invention of the telescope, the Moon was increasingly recognised as a sphere, though many believed that it was "perfectly smooth".
In 1609, Galileo Galilei drew one of the first telescopic drawings of the Moon in his book and noted that it was not smooth but had mountains and craters.
Thomas Harriot had made, but not published such drawings a few months earlier.
Telescopic mapping of the Moon followed: later in the 17th century, the efforts of Giovanni Battista Riccioli and Francesco Maria Grimaldi led to the system of naming of lunar features in use today.
The more exact 1834-36 of Wilhelm Beer and Johann Heinrich Mädler, and their associated 1837 book , the first trigonometrically accurate study of lunar features, included the heights of more than a thousand mountains, and introduced the study of the Moon at accuracies possible in earthly geography.
Lunar craters, first noted by Galileo, were thought to be volcanic until the 1870s proposal of Richard Proctor that they were formed by collisions.
the first human-made object to escape Earth's gravity and pass near the Moon was Luna 1; the first human-made object to impact the lunar surface was Luna 2, and the first photographs of the normally occluded far side of the Moon were made by Luna 3, all in 1959.
The first spacecraft to perform a successful lunar soft landing was Luna 9 and the first unmanned vehicle to orbit the Moon was Luna 10, both in 1966.
Two pioneering robotic rovers landed on the Moon in 1970 and 1973 as a part of Soviet Lunokhod programme.
Luna 24 was the last Soviet/Russian mission to the Moon.
United States missions
During the late 1950s at the height of the Cold War, the United States Army conducted a classified feasibility study that proposed the construction of a manned military outpost on the Moon called Project Horizon with the potential to conduct a wide range of missions from scientific research to nuclear Earth bombardment.
The study included the possibility of conducting a lunar-based nuclear test.
The Air Force, which at the time was in competition with the Army for a leading role in the space program, developed its own similar plan called Lunex.
An estimated 500 million people worldwide watched the transmission by the Apollo TV camera, the largest television audience for a live broadcast at that time.
The Apollo missions 11 to 17 (except Apollo 13, which aborted its planned lunar landing) removed of lunar rock and soil in 2,196 separate samples.
The American Moon landing and return was enabled by considerable technological advances in the early 1960s, in domains such as ablation chemistry, software engineering, and atmospheric re-entry technology, and by highly competent management of the enormous technical undertaking.
Scientific instrument packages were installed on the lunar surface during all the Apollo landings.
Long-lived instrument stations, including heat flow probes, seismometers, and magnetometers, were installed at the Apollo 12, 14, 15, 16, and 17 landing sites.
Direct transmission of data to Earth concluded in late 1977 because of budgetary considerations, but as the stations' lunar laser ranging corner-cube retroreflector arrays are passive instruments, they are still being used.
Ranging to the stations is routinely performed from Earth-based stations with an accuracy of a few centimeters, and data from this experiment are being used to place constraints on the size of the lunar core.
1980s-2000
After the first Moon race there were years of near quietude but starting in the 1990s, many more countries have become involved in direct exploration of the Moon.
In 1990, Japan became the third country to place a spacecraft into lunar orbit with its Hiten spacecraft.
The spacecraft released a smaller probe, Hagoromo, in lunar orbit, but the transmitter failed, preventing further scientific use of the mission.
In 1994, the U.S. sent the joint Defense Department/NASA spacecraft Clementine to lunar orbit.
This mission obtained the first near-global topographic map of the Moon, and the first global multispectral images of the lunar surface.
This was followed in 1998 by the Lunar Prospector mission, whose instruments indicated the presence of excess hydrogen at the lunar poles, which is likely to have been caused by the presence of water ice in the upper few meters of the regolith within permanently shadowed craters.
India, Japan, China, the United States, and the European Space Agency each sent lunar orbiters, and especially ISRO's Chandrayaan-1 has contributed to confirming the discovery of lunar water ice in permanently shadowed craters at the poles and bound into the lunar regolith.
The post-Apollo era has also seen two rover missions: the final Soviet Lunokhod mission in 1973, and China's ongoing Chang'e 3 mission, which deployed its Yutu rover on 14 December 2013.
The Moon remains, under the Outer Space Treaty, free to all nations to explore for peaceful purposes.
21st century
The European spacecraft SMART-1, the second ion-propelled spacecraft, was in lunar orbit from 15 November 2004 until its lunar impact on 3 September 2006, and made the first detailed survey of chemical elements on the lunar surface.
The ambitious Chinese Lunar Exploration Program began with Chang'e 1, which successfully orbited the Moon from 5 November 2007 until its controlled lunar impact on 1 March 2009.
Between 4 October 2007 and 10 June 2009, the Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency's Kaguya (Selene) mission, a lunar orbiter fitted with a high-definition video camera, and two small radio-transmitter satellites, obtained lunar geophysics data and took the first high-definition movies from beyond Earth orbit.
India's first lunar mission, Chandrayaan-1, orbited from 8 November 2008 until loss of contact on 27 August 2009, creating a high-resolution chemical, mineralogical and photo-geological map of the lunar surface, and confirming the presence of water molecules in lunar soil.
The Indian Space Research Organisation planned to launch Chandrayaan-2 in 2013, which would have included a Russian robotic lunar rover.
However, the failure of Russia's Fobos-Grunt mission has delayed this project, and was launched on 22 July 2019.
The lander Vikram attempted to land on the lunar south pole regime on 6 September, but lost the signal in .
What happened after that is unknown.
The U.S. co-launched the Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter (LRO) and the LCROSS impactor and follow-up observation orbiter on 18 June 2009; LCROSS completed its mission by making a planned and widely observed impact in the crater Cabeus on 9 October 2009, whereas LRO is currently in operation, obtaining precise lunar altimetry and high-resolution imagery.
In November 2011, the LRO passed over the large and bright Aristarchus crater.
NASA released photos of the crater on 25 December 2011.
Two NASA GRAIL spacecraft began orbiting the Moon around 1 January 2012, on a mission to learn more about the Moon's internal structure.
NASA's LADEE probe, designed to study the lunar exosphere, achieved orbit on 6 October 2013.
Upcoming lunar missions include Russia's |accessdate
13 April 2010 |url-status
dead |archiveurl
https:/ web http:/ Top_News Russia_to_send_mission_to_Mars_this_year__Moon_in_three_years_.html |archivedate
13 September 2010
Privately funded lunar exploration has been promoted by the Google Lunar X Prize, announced 13 September 2007, which offers US$20 million to anyone who can land a robotic rover on the Moon and meet other specified criteria.
Shackleton Energy Company is building a program to establish operations on the south pole of the Moon to harvest water and supply their Propellant Depots.
NASA began to plan to resume manned missions following the call by U.S. President George W. Bush on 14 January 2004 for a manned mission to the Moon by 2019 and the construction of a lunar base by 2024.
The Constellation program was funded and construction and testing begun on a manned spacecraft and launch vehicle, and design studies for a lunar base.
However, that program has been canceled in favor of a manned asteroid landing by 2025 and a manned Mars orbit by 2035.
India has also expressed its hope to send a manned mission to the Moon by 2020.
On 28 February 2018, SpaceX, Vodafone, Nokia and Audi announced a collaboration to install a 4G wireless communication network on the Moon, with the aim of streaming live footage on the surface to Earth.
Recent reports also indicate NASA's intent to send a woman astronaut to the Moon in their planned mid-2020s mission.
Planned commercial missions
In 2007, the X Prize Foundation together with Google launched the Google Lunar X Prize to encourage commercial endeavors to the Moon.
A prize of $20 million was to be awarded to the first private venture to get to the Moon with a robotic lander by the end of March 2018, with additional prizes worth $10 million for further milestones.
As of August 2016, 16 teams were reportedly participating in the competition.
In January 2018 the foundation announced that the prize would go unclaimed as none of the finalist teams would be able to make a launch attempt by the deadline.
In August 2016, the US government granted permission to US-based start-up Moon Express to land on the Moon.
This marked the first time that a private enterprise was given the right to do so.
The decision is regarded as a precedent helping to define regulatory standards for deep-space commercial activity in the future, as thus far companies' operation had been restricted to being on or around Earth.
Human impact
Beside the traces of human activity on the Moon, there have been some intended permanent installations like the Moon Museum art piece, Apollo 11 goodwill messages, Lunar plaque, Fallen Astronaut memorial and other artifacts.
Astronomy from the Moon
For many years, the Moon has been recognized as an excellent site for telescopes.
It is relatively nearby; astronomical seeing is not a concern; certain craters near the poles are permanently dark and cold, and thus especially useful for infrared telescopes; and radio telescopes on the far side would be shielded from the radio chatter of Earth.
The lunar soil, although it poses a problem for any moving parts of telescopes, can be mixed with carbon nanotubes and epoxies and employed in the construction of mirrors up to 50 meters in diameter.
A lunar zenith telescope can be made cheaply with an ionic liquid.
In April 1972, the Apollo 16 mission recorded various astronomical photos and spectra in ultraviolet with the Far Ultraviolet Camera/Spectrograph.
Legal status
Although Luna landers scattered pennants of the Soviet Union on the Moon, and U.S. flags were symbolically planted at their landing sites by the Apollo astronauts, no nation claims ownership of any part of the Moon's surface.
The ancient Sumerians believed that the Moon was the god Nanna, who was the father of Inanna, the goddess of the planet Venus, The star and crescent arrangement also goes back to the Bronze Age, representing either the Sun and Moon, or the Moon and planet Venus, in combination.
It came to represent the goddess Artemis or Hecate, and via the patronage of Hecate came to be used as a symbol of Byzantium.
An iconographic tradition of representing Sun and Moon with faces developed in the late medieval period.
The splitting of the moon () is a miracle attributed to Muhammad.
Calendar
The Moon's regular phases make it a very convenient timepiece, and the periods of its waxing and waning form the basis of many of the oldest calendars.
Tally sticks, notched bones dating as far back as 20-30,000 years ago, are believed by some to mark the phases of the Moon.
The ~30-day month is an approximation of the lunar cycle.
The English noun month and its cognates in other Germanic languages stem from Proto-Germanic *mǣnṓth-, which is connected to the above-mentioned Proto-Germanic *mǣnōn, indicating the usage of a lunar calendar among the Germanic peoples (Germanic calendar) prior to the adoption of a solar calendar.
and echoing the Moon's importance to many ancient cultures in measuring time (see Latin and Ancient Greek (meis) or (mēn), meaning "month").
Most historical calendars are lunisolar.
The 7th-century Islamic calendar is an exceptional example of a purely lunar calendar.
Months are traditionally determined by the visual sighting of the hilal, or earliest crescent moon, over the horizon.
Lunacy
The Moon has long been associated with insanity and irrationality; the words lunacy and lunatic (popular shortening loony) are derived from the Latin name for the Moon, Luna.
Philosophers Aristotle and Pliny the Elder argued that the full moon induced insanity in susceptible individuals, believing that the brain, which is mostly water, must be affected by the Moon and its power over the tides, but the Moon's gravity is too slight to affect any single person.
Even today, people who believe in a lunar effect claim that admissions to psychiatric hospitals, traffic accidents, homicides or suicides increase during a full moon, but dozens of studies invalidate these claims.
Notes
References
Citations
Bibliography
Further reading
* http:/ worldservice 948_discovery_2008/page4.shtml The Moon.
Discovery 2008.
BBC World Service.
