Mickey Rooney (born Joseph Yule Jr.; September 23, 1920 - April 6, 2014) was an American actor, vaudevillian, comedian, producer and radio personality.
In a career spanning nine decades and continuing until shortly before his death, he appeared in more than 300 films and was one of the last surviving stars of the silent film era.
At the height of a career that was marked by precipitous declines and raging comebacks, Rooney performed the role of Andy Hardy in a series of 16 films in the 1930s and 1940s that epitomized American family values.
A versatile performer, he became a celebrated character actor later in his career.
Laurence Olivier once said he considered Rooney "the best there has ever been".
Rooney first performed in vaudeville as a child and made his film debut at the age of six.
At 14 he played Puck in the play and later the 1935 film adaptation of A Midsummer Night's Dream.
Critic David Thomson hailed his performance as "one of the cinema's most arresting pieces of magic".
In 1938, he co-starred in Boys Town.
At 19 he was the first teenager to be nominated for an Oscar for his leading role in Babes in Arms, and he was awarded a special Academy Juvenile Award in 1939.
At the peak of his career between the ages of 15 and 25, he made 43 films, which made him one of Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer's most consistently successful actors and a favorite of MGM studio head Louis B. Mayer.
Rooney was the top box-office attraction from 1939 to 1941
His mother was a former chorus girl and a burlesque performer.
Career
Child actor
Rooney's parents separated when he was four years old in 1924, and he and his mother moved to Hollywood the following year from Greenpoint, Brooklyn.
He made his first film appearance at age six in 1926, in the short Not to be Trusted.
Rooney got bit parts in films such as The Beast of the City (1932) and The Life of Jimmy Dolan (1933), which allowed him to work alongside stars such as Joel McCrea, Colleen Moore, Clark Gable, Douglas Fairbanks Jr., John Wayne and Jean Harlow.
He enrolled in the Hollywood Professional School and later attended Hollywood High School, graduating in 1938.
Mickey McGuire
His mother saw an advertisement for a child to play the role of "Mickey McGuire" in a series of short films.
Rooney got the role and became "Mickey" for 78 of the comedies, running from 1927 to 1936, starting with Mickey's Circus (1927), his first starring role.
During this period, he also briefly voiced Oswald the Lucky Rabbit.
He made other films in his adolescence, including several more of the McGuire films.
At age 15 he played the role of Puck in the Warner Brothers all-star adaptation of A Midsummer Night's Dream in 1935.
Rooney then moved to MGM, where he befriended Judy Garland, with whom he began making a series of musicals that propelled both of them to stardom.
Andy Hardy, Boys Town and Hollywood stardom
In 1937, Rooney was selected to portray Andy Hardy in A Family Affair, which MGM had planned as a B-movie.
Fifty years later, Rooney realized in hindsight that these early confrontations with Mayer were necessary for him to develop into a leading film star: "Everybody butted heads with him, but he listened and you listened.
And then you'd come to an agreement you could both live with. ...
He visited the sets, he gave people talks ...
What he wanted was something that was American, presented in a cosmopolitan manner."
In 1937, Rooney made his first film alongside Judy Garland with Thoroughbreds Don't Cry.
Garland and Rooney became close friends as they co-starred in future films and became a successful song-and-dance team.
Audiences delighted in seeing the "playful interactions between the two stars showcase a wonderful chemistry".
Along with three of the Andy Hardy films, where she portrayed a girl attracted to Andy, they appeared together in a string of successful musicals, including Babes in Arms (1939).
During an interview in the 1992 documentary film MGM: When the Lion Roars, Rooney describes their friendship:
Judy and I were so close we could've come from the same womb.
We weren't like brothers or sisters but there was no love affair there; there was more than a love affair.
It's very, very difficult to explain the depths of our love for each other.
It was so special.
It was a forever love.
Judy, as we speak, has not passed away.
She's always with me in every heartbeat of my body.
In 1937, Rooney received top billing as Shockey Carter in Hoosier Schoolboy but his breakthrough-role as a dramatic actor came in 1938's Boys Town opposite Spencer Tracy as Father Flanagan, who runs a home for wayward and homeless boys.
Rooney was awarded a special Juvenile Academy Award in 1939, for "significant contribution in bringing to the screen the spirit and personification of youth".
Wayne describes one of the "most famous scenes" in the film, where tough young Rooney is playing poker with a cigarette in his mouth, his hat is cocked and his feet are up on the table.
"Tracy grabs him by the lapels, throws the cigarette away and pushes him into a chair.
'That's better,' he tells Mickey."
For their roles in Boys Town, Rooney and Tracy won first and second place in the Motion Picture Herald 1940 National Poll of Exhibitors, based on the box office appeal of 200 players.
Boys' Life magazine wrote, "Congratulations to Messrs. Rooney and Tracy!
Also to Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer we extend a hearty thanks for their very considerable part in this outstanding achievement."
Actor Laurence Olivier once called Rooney "the greatest actor of them all".
A major star in the early 1940s, he appeared on the cover of Time magazine in 1940, timed to coincide with the release of Young Tom Edison; the cover story began:
Hollywood's No. 1 box office bait in 1939 was not Clark Gable, Errol Flynn or Tyrone Power, but a rope-haired, kazoo-voiced kid with a comic-strip face, who until this week had never appeared in a picture without mugging or overacting it.
His name (assumed) was Mickey Rooney, and to a large part of the more articulate U.S. cinema audience, his name was becoming a frequently used synonym for brat.
During his long and illustrious career, Rooney also worked with many of the screen's female stars, including Elizabeth Taylor in National Velvet (1944) and Audrey Hepburn in Breakfast at Tiffany's (1961)."
Rooney's "bumptiousness and boyish charm" as an actor would develop more "smoothness and polish" over the years, writes biographer Scott Eyman.
The fact that Rooney fully enjoyed his life as an actor played a large role in those changes:
QTEMPLATE |You weren't going to work, you were going to have fun.
It was home, everybody was cohesive; it was family.
One year I made nine pictures; I had to go from one set to another.
It was like I was on a conveyor belt.
You did not read a script and say, "I guess I'll do it."
You did it.
They had people that knew the kind of stories that were suited to you.
It was a conveyor belt that made motion pictures.
Clarence Brown, who directed Rooney in his Oscar-nominated performance in The Human Comedy (1943) and again in National Velvet (1944), enjoyed working with Rooney in films:
QTEMPLATE |Mickey Rooney is the closest thing to a genius that I ever worked with.
There was Chaplin, then there was Rooney.
The little bastard could do no wrong in my book ...
All you had to do with him was rehearse it once.
World War II and later career
In June 1944, Rooney was inducted into the United States Army, where he served more than 21 months (until shortly after the end of World War II) entertaining the troops in America and Europe in Special Services.
He spent part of the time as a radio personality on the American Forces Network and was awarded the Bronze Star Medal for entertaining troops in combat zones.
In addition to the Bronze Star Medal, Rooney also received the Army Good Conduct Medal, American Campaign Medal, European-African-Middle Eastern Campaign Medal, and World War II Victory Medal, for his military service.
Rooney's career slumped after his return to civilian life.
He was now an adult with a height of only and he could no longer play the role of a teenager, but he also lacked the stature of most leading men.
He appeared in a number of films, including Words and Music in 1948, which paired him for the last time with Garland on film (he appeared with her on one episode as a guest on The Judy Garland Show).
He briefly starred in a CBS radio series, Shorty Bell, in the summer of 1948, and reprised his role as "Andy Hardy", with most of the original cast, in a syndicated radio version of The Hardy Family in 1949 and 1950 (repeated on Mutual during 1952).
In 1949 Variety reported that Rooney had renegotiated his deal with MGM.
He agreed to make one film a year for them for five years at $25,000 a movie (his fee until then had been $100,000 but Rooney wanted to enter independent production.)
Rooney claimed he was unhappy with the billing MGM gave him for Words and Music.
His first television series, The Mickey Rooney Show, also known as Hey, Mulligan, was created by Blake Edwards with Rooney as his own producer, and appeared on NBC television for 32 episodes between August 28, 1954 and June 4, 1955.
In 1951, he made his directorial debut with My True Story, starring Helen Walker.
Rooney also starred as a ragingly egomaniacal television comedian, loosely based on Red Buttons, in the live 90-minute television drama The Comedian, in the Playhouse 90 series on the evening of Valentine's Day in 1957, and as himself in a revue called The Musical Revue of 1959 based on the 1929 film The Hollywood Revue of 1929, which was edited into a film in 1960.
In 1958, Rooney joined Dean Martin and Frank Sinatra in hosting an episode of NBC's short-lived Club Oasis comedy and variety show.
In 1960, Rooney directed and starred in The Private Lives of Adam and Eve, an ambitious comedy known for its multiple flashbacks and many cameos.
In the 1960s, Rooney returned to theatrical entertainment.
He still accepted film roles in undistinguished films but occasionally would appear in better works, such as Requiem for a Heavyweight (1962) and It's a Mad, Mad, Mad, Mad World (1963).
He portrayed a Japanese character, Mr. Yunioshi, in the 1961 film version of Truman Capote's novella Breakfast at Tiffany's.
His performance was criticized by some in subsequent years as a racist stereotype.
Rooney later said that he would not have taken the role if he had known it would offend people.
On December 31, 1961, Rooney appeared on television's What's My Line and mentioned that he had already started enrolling students in the MRSE (Mickey Rooney School of Entertainment).
His school venture never came to fruition.
This was a period of professional distress for Rooney; as a childhood friend, director Richard Quine put it: "Let's face it.
It wasn't all that easy to find roles for a 5-foot-3 man who'd passed the age of Andy Hardy."
In 1962, his debts had forced him into filing for bankruptcy.
In 1966, Rooney was working on the film Ambush Bay in the Philippines when his wife Barbara Ann Thomason- a former model and aspiring actress who had won 17 straight beauty contests in Southern California-was found dead in her bed.
Her lover, Milos Milos-who was one of Rooney's actor-friends-was found dead beside her.
Detectives ruled it a murder-suicide, which was committed with Rooney's own gun.
Francis Ford Coppola had bought the rights to make The Black Stallion (1979), and when casting it, he called Rooney and asked him if he thought he could play a jockey.
Rooney replied saying, "Gee, I don't know.
I never played a jockey before."
He was kidding, he said, since he had played a jockey in at least three past films, including Down the Stretch, Thoroughbreds Don't Cry, and National Velvet.
The film garnered excellent reviews and earned $40 million in its first run, which gave Coppola's struggling studio, American Zoetrope, a major boost.
It also gave Rooney newfound recognition, along with a nomination for Best Supporting Actor.
In 1983, the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences gave Rooney their Academy Honorary Award for his lifetime of achievement.
He reprised his role in 1983's Bill: On His Own, earning an Emmy nomination for the turn.
Rooney did voice acting from time to time.
He provided the voice of Santa Claus in four stop-motion animated Christmas TV specials: Santa Claus Is Comin' to Town (1970), The Year Without a Santa Claus (1974), Rudolph and Frosty's Christmas in July (1979) and A Miser Brothers' Christmas (2008).
In 1995, he appeared as himself on The Simpsons episode "Radioactive Man".
After starring in one unsuccessful TV series and turning down an offer for a huge TV series, Rooney, now 70, starred in the Family Channel's The Adventures of the Black Stallion, where he reprised his role as Henry Dailey in the film of the same name, eleven years earlier.
The series ran for three years and was an international hit.,
Rooney appeared in television commercials for Garden State Life Insurance Company in 2002.
Broadway shows
A major turning point came in 1979, when Rooney made his Broadway debut in the acclaimed stage play Sugar Babies, a musical revue tribute to the burlesque era costarring former MGM dancing star Ann Miller.
Aljean Harmetz noted that "Mr. Rooney fought over every skit and argued over every song and almost always got things done his way.
The show opened on Broadway on October 8, 1979, to rave reviews, and this time he did not throw success away.
Rooney and Miller performed the show 1,208 times in New York and then toured with it for five years, including eight months in London.
Co-star Miller recalls that Rooney "never missed a performance or a chance to ad-lib or read the lines the same way twice, if he even stuck to the script".
Despite the millions of dollars that he earned over the years, such as his $65,000 a week earnings from Sugar Babies, Rooney was plagued by financial problems late in life.
His longtime gambling habit caused him to "gamble away his fortune again and again".
He declared bankruptcy for the second time in 1996 and described himself as "broke" in 2005.
He kept performing on stage and in the movies, but his personal property was valued at only $18,000 when he died in 2014.
Rooney and his wife Jan toured the country in 2005 through 2011 in a musical revue called Let's Put on a Show.
Vanity Fair called it "a homespun affair full of dog-eared jokes" that featured Rooney singing George Gershwin songs.
He returned to play the role again in the sequel Night at the Museum:
Battle of the Smithsonian in 2009, in a scene that was deleted from the final film.
a role he reprised at Bristol Hippodrome in 2008 and at the Milton Keynes theatre in 2009.
In 2011, Rooney made a brief cameo appearance in The Muppets and in 2014, at age 93, he reprised his role as Gus in Night at the Museum:
Secret of the Tomb, with the film being dedicated in the honor of Rooney and Robin Williams, who also died that year.
Although confined to a wheelchair, he was described by director Shawn Levy as "energetic and so pleased to be there.
He was just happy to be invited to the party."
An October 2015 article in The Hollywood Reporter maintained that Rooney was frequently abused and financially depleted by his closest relatives in the last years of his life.
The article said that it was clear that "one of the biggest stars of all time, who remained aloft longer than anyone in Hollywood history, was in the end brought down by those closest to him.
He died humiliated and betrayed, nearly broke and often broken."
He had nine children and two stepchildren, as well as 19 grandchildren and several great-grandchildren.
Rooney had been addicted to sleeping pills, and overcame the sleeping pill addiction in 2000 when he was in his late 70s.
On February 16, 2011, Rooney was granted a temporary restraining order against stepson Christopher Aber and Aber's wife, Christina, and they were ordered to stay 100 yards from Rooney, his stepson Mark Rooney and his wife, Charlene Rooney.
Rooney claimed that he was a victim of elder abuse.
On March 2, 2011, Rooney appeared before a special U.S. Senate committee that was considering legislation to curb elder abuse, testifying about the abuse he claimed to have suffered at the hands of family members.
who called Rooney "completely competent".
Christopher Aber and Jan Rooney denied all the allegations.
In 1997, Rooney was arrested on suspicion of beating his wife, but charges were dropped due to lack of evidence.
In May 2013, Rooney sold his home of many years, reportedly for $1.3 million, and split the proceeds with his wife, Jan.
Marriages
Rooney was married eight times, with six of the marriages ending in divorce.
In 1942, he married his first wife, actress Ava Gardner, who at that time was still an obscure teenage starlet.
They divorced the following year, partly because he had apparently been unfaithful.
He then married Barbara's best friend, Marge Lane.
That marriage lasted 100 days.
He was married to Carolyn Hockett from 1969 to 1975.
including complications from diabetes, in Los Angeles at the age of 93.
A group of family members and friends, including Mickey Rourke, held a memorial service on April 18.
A private funeral, organized by another set of family members, was held at Hollywood Forever Cemetery, where he was interred, on April 19.
His eight surviving children said in a statement that they were barred from seeing Rooney during his final years.
At his death, Vanity Fair called him "the original Hollywood train wreck".
He struggled with alcohol and pill addiction.
Ava Gardner was his first wife, and he would go on to marry an additional seven times.
Despite earning millions during his career, he had to file for bankruptcy in 1962 due to mismanagement of his finances.
Shortly before his death in 2014 at age 93, he accused some family members of mistreatment and testified before Congress about what he said was physical abuse and exploitation by family members.
By the end of his life, his millions in earnings had dwindled to an estate that was valued at only $18,000.
He died owing medical bills and back taxes, and contributions were solicited from the public.
Legacy
Rooney was one of the last surviving actors of the silent picture era.
His movie career spanned 88 years, from 1926 to 2014, continuing until shortly before his death.
During his peak years from the late 1930s to the early 1940s, Rooney was among the top box-office stars in the United States.
He made forty-three pictures between the age of 15 and 25.
Among those, his role as Andy Hardy became one of "Hollywood's best-loved characters," with Marlon Brando calling him "the best actor in films".
"There was nothing he couldn't do", said actress Margaret O'Brien.
By the time Rooney was 20, his consistent portrayals of characters with youth and energy suggested that his future success was unlimited.
Thomson also explains that Rooney's characters were able to cover a wide range of emotional types, and gives three examples where "Rooney is not just an actor of genius, but an artist able to maintain a stylized commentary on the demon impulse of the small, belligerent man:"
Filmography
One of the most enduring performers in show business history, Rooney appeared in over 300 films in 88 years.
He was one of the last surviving stars of the silent film era, having one of the longest careers in movie history.
On February 8, 1960, Rooney was initiated into the Hollywood Walk of Fame with a star heralding his work in motion pictures, located at 1718 Vine Street, one for his television career located at 6541 Hollywood Boulevard, and a third dedicated to his work in radio, located at 6372 Hollywood Boulevard.
On March 29, 1984, he received a fourth star, this one for his live performances, located at 6211 Hollywood Boulevard.
In 1996, a Golden Palm Star on the Palm Springs Walk of Stars was dedicated to Rooney.
Notes
Bibliography
