is a classical Japanese dance-drama.
Kabuki theatre is known for the stylization of its drama and for the elaborate make-up worn by some of its performers.
In 2005, the Kabuki theatre was proclaimed by UNESCO as an intangible heritage possessing outstanding universal value.
In 2008, it was inscribed in the UNESCO
Representative List of the Intangible Cultural Heritage of Humanity.
Etymology
The individual kanji, from left to right, mean sing (), dance (), and skill ().
Kabuki is therefore sometimes translated as "the art of singing and dancing".
These are, however, ateji characters which do not reflect actual etymology.
The kanji of 'skill' generally refers to a performer in kabuki theatre.
Since the word kabuki is believed to derive from the verb kabuku, meaning "to lean" or "to be out of the ordinary", kabuki can be interpreted as "avant-garde" or "bizarre" theatre.
The expression kabukimono () referred originally to those who were bizarrely dressed.
It is often translated into English as "strange things" or "the crazy ones", and referred to the style of dress worn by gangs of samurai.
History
1603-1629: Female kabuki
The history of kabuki began in 1603 when Izumo no Okuni, possibly a miko of Izumo-taisha, began performing with a troupe of female dancers a new style of dance drama, on a makeshift stage in the dry bed of the Kamo River in Kyoto.
It originated in the 17th century.
Japan was under the control of the Tokugawa shogunate, enforced by Tokugawa Ieyasu.
The name of the Edo period derives from the relocation of the Tokugawa regime from its former home in Kyoto to the city of Edo, present-day Tokyo.
Female performers played both men and women in comic playlets about ordinary life.
The style was immediately popular, and Okuni was asked to perform before the Imperial Court.
In the wake of such success, rival troupes quickly formed, and kabuki was born as ensemble dance and drama performed by women-a form very different from its modern incarnation.
Much of its appeal in this era was due to the ribald, suggestive themes featured by many troupes; this appeal was further augmented by the fact that the performers were often also available for prostitution.
the registered red-light district in Edo.
A diverse crowd gathered under one roof, something that happened nowhere else in the city.
Kabuki theaters were a place to see and be seen as they featured the latest fashion trends and current events.
The stage provided good entertainment with exciting new music, patterns, clothing, and famous actors.
Performances went from morning until sunset.
The teahouses surrounding or connected to the theater provided meals, refreshments, and good company.
The area around the theatres was filled with shops selling kabuki souvenirs.
Kabuki, in a sense, initiated pop culture in Japan.
The shogunate was never partial to kabuki and all the mischief it brought, particularly the variety of the social classes which mixed at kabuki performances.
Women's kabuki, called onna-kabuki, was banned in 1629 for being too erotic.
Following onna-kabuki, young boys performed in wakashū-kabuki, but since they too were eligible for prostitution, the shōgun government soon banned wakashū-kabuki as well.
Male actors played both female and male characters.
The theatre remained popular, and remained a focus of urban lifestyle until modern times.
Although kabuki was performed all over ukiyo and other portions for the country, the Nakamura-za, Ichimura-za and Kawarazaki-za theatres became the top theatres in ukiyo, where some of the most successful kabuki performances were and still are held.
Along with the change in the performer's gender came a change in the emphasis of the performance: increased stress was placed on drama rather than dance.
Performances were equally ribald, and the male actors too were available for prostitution (to both female and male customers).
Audiences frequently became rowdy, and brawls occasionally broke out, sometimes over the favors of a particularly handsome young actor, leading the shogunate to ban first onnagata and then wakashū roles.
Both bans were rescinded by 1652.
1673-1841:
Golden age
During the Genroku era, kabuki thrived.
The structure of a kabuki play was formalized during this period, as were many elements of style.
Conventional character types were established.
Kabuki theater and ningyō jōruri, the elaborate form of puppet theater that later came to be known as bunraku, became closely associated with each other, and each has since influenced the other's development.
The famous playwright Chikamatsu Monzaemon, one of the first professional kabuki playwrights, produced several influential works, though the piece usually acknowledged as his most significant, Sonezaki Shinjū (The Love Suicides at Sonezaki), was originally written for bunraku.
Like many bunraku plays, it was adapted for kabuki, and it spawned many imitators-in fact, it and similar plays reportedly caused so many real-life "copycat" suicides that the government banned shinju mono (plays about lovers' double suicides) in 1723.
Ichikawa Danjūrō I also lived during this time; he is credited with the development of mie poses and mask-like kumadori make-up.
1842-1868: Saruwaka-chō kabuki
Male actors played both female and male characters.
After World War II, the occupying forces briefly banned kabuki, which had strongly supported Japan's war since 1931; however, by 1947 the ban had been rescinded.
Today
The immediate post-World War II era was a difficult time for kabuki.
Besides the war's physical devastation, many rejected the styles and thoughts of the past, kabuki among them.
Director Tetsuji Takechi's popular and innovative productions of kabuki classics at this time are credited with bringing about a rebirth of interest in kabuki in the Kansai region.
Of the many popular young stars who performed with the Takechi Kabuki, Nakamura Ganjiro III (b. 1931) was the leading figure.
He was first known as Nakamura Senjaku, and this period in Osaka kabuki became known as the "Age of Senjaku" in his honor.
For example, the well-known onnagata Bandō Tamasaburō V has appeared in several (non-kabuki) plays and movies, often in a female role.
Kabuki appears in works of Japanese popular culture such as anime.
In addition to the handful of major theatres in Tokyo and Kyoto, there are many smaller theatres in Osaka and throughout the countryside.
The Ōshika Kabuki troupe, based in Ōshika, Nagano Prefecture, is one example.
Some local kabuki troupes today use female actors in onnagata roles.
The Ichikawa Shōjo Kabuki Gekidan, an all-female troupe, debuted in 1953 to significant acclaim but failed to start a new trend.
The introduction of earphone guides in 1975, including an English version in 1982, Kabuki troupes regularly tour Asia, Europe and America, and there have been several kabuki-themed productions of canonical Western plays such as those of Shakespeare.
Western playwrights and novelists have experimented with kabuki themes, an example of which is Gerald Vizenor's Hiroshima Bugi (2004).
Writer Yukio Mishima pioneered and popularized the use of kabuki in modern settings and revived other traditional arts, such as Noh, adapting them to modern contexts.
There have even been kabuki troupes established in countries outside Japan.
For instance, in Australia, the Za Kabuki troupe at the Australian National University has performed a kabuki drama each year since 1976, the longest regular kabuki performance outside Japan.
In November 2002 a statue was erected in honor of kabuki's founder Okuni and to commemorate 400 years of kabuki's existence.
Diagonally across from the Minami-za, the last remaining kabuki theater in Kyoto,
Elements
Stage design
The kabuki stage features a projection called a hanamichi (, "flower path"), a walkway which extends into the audience and via which dramatic entrances and exits are made.
Okuni also performed on a hanamichi stage with her entourage.
The stage is used not only as a walkway or path to get to and from the main stage, but important scenes are also played on the stage.
Kabuki stages and theaters have steadily become more technologically sophisticated, and innovations including revolving stages and trap doors were introduced during the 18th century.
A driving force has been the desire to manifest one frequent theme of kabuki theater, that of the sudden, dramatic revelation or transformation.
A number of stage tricks, including actors' rapid appearance and disappearance, employ these innovations.
The term keren (), often translated playing to the gallery, is sometimes used as a catch-all for these tricks.
Hanamichi and several innovations including revolving stage, seri and chunori have all contributed to kabuki play.
Hanamichi creates depth and both seri and chunori provide a vertical dimension.
Mawari-butai (revolving stage) developed in the Kyōhō era (1716-1735).
The trick was originally accomplished by the on-stage pushing of a round, wheeled platform.
Later a circular platform was embedded in the stage with wheels beneath it facilitating movement.
The kuraten (“darkened revolve”) technique involves lowering the stage lights during this transition.
More commonly the lights are left on for akaten (“lighted revolve”), sometimes simultaneously performing the transitioning scenes for dramatic effect.
This stage was first built in Japan in the early eighteenth century.
Seri refers to the stage "traps" that have been commonly employed in kabuki since the middle of the 18th century.
These traps raise and lower actors or sets to the stage.
Seridashi or seriage refers to trap (s) moving upward and serisage or serioroshi to traps descending.
This technique is often used to lift an entire scene at once.
Chūnori (riding in mid-air) is a technique, which appeared toward the middle of the 19th century, by which an actor's costume is attached to wires and he is made to "fly" over the stage and/or certain parts of the auditorium.
This is similar to the wire trick in the stage musical Peter Pan, in which Peter launches himself into the air.
It is still one of the most popular keren (visual tricks) in kabuki today; major kabuki theaters, such as the National Theatre, Kabuki-za and Minami-za, are all equipped with chūnori installations.
Scenery changes are sometimes made mid-scene, while the actors remain on stage and the curtain stays open.
This is sometimes accomplished by using a Hiki Dōgu, or small wagon stage.
This technique originated at the beginning of the 18th century, where scenery or actors move on or off stage on a wheeled platform.
Also common are stagehands rushing onto the stage adding and removing props, backdrops and other scenery; these kuroko () are always dressed entirely in black and are traditionally considered invisible.
Stagehands also assist in a variety of quick costume changes known as hayagawari (quick change technique).
When a character's true nature is suddenly revealed, the devices of hikinuki and bukkaeri are often used.
This involves layering one costume over another and having a stagehand pull the outer one off in front of the audience.
The curtain that shields the stage before the performance and during the breaks is in the traditional colours of black, red and green, in various order, or white instead of green, vertical stripes.
The curtain consists of one piece and is pulled back to one side by a staff member by hand.
An additional outer curtain called doncho was not introduced until the Meiji era following the introduction of western influence.
These are more ornate in their appearance and are woven.
They depict the season in which the performance is taking place, often designed by renowned Nihonga artists.
Performance
The three main categories of kabuki play are jidaimono (, historical, or pre-Sengoku period stories), sewamono (, domestic, or post-Sengoku stories) and shosagoto (, dance pieces).
Jidaimono, or history plays, were set within the context of major events in Japanese history.
Strict censorship laws during the Edo period prohibited the representation of contemporary events and particularly prohibited criticising the shogunate or casting it in a bad light, although enforcement varied greatly over the years.
Many shows were set in the context of the Genpei War of the 1180s, the Nanboku-chō Wars of the 1330s, or other historical events.
Frustrating the censors, many shows used these historical settings as metaphors for contemporary events.
Kanadehon Chūshingura, one of the most famous plays in the kabuki repertoire, serves as an excellent example; it is ostensibly set in the 1330s, though it actually depicts the contemporary (18th century) affair of the revenge of the 47 rōnin.
Unlike jidaimono which generally focused upon the samurai class, sewamono focused primarily upon commoners, namely townspeople and peasants.
Often referred to as "domestic plays" in English, sewamono generally related to themes of family drama and romance.
Some of the most famous sewamono are the love suicide plays, adapted from works by the bunraku playwright Chikamatsu; these center on romantic couples who cannot be together in life due to various circumstances and who therefore decide to be together in death instead.
Many if not most sewamono contain significant elements of this theme of societal pressures and limitations.
Important elements of kabuki include the mie (), in which the actor holds a picturesque pose to establish his character.
While many plays were originally written for kabuki, many others were taken from jōruri plays, Noh plays, folklore, or other performing traditions such as the oral tradition of the Tale of the Heike.
While jōruri plays tend to have serious, emotionally dramatic, and organized plots, plays written specifically for kabuki generally have looser, sillier plots.
One of the crucial differences in the philosophy of the two forms is that jōruri focuses primarily on the story and on the chanter who recites it, while kabuki focuses more on the actors.
A jōruri play may sacrifice the details of sets, puppets, or action in favor of the chanter, while kabuki is known to sacrifice drama and even the plot to highlight an actor's talents.
It was not uncommon in kabuki to insert or remove individual scenes from a day's schedule in order to cater to the talents or desires of an individual actor-scenes he was famed for, or that featured him, would be inserted into a program without regard to plot continuity.
For a long time, actors from one region often failed to adjust to the styles of the other region and were unsuccessful in their performance tours of that region.
Famous plays
Kanadehon Chūshingura (Treasury of Loyal Retainers) is the famous story of the Forty-seven rōnin, led by Oishi Kuranosuke, who track down their enemy and exact revenge upon him before committing seppuku as required by their code of honor upon the death of their lord, Lord Takuminokami of the Asano clan.
Yoshitsune Senbon Zakura (Yoshitsune and the Thousand Cherry Trees) follows Minamoto no Yoshitsune as he flees from agents of his brother Yoritomo.
Three Taira clan generals supposed killed in the Genpei War figure prominently, as their deaths ensure a complete end to the war and the arrival of peace, as does a kitsune named Genkurō.
* Sugawara Denju Tenarai Kagami (Sugawara and the Secrets of Calligraphy) is based on the life of famed scholar Sugawara no Michizane (845-903), who is exiled from Kyoto, and upon his death causes a number of calamities in the capital.
He is then deified, as Tenjin, kami (divine spirit) of scholarship, and worshipped in order to propitiate his angry spirit.
Actors
Actors form schools or are associated with a particular theatre.
Every actor has a stage name, which is different from the name they were born with.
These stagenames, most often those of the actor's father, grandfather, or teacher, are passed down between generations of actors' lineages, and hold great honor and importance.
Many names are associated with certain roles or acting styles, and the new possessor of each name must live up to these expectations; there is the feeling almost of the actor not only taking a name, but embodying the spirit, style, or skill of each actor to previously hold that name.
Many actors will go through at least three names over the course of their career.
The shūmei (, lit. name succession) are grand naming ceremonies held in Kabuki theatre in front of the audience.
Most often, a number of actors will participate in a single ceremony, taking on new stage-names.
Their participation in a shūmei represent their passage into a new chapter of their performing career.
Major theatres in operation
* Kanteiryū, a lettering style invented to advertise kabuki and other theatrical performances
* Kyōgen, a traditional form of Japanese comic theatre that influenced the development of kabuki
* Oshiguma, an imprint of the face make-up of kabuki actors, as artwork and souvenir
* Bunraku, a traditional Japanese puppet theatre from whose scripts many kabuki plays were adapted
*Sgt.
Kabukiman NYPD, a 1991 comedic superhero film directed by Lloyd Kaufman and Michael Herz and distributed by Troma Entertainment.
* Kabukibu!, a light novel, manga, and anime series about a boy who loves kabuki
Notes
* Ronald Cavaye (1993).
Kabuki: A Pocket Guide.
USA and Japan: Charles E. Tuttle,
* Ronald Cavaye, Paul Griffith and Akihiko Senda (2004).
A Guide to the Japanese Stage.
Japan: Kodansha International.
* Senelick, L. (2000).
The Changing Room: Sex, Drag, and Theatre.
London: Routledge.
* Facts JPN-kabuki.
25 November 2007 .
* Japanese Culture.
25 November 2007 .
* Kabuki.
25 November 2007
* Kabuki.
Ed.
Shoriya Aragoro.
9 September 1999.
25 November 2007
Further reading
