Lionel Andrés Messi Cuccittini (; born 24 June 1987)
is an Argentine professional footballer who plays as a forward and captains both Spanish club Barcelona and the Argentina national team.
Often considered the best player in the world and widely regarded as one of the greatest players of all time, Messi has won a record six FIFA Ballon d'or/Best FIFA Men's Player awards, and a record six European Golden Shoes.
He has spent his entire professional career with Barcelona, where he has won a club-record 34 trophies, including ten La Liga titles, four UEFA Champions League titles and six Copas del Rey.
A prolific goalscorer and a creative playmaker, Messi holds the records for most goals in La Liga (423), a La Liga and European league season (50), most hat-tricks in the UEFA Champions League (8), and most assists in La Liga (173) and the Copa América (13).
He has scored over 700 senior career goals for club and country.
Born and raised in central Argentina, Messi was diagnosed with a growth hormone deficiency as a child.
At age 13, he relocated to Spain to join Barcelona, who agreed to pay for his medical treatment.
After a fast progression through Barcelona's youth academy, Messi made his competitive debut aged 17 in October 2004.
Despite being injury-prone during his early career, he established himself as an integral player for the club within the next three years, finishing 2007 as a finalist for both the Ballon d'Or and FIFA World Player of the Year award, a feat he repeated the following year.
His first uninterrupted season was 2008-09, during which he helped Barcelona achieve the first treble in Spanish football.
At 22 years old, Messi won the 2009 Ballon d'Or and the 2009 FIFA World Player of the Year award by record voting margins.
Three successful seasons followed, with Messi winning three consecutive FIFA Ballons d'Or, including an unprecedented fourth.
During the 2011-12 season, he set the La Liga and European records for most goals scored in a single season, while establishing himself as Barcelona's all-time top scorer in official competitions in March 2012.
The following two seasons, Messi finished twice second for the Ballon d'Or behind Cristiano Ronaldo, his perceived career rival.
Messi regained his best form during the 2014-15 campaign, breaking the all-time goalscoring records in both La Liga and the Champions League in November 2014, and leading Barcelona to a historic second treble.
An Argentine international, Messi is his country's all-time leading goalscorer.
At youth level, he won the 2005 FIFA World Youth Championship, finishing the tournament with both the Golden Ball and Golden Shoe, and an Olympic gold medal at the 2008 Summer Olympics.
His style of play as a diminutive, left-footed dribbler drew comparisons with his compatriot Diego Maradona, who described Messi as his successor.
After his senior debut in August 2005, Messi became the youngest Argentine to play and score in a FIFA World Cup during the 2006 edition, and reached the final of the 2007 Copa América, where he was named young player of the tournament.
As the squad's captain from August 2011, he led Argentina to three consecutive finals: the 2014 FIFA World Cup, for which he won the Golden Ball, and the 2015 and 2016 Copas América.
After announcing his international retirement in 2016, he reversed his decision and led his country to qualification for the 2018 FIFA World Cup, and a third-place finish at the 2019 Copa América.
According to France Football, Messi was the world's highest-paid footballer for five years out of six between 2009 and 2014, and was ranked the world's highest-paid athlete by Forbes in 2019.
He was among Times 100 most influential people in the world in 2011 and 2012.
One of the most famous athletes in the world, Messi has been sponsored by sportswear company Adidas since 2006 and has established himself as their leading brand endorser.
Early life
Lionel Andrés Messi was born on 24 June 1987 in Rosario, the third of the four children of Jorge Messi, a steel factory manager, and his wife Celia Cuccittini, who worked in a magnet manufacturing workshop.
On his father's side, he is of Italian and Spanish descent, the great-grandson of immigrants from the northcentral Adriatic Marche region of Italy and Catalonia, and on his mother's side, he has primarily Italian ancestry.
Growing up in a tight-knit, football-loving family, "Leo" developed a passion for the sport from an early age, playing constantly with his older brothers, Rodrigo and Matías, and his cousins, Maximiliano and Emanuel Biancucchi, both of whom became professional footballers.
At the age of four he joined local club Grandoli, where he was coached by his father, though his earliest influence as a player came from his maternal grandmother, Celia, who accompanied him to training and matches.
He was greatly affected by her death, shortly before his eleventh birthday; since then, as a devout Catholic, he has celebrated his goals by looking up and pointing to the sky in tribute of his grandmother.
QTEMPLATE box|width
25%|align
right|quote
"When you saw him you would think: this kid can't play ball.
He's a dwarf, he's too fragile, too small.
But immediately you'd realise that he was born different, that he was a phenomenon and that he was going to be something impressive.
"|source
-Newell's Old Boys youth coach Adrián Coria shares his first impression of the 12-year-old Messi.
A lifelong supporter of Newell's Old Boys, Messi joined the Rosario club when he was six years old.
During the six years he played for Newell's, he scored almost 500 goals as a member of "The Machine of '87", the near-unbeatable youth side named for the year of their birth, and regularly entertained crowds by performing ball tricks during half-time of the first team's home games.
However, his future as a professional player was threatened when, at age 10, he was diagnosed with a growth hormone deficiency.
As his father's health insurance covered only two years of growth hormone treatment, which cost at least $1,000 per month, Newell's agreed to contribute, but later reneged on their promise.
He was scouted by Buenos Aires club River Plate, whose playmaker, Pablo Aimar, he idolised, but they were also unable to pay for his treatment due to the country's economic collapse.
His goalscoring idol growing up was Ronaldo, with Messi calling him "the best forward I've ever seen".
As the Messi family had relatives in Catalonia, they sought to arrange a trial with Barcelona in September 2000.
First team director Charly Rexach immediately wanted to sign him, but the board of directors hesitated; at the time it was highly unusual for European clubs to sign foreign players of such a young age.
On 14 December, an ultimatum was issued for Barcelona to prove their commitment, and Rexach, with no other paper at hand, offered a contract on a paper napkin.
In February 2001, the family relocated to Barcelona, where they moved into an apartment near the club's stadium, Camp Nou.
During his first year in Spain, Messi rarely played with the Infantiles due to a transfer conflict with Newell's; as a foreigner, he could only be fielded in friendlies and the Catalan league.
Without football, he struggled to integrate into the team; already reserved by nature, he was so quiet that his teammates initially believed he was mute.
At home, he suffered from homesickness after his mother moved back to Rosario with his brothers and little sister, María Sol, while he stayed in Barcelona with his father.
After a year at Barcelona's youth academy, La Masia, Messi was finally enrolled in the Royal Spanish Football Federation (RFEF) in February 2002.
Now playing in all competitions, he befriended his teammates, among whom were Cesc Fàbregas and Gerard Piqué.
After completing his growth hormone treatment aged 14, Messi became an integral part of the "Baby Dream Team", Barcelona's greatest-ever youth side.
During his first full season (2002-03), he was top scorer with 36 goals in 30 games for the Cadetes A, who won an unprecedented treble of the league and both the Spanish and Catalan cups.
The Copa Catalunya final, a 4-1 victory over Espanyol, became known in club lore as the partido de la máscara, the final of the mask.
A week after suffering a broken cheekbone during a league match, Messi was allowed to start the game on the condition that he wear a plastic protector; soon hindered by the mask, he took it off and scored two goals in 10 minutes before his substitution.
At the close of the season, he received an offer to join Arsenal, his first from a foreign club, but while Fàbregas and Piqué soon left for England, he chose to remain in Barcelona.
Club career
Barcelona
2003-05: Rise to the first team
QTEMPLATE box|width
30%|align
right|quote
"It seemed as if he had been playing with us all his life.
"|source
-Barcelona's then assistant coach Henk Ten Cate on Messi's first-team debut.
During the 2003-04 season, his fourth with Barcelona, Messi rapidly progressed through the club's ranks, debuting for a record five teams in a single campaign.
After being named player of the tournament in four international pre-season competitions with the Juveniles B, he played only one official match with the team before being promoted to the Juveniles A, where he scored 18 goals in 11 league games.
Messi was then one of several youth players called up to strengthen a depleted first team during the international break.
French winger Ludovic Giuly explained how a teenage Leo caught the eye in a training session with Frank Rijkaard's first team: "He destroyed us all...
They were kicking him all over the place to avoid being ridiculed by this kid, he just got up and kept on playing.
He would dribble past four players and score a goal.
Even the team's starting centre-backs were nervous.
He was an alien."
At 16 years, four months, and 23 days old, Messi made his first team debut when he came on in the 75th minute during a friendly against José Mourinho's Porto on 16 November 2003.
His performance, creating two chances and a shot on goal, impressed the technical staff, and he subsequently began training daily with the club's reserve side, Barcelona B, as well as weekly with the first team.
After his first training session with the senior squad, Barça's new star player, Ronaldinho, told his teammates that he believed the 16-year-old would become an even better player than himself.
Ronaldinho soon befriended Messi, whom he called "little brother", which greatly eased his transition into the first team.
To gain further match experience, Messi joined Barcelona C in addition to the Juveniles A, playing his first game for the third team on 29 November.
He helped save them from the relegation zone of the Tercera División, scoring five goals in ten games, including a hat-trick in eight minutes during a Copa del Rey match while man-marked by Sevilla's Sergio Ramos.
His progress was reflected in his first professional contract, signed on 4 February 2004, which lasted until 2012 and contained an initial buyout clause of €30 million.
A month later, on 6 March, he made his debut for Barcelona B in the Segunda División B, and his buyout clause automatically increased to €80 million.
He played five games with the B team that season but did not score.
Physically he was weaker than his opponents, who were often much older and taller, and in training he worked on increasing his muscle mass and overall strength in order to be able to shake off defenders.
Towards the end of the season, he returned to both youth teams, helping the Juveniles B win the league.
He finished the campaign having scored for four of his five teams with a total of 36 goals in all official competitions.
During the 2004-05 season, Messi was a guaranteed starter for the B team, playing 17 games throughout the campaign and scoring on six occasions.
Since his debut the previous November, he had not been called up to the first team again, but in October 2004, the senior players asked manager Frank Rijkaard to promote him.
Since Ronaldinho already played on the left wing, Rijkaard moved Messi from his usual position onto the right flank (though initially against the player's wishes), allowing him to cut into the centre of the pitch and shoot with his dominant left foot.
Messi made his league debut during the next match on 16 October, against Espanyol, coming on in the 82nd minute.
He scored his first senior goal on 1 May 2005, against Albacete, from an assist by Ronaldinho, becoming - at that time - the youngest-ever scorer for the club.
Barcelona, in their second season under Rijkaard, won the league for the first time in six years.
2005-08: Becoming a starting eleven player
QTEMPLATE box|width
33%|align
right|quote
"In my entire life I have never seen a player of such quality and personality at such a young age, particularly wearing the 'heavy' shirt of one of the world's great clubs.
"|source
-Fabio Capello praises the 18-year-old Messi following the Joan Gamper trophy in August 2005.
On 24 June 2005, his 18th birthday, Messi signed his first contract as a senior team player.
It made him a Barcelona player until 2010, two years less than his previous contract, but his buyout clause increased to €150 million.
His breakthrough came two months later, on 24 August, during the Joan Gamper Trophy, Barcelona's pre-season competition.
A starter for the first time, he gave a well-received performance against Fabio Capello's Juventus, receiving an ovation from the Camp Nou.
While Capello requested to loan Messi, a bid to buy him came from Inter Milan, who were willing to pay his €150 million buyout clause and triple his wages.
According to then-president Joan Laporta, it was the only time the club faced a real risk of losing Messi, but he ultimately decided to stay.
On 16 September, his contract was updated for the second time in three months and extended to 2014.
Due to issues regarding his legal status in the Royal Spanish Football Federation, Messi missed the start of La Liga, but on 26 September, he acquired Spanish citizenship and became eligible to play.
He was in the starting line-up in major matches like his first Clásico against rivals Real Madrid on 19 November, as well as Barcelona's away victory over Chelsea in the last 16 round of the Champions League.
After he had scored 8 goals in 25 games, including his first in the Champions League, his season ended prematurely during the return leg against Chelsea on 7 March 2006, when he suffered a torn hamstring.
Messi worked to regain fitness in time for the Champions League final, but on 17 May, the day of the final, he was eventually ruled out.
He was so disappointed that he did not celebrate his team's victory over Arsenal in Paris, something he later came to regret.
Already an idol to the culés, the club's supporters, he scored 17 goals during the 2007-08 campaign, the second half of his season was again marred by injuries after he suffered a torn hamstring on 15 December.
He returned to score twice in their away victory against Celtic in the last 16 round of the Champions League, becoming the competition's top scorer at that point with six goals, but reinjured himself during the return leg on 4 March 2008.
Rijkaard had fielded him despite warning from the medical staff, leading captain Carles Puyol to criticise the Spanish media for pressuring Messi to play every match.
After two unsuccessful seasons, Barcelona were in need of an overhaul, leading to the departure of Rijkaard and Ronaldinho.
Upon the latter's departure, Messi was given the number 10 shirt.
Ahead of the new season, a major concern remained his frequent muscular injuries, which had left him side-lined for a total of eight months between 2006 and 2008.
To combat the problem, the club implemented new training, nutrition, and lifestyle regimens, and assigned him a personal physiotherapist, who would travel with him during call-ups for the Argentina national team.
As a result, Messi remained virtually injury-free during the next four years, allowing him to reach his full potential.
Despite his injuries early in the year, his performances in 2008 saw him again voted runner-up for the Ballon d'Or and the FIFA World Player of the Year award, both times behind Cristiano Ronaldo.
2009-11: Sustained success
In his first uninterrupted campaign, the 2008-09 season, he scored 38 goals in all competitions, including 46 goals in La Liga, he finished the campaign as league top scorer in Spain and Europe for the second consecutive year, becoming the first player in history to win the European Golden Shoe three times.
Following an irregular start to the new season under manager Gerardo Martino, formerly of his boyhood club Newell's Old Boys, Messi suffered his fifth injury of 2013 when he tore his hamstring on 10 November, leaving him sidelined for two months.
Despite his injuries, he was voted runner-up for the FIFA Ballon d'Or, relinquishing the award after a four-year monopoly to Cristiano Ronaldo.
During the second half of the 2013-14 season, doubts persisted over Messi's form, leading to a perception among the culés that he was reserving himself for the 2014 FIFA World Cup.
Statistically, his contribution of goals, shots, and passes had dropped significantly compared to previous seasons.
He still managed to break two longstanding records in a span of seven days: a hat-trick on 16 March against Osasuna saw him overtake Paulino Alcántara's 369 goals to become Barcelona's top goalscorer in all competitions including friendlies, while another hat-trick against Real Madrid on 23 March made him the all-time top scorer in El Clásico, ahead of the 18 goals scored by former Real Madrid player Alfredo Di Stéfano.
Messi finished the campaign with his worst output in five seasons, though he still managed to score 41 goals in all competitions.
For the first time in five years, Barcelona ended the season without a major trophy; they were defeated in the Copa del Rey final by Real Madrid and lost the league in the last game to Atlético Madrid, causing Messi to be booed by sections of fans at the Camp Nou.
After prolonged speculation over his future with the club, Messi signed a new contract on 19 May 2014, only a year after his last contractual update; his salary increased to €20 million, or €36 million before taxes, the highest wage in the sport.
2014-15: A historic treble
Under new manager and former captain Luis Enrique, Messi experienced a largely injury-free start to the 2014-15 season, allowing him to break three more longstanding records towards the end of the year.
A hat-trick scored against Sevilla on 22 November made him the all-time top scorer in La Liga, as he surpassed the 59-year record of 251 league goals held by Telmo Zarra.
A third hat-trick, scored against city rivals Espanyol on 7 December, allowed him to surpass César Rodríguez as the all-time top scorer in the Derbi barceloní with 12 goals.
Messi again placed second in the FIFA Ballon d'Or behind Cristiano Ronaldo, largely owing to his second-place achievement with Argentina at the World Cup.
At the start of 2015, Barcelona were perceived to be headed for another disappointing end to the season, with renewed speculation in the media that Messi was leaving the club.
A turning point came on 11 January during a 3-1 victory over Atlético Madrid, the first time Barça's attacking trident of Messi, Luis Suárez and Neymar, dubbed "MSN", each scored in a match, marking the beginning of a highly successful run.
After five years of playing in the centre of the pitch, Messi had returned to his old position on the right wing late the previous year, by his own suggestion according to Suárez, their striker.
From there, he regained his best - arguably his best-ever - form, while Suárez and Neymar ended the team's attacking dependency on their star player.
With 58 goals from Messi, the trio scored a total of 122 goals in all competitions that season, a record in Spanish football.
Towards the end of the campaign, Messi scored in a 1-0 away win over Atlético Madrid on 17 May, securing the La Liga title.
Among his 43 league goals that season was a hat-trick scored in 11 minutes against Rayo Vallecano on 8 March, the fastest of his senior career; it was his 32nd hat-trick overall for Barcelona, allowing him to overtake Telmo Zarra with the most hat-tricks in Spanish football.
As the season's top assist provider with 18 he surpassed Luís Figo with the most assists in La Liga; he made his record 106th assist in a fixture against Levante on 15 February, in which he also scored a hat-trick.
Messi scored twice as Barcelona defeated Athletic Bilbao 3-1 in the Copa del Rey final on 30 May, achieving the sixth double in their history.
His opening goal was hailed as one of the greatest in his career; he collected the ball near the halfway line and beat four opposing players, before feinting the goalkeeper to score in a tight space by the near post.
In the Champions League, Messi scored twice and assisted on another in their 3-0 semi-final victory over Bayern Munich, now under the stewardship of Guardiola.
His second goal, which came only three minutes after his first, saw him chip the ball over goalkeeper Manuel Neuer after his dribble past Jérôme Boateng had made the defender drop to the ground; it went viral, becoming the year's most tweeted about sporting moment, and was named the best goal of the season by UEFA.
Despite a second-leg loss, Barcelona progressed to the final on 6 June in Berlin, where they defeated Juventus 3-1 to win their second treble, becoming the first team in history to do so.
Although Messi did not score, he participated in each of his side's goals, particularly the second as he forced a parried save from goalkeeper Gianluigi Buffon from which Suárez scored the match-winning goal on the rebound.
For his efforts during the season, he received the UEFA Best Player in Europe award for a second time.
2015-16: Domestic success
Messi opened the 2015-16 season by scoring twice from free kicks in Barcelona's 5-4 victory (after extra time) over Sevilla in the UEFA Super Cup.
On 16 September, he became the youngest player to make 100 appearances in the UEFA Champions League in a 1-1 away draw to Roma.
After a knee injury, he returned to the pitch on 21 November, making a substitute appearance in Barcelona's 4-0 away win over rivals Real Madrid in El Clásico.
Messi capped off the year by winning the 2015 FIFA Club World Cup Final on 20 December, collecting his fifth club trophy of 2015 as Barcelona defeated River Plate 3-0 in Yokohama.
On 30 December, Messi scored on his 500th appearance for Barcelona, in a 4-0 home win over Real Betis.
On 11 January 2016, Messi won the FIFA Ballon d'Or for a record fifth time in his career.
On 3 February, he scored a hat-trick in Barcelona's 7-0 win against Valencia in the first leg of the Copa del Rey semi-final at the Camp Nou.
In a 6-1 home win against Celta de Vigo in the league, Messi assisted Suárez from a penalty kick.
Some saw it as "a touch of genius", while others criticised it as being disrespectful to the opponent.
The Celta players never complained and their coach defended the penalty, stating, "Barca's forwards are very respectful."
The penalty routine has been compared to that of Barça icon Johan Cruyff in 1982, who was battling lung cancer, leading many fans to indicate that the penalty was a tribute to him.
Cruyff himself was "very happy" with the play, insisting "it was legal and entertaining".
On 17 February, Messi reached his 300th league goal in a 1-3 away win against Sporting de Gijón.
A few days later, he scored both goals in Barcelona's 0-2 win against Arsenal at the Emirates Stadium, in the first leg of the 2015-16 UEFA Champions League round of 16, with the second goal being Barcelona's 10,000th in official competitions.
On 17 April, Messi ended a five-match scoring drought with his 500th senior career goal for club and country in Barcelona's 2-1 home loss to Valencia.
Messi finished the 2015-16 season by setting up both goals in Barcelona's 2-0 extra time win over Sevilla in the 2016 Copa del Rey Final, at the Vicente Calderón Stadium, on 22 May 2016, as the club celebrated winning the domestic double for the second consecutive season.
In total, Messi scored 41 goals and provided 23 assists, as Barcelona's attacking trio managed a Spanish record of 131 goals throughout the season, breaking the record they had set the previous season.
2016-17: Fourth Golden Boot
QTEMPLATE box|width
33%|align
left|quote
"Messi is indispensable, but the rest of us are dispensable.
- No, the club is bigger than any manager, than any player... except Leo.
That's the reality, and you have to accept it."|source
-In an interview with Barcelona's official magazine, Javier Mascherano outlines Messi's importance to the team.
Messi opened the 2016-17 season by lifting the 2016 Supercopa de España as Barcelona's captain in the absence of the injured Andrés Iniesta; he set-up Munir's goal in a 2-0 away win over Sevilla in the first leg on 14 August, and subsequently scored and assisted in a 3-0 win in the return leg on 17 August.
Three days later, he scored two goals and provided an assist to lead Barcelona to a 6-2 victory against Real Betis in the opening game of the 2016-17 La Liga season.
On 13 September 2016, Messi scored his first hat-trick of the season in the opening game of the 2016-17 UEFA Champions League campaign against Celtic in a 7-0 victory; this was also Messi's sixth hat-trick in the Champions League, the most by any player.
A week later, Messi sustained a groin injury in a 1-1 draw against Atlético Madrid and was ruled out with injury for three weeks.
He marked his return with a goal, scoring three minutes after coming off the bench in a 4-0 home win over Deportivo de La Coruña, on 16 October.
Three days after this, he netted his thirty-seventh club hat-trick as Barcelona defeated Manchester City 4-0.
On 1 November, Messi scored his 54th Champions League group stage goal in Barcelona's 3-1 away loss to Manchester City, surpassing the previous record of 53 goals held by Raúl.
Messi finished the year with 51 goals, making him Europe's top scorer, one ahead of Zlatan Ibrahimović.
After placing second in the 2016 Ballon d'Or, on 9 January 2017 Messi also finished in second place - behind Cristiano Ronaldo once again - in the 2016 Best FIFA Men's Player Award.
On 11 January, Messi scored from a free-kick in Barcelona's 3-1 victory against Athletic Bilbao in the second leg of the round of 16 of the Copa del Rey, which enabled Barcelona to advance to the quarter-finals of the competition; with his 26th goal from a free-kick for Barcelona in all competitions, he equalled the club's all-time record, which had previously been set by Ronald Koeman.
In his next league match, on 14 January, Messi scored in a 5-0 win against Las Palmas; with this goal, he equalled Raúl's record for the most number of teams scored against in La Liga (35).
On 4 February 2017, Messi scored his 27th free-kick for Barcelona in a 3-0 home win over Athletic Bilbao in the league, overtaking Koeman as the club's all-time top-scorer from free-kicks.
On 23 April, Messi scored twice in a 3-2 away win over Real Madrid.
His game-winning goal in stoppage time was his 500th for Barcelona.
His memorable celebration saw him taking off his Barcelona shirt and holding it up to incensed Real Madrid fans - with his name and number facing the crowd.
On 27 May, Messi scored a goal and set up another for Paco Alcácer in the 2017 Copa del Rey Final, helping Barcelona to a 3-1 victory over Alavés, and was named Man of the Match.
In total, Messi finished the 2016-17 season with 54 goals and 16 assists, while his 37 goals in La Liga saw him claim both the Pichichi and European Golden Boot Awards for the fourth time in his career.
2017-18: Domestic double and a record fifth Golden Boot
Messi opened the 2017-18 season by converting a penalty in Barcelona's 1-3 first leg home defeat to Real Madrid in Supercopa de España.
Thereby, Messi also extended his El Clásico goalscoring record with the goal being his 24th official and 25th overall.
On 9 September, Messi scored his first hat-trick of the 2017-18 league campaign, against Espanyol in derbi barceloní, thus helping to secure a 5-0 home victory for Blaugrana over local rivals.
Messi netted twice against Gianluigi Buffon, on 12 September, as Barça defeated the last season's Italian champions Juventus 3-0 at home in the UEFA Champions League.
On 19 September, Messi found the net four times in a 6-1 trashing of Eibar at the Camp Nou in La Liga.
Three weeks later, on 1 October, Messi surpassed his former teammate Carles Puyol to become the third highest appearance maker in the club's history, as he helped Barça defeat Las Palmas 3-0 by assisting Sergio Busquets' opener and later adding two himself in his 594th official game for the club; the league game was played behind closed doors at the Camp Nou due to violence in Catalonia relating to an ongoing independence referendum.
On 18 October, in his 122nd European club appearance, Messi scored his 97th UEFA Champions League goal, and his 100th in all UEFA club competitions, in a 3-1 home victory over Olympiakos.
Messi became only the second player after Cristiano Ronaldo to reach this century milestone, but accomplished it in 21 fewer appearances than the Portuguese counterpart.
On 4 November, he made his 600th appearance for Barcelona in a 2-1 home win over Sevilla in La Liga.
Following the reception of his fourth Golden Boot, Messi signed a new deal with Barcelona on 25 November, keeping him with the club through the 2020-21 season.
His buyout clause was set at €700 million.
On 7 January 2018, Messi made his 400th La Liga appearance with Barcelona in a 3-0 home win over Levante, marking the occasion with his 144th league assist and 365th league goal for the club, the latter of which saw him equal Gerd Müller's record for the most league goals scored for the same club in one of Europe's top five divisions.
A week later, he broke the record, scoring his 366th La Liga goal from a free kick in a 4-2 away win against Real Sociedad.
On 14 March, Messi scored his 99th and 100th Champions League goals in a 3-0 home win over Chelsea, becoming only the second player after Cristiano Ronaldo to reach this landmark, and achieving it at a younger age, in fewer appearances, having played fewer minutes, and having taken fewer shots than his Portuguese counterpart.
His opening goal, which came after only two minutes and eight seconds, was also the fastest of his career, as Barcelona advanced to the quarter-finals of the competition for the eleventh consecutive season.
On 7 April, he scored a hat-trick in a 3-1 win over Leganés including his sixth goal scored from a free-kick for the season, matching the record set by former teammate Ronaldinho.
He once again finished the season as the top scorer in La Liga, with 34 goals, which also saw him win his fifth Golden Shoe award.
On 29 April, Messi scored a hat-trick in a 4-2 away win over Deportivo de La Coruña, which saw Barcelona claim their 25th league title.
On 9 May, Messi scored as Barcelona defeated Villarreal 5-1 to set the longest unbeaten streak (43 games) in La Liga history.
2018-19: Barcelona captain, tenth La Liga title, and a record sixth Golden Boot
With the departure of former captain Andrés Iniesta in May 2018, Messi was named the team's new captain for the following season.
On 12 August 2018, he lifted his first title as Barcelona's captain, the Supercopa de España, following a 2-1 victory over Sevilla.
On 19 August, Messi scored twice in helping Barcelona defeat Alavés 3-0 in their first La Liga match of the season, with his first goal, a free kick that he rolled under the jumping Alavés wall, making history in being Barcelona's 6000th goal in La Liga.
On 18 September, Messi scored a hat-trick in a 4-0 home win over PSV Eindhoven in Barcelona's opening Champions League group stage match of the season, setting a new record for most hat-tricks in the competition, with eight.
On 20 October, Messi scored and assisted in a 4-2 home win over Sevilla, but was later forced off in the 26th minute after falling awkwardly and injuring his right arm; tests later confirmed that he had fractured his radial bone, ruling him out for approximately three weeks.
On 8 December, Messi scored two free kicks - his ninth and tenth goals from set pieces during the calendar year - in a 4-0 away win over Catalan Derby rivals Espanyol in La Liga; this was the first time ever that he had managed such a feat in the league.
His first goal was also his 10th league goal of the season, making him the first player ever to reach double figures in La Liga for 13 consecutive seasons.
On 13 January 2019, Messi scored his 400th La Liga goal in his 435th league appearance in a 3-0 home win over Eibar, becoming the first player ever to manage this tally in just one of Europe's top five leagues.
On 2 February, Messi scored twice in a 2-2 draw against Valencia, with his first goal coming from the penalty spot, his 50th La Liga penalty goal; as such, he became only the third player in La Liga history after Cristiano Ronaldo and Hugo Sánchez to score 50 penalties in the competition.
Later that month, the club admitted they had begun preparations for Messi's future retirement.
On 23 February, Messi scored the 50th hat-trick of his career and also provided an assist for Suárez, as he helped Barcelona come from behind to achieve a 4-2 away victory over Sevilla in La Liga; the goal was also his 650th career goal for club and country at senior level.
On 16 April, Messi scored twice in a 3-0 home victory over Manchester United in the second leg of the Champions League quarter-finals to give Barcelona a 4-0 aggregate win, which saw Barcelona progress to the semi-finals of the competition for the first time since 2015; these were also his first goals in the Champions League quarter-finals since 2013.
On 27 April, Messi came off the bench and scored the only goal in a 1-0 home win over Levante, which allowed Barcelona to clinch the league title; this was his 450th La Liga appearance, and his first league title as Barcelona's captain.
On 1 May, Messi scored twice in a 3-0 home win over Liverpool in the first leg of the Champions League semi-finals; his second goal of the match, a 35-yard free kick, was the 600th senior club goal of his career, all of which had been scored with Barcelona.
In the return leg six days later at Anfield, Barcelona suffered a 4-0 away defeat, which saw Liverpool advance to the final 4-3 on aggregate.
On 19 May, in Barcelona's final La Liga match of the season, Messi scored twice in a 2-2 away draw against Eibar (his 49th and 50th goals of the season in all competitions), which saw him capture his sixth Pichichi Trophy as the league's top scorer, with 36 goals in 34 appearances; with six titles, he equalled Zarra as the player with the most top-scorer awards in La Liga.
He also captured his sixth Golden Shoe award, and a record third consecutive award since the 2016-17 season.
On 25 May, Messi scored his final goal of the season in a 2-1 defeat to Valencia in the 2019 Copa del Rey Final.
2019-20: A record sixth FIFA Player of the Year Award
On 5 August 2019, it was announced that Messi would miss Barcelona's US tour after sustaining a right calf injury.
On 19 August, Messi's chipped goal from the edge of the box against Real Betis was nominated for the 2019 FIFA Puskás Award.
Later that month, he suffered another setback following the return of his calf injury, which ruled him out of the opening game of the season; as a result, he was sidelined indefinitely, and was only expected to return to action with Barcelona after the September international break.
On 2 September, Messi was shortlisted as one of the three finalists for both the 2019 FIFA Puskás Award and the 2019 Best FIFA Men's Player Award, with Messi winning the latter on 23 September.
On 23 October, Messi scored his first Champions League goal of the season in a 2-1 away win over Slavia Prague, becoming the first player to score in 15 consecutive Champions League seasons (excluding qualifying rounds); he also equalled Raúl and Cristiano Ronaldo's shared record of the most sides scored against in the competition (33).
On 29 October, Messi scored and assisted twice in a 5-1 home win over Real Valladolid in La Liga; his first goal - a set piece from 35 yards - was the 50th free-kick of his career.
His goals (608) also saw him overtake Cristiano Ronaldo's senior goal tally (606) at club level.
International career
2004-05: Success at youth level
As a dual Argentine-Spanish national, Messi was eligible to play for the national team of both countries.
Selectors for Spain's Under-17 squad began pursuing him in 2003 after Barcelona's director of football, Carles Rexach, alerted the Royal Spanish Football Federation to their young player.
Messi declined the offer, having aspired to represent La Albiceleste since childhood.
To further prevent Spain from taking him, the Argentine Football Association organised two under-20 friendlies in June 2004, against Paraguay and Uruguay, with the purpose of finalising his status as an Argentina player in FIFA.
Five days after his 17th birthday, on 29 June, he made his debut for his country against Paraguay, scoring once and providing two assists in their 8-0 victory.
He was subsequently included in the squad for the South American Youth Championship, held in Colombia in February 2005.
As he lacked the stamina of his teammates, the result of his former growth hormone deficiency, he was used as a substitute in six of the nine games.
After being named man of the match against Venezuela, he scored the winning 2-1 goal in the crucial last match against Brazil, thereby securing their third-place qualification for the FIFA World Youth Championship.
Aware of his physical limitations, Messi employed a personal trainer to increase his muscle mass, returning to the squad in an improved condition in time for the World Youth Championship, hosted by the Netherlands in June 2005.
After he was left out of the starting line-up in their first match against the United States, a 1-0 defeat, the squad's senior players asked manager Francisco Ferraro to let Messi start, as they considered him their best player.
After helping the team defeat Egypt and Germany to progress past the group stage, Messi proved decisive in the knockout phase as he scored their equaliser against Colombia, provided a goal and an assist against title favourites Spain, and scored their opening goal against reigning champions Brazil.
Ahead of the final, he was awarded the Golden Ball as the best player of the tournament.
He scored two penalties in their 2-1 victory over Nigeria, clinching Argentina's fifth championship and finishing the tournament as top scorer with 6 goals.
His performances drew comparisons with compatriot Diego Maradona, who had led Argentina to the title in 1979.
Messi was reportedly found weeping in the dressing room after his sending-off.
He returned to the team on 3 September in their World Cup qualifier defeat to Paraguay, which he had declared his "re-debut" ahead of the match.
Messi started his first game in the next qualifying match against Peru, in which he was able to win a crucial penalty that secured their victory.
After the match, Pékerman described him as "a jewel".
He subsequently made regular appearances for the team ahead of Argentina's participation in the 2006 FIFA World Cup, scoring his first goal in a friendly against Croatia on 1 March 2006.
A hamstring injury sustained a week later jeopardised his presence in the World Cup, but he was nevertheless selected for Pékerman's squad and regained fitness in time for the start of the tournament.
During the World Cup in Germany, Messi witnessed their opening match victory against the Ivory Coast from the substitutes' bench.
In the next match, against Serbia and Montenegro, he became the youngest player to represent Argentina at a FIFA World Cup when he came on as a substitute in the 74th minute.
He assisted their fourth strike within minutes and scored the final goal in their 6-0 victory, making him the youngest scorer in the tournament and the sixth-youngest goalscorer in the history of the World Cup.
As their progression to the knockout phase was secured, several starters were rested during the last group match.
Messi consequently started the game against the Netherlands, a 0-0 draw, as they won their group on goal differential.
In the round of 16 match against Mexico, played on his 19th birthday, Messi came on in the 84th minute, with the score tied at 1-1.
He appeared to score a goal, but it was contentiously ruled offside, with the team needing a late goal in extra time to proceed.
He did not play in the quarter-final against Germany, during which Argentina were eliminated 4-2 in a penalty shootout.
Back home, Pékerman's decision to leave him on the bench against Germany led to widespread criticism from those who believed Messi could have changed the outcome of the match in Argentina's favour.
2007-08: Copa América final and Olympic gold
As Messi evolved into one of the best players in the world, he secured a place in Alfio Basile's starting line-up, as part of a team considered favourites to win the 2007 Copa América, held in Venezuela.
As they had secured their place in the knockout phase, Messi started the next game on the bench, coming on in the last 25 minutes with the score at 0-0 to help his team defeat Paraguay by assisting their only goal.
At the quarter-final stage, where the group winners faced Peru, he scored the second goal of a 4-0 victory that saw them through to the semi-final, during which he chipped the ball over Mexico's goalkeeper to ensure another 3-0 win.
In a surprise defeat, Argentina lost the final 3-0 to a Brazil squad that lacked several of the nation's best players.
Their unexpected loss was followed by much criticism in Argentina, though Messi was mostly exempt due to his young age and secondary status to star player Juan Román Riquelme.
He was named the best young player of the tournament by CONMEBOL.
Ahead of the 2008 Summer Olympics, Barcelona legally barred Messi from representing Argentina at the tournament as it coincided with their Champions League qualifying matches.
After interference from newly appointed Barcelona manager Pep Guardiola, who had won the tournament in 1992, Messi was permitted to join Sergio Batista's under-23 squad in Beijing.
During the first match, he scored the opening goal and assisted another in their 2-1 victory over the Ivory Coast.
Following a 1-0 win in the next group match against Australia, ensuring their quarter-final qualification, Messi was rested during the game against Serbia, while his side won the match to finish first in their group.
Against the Netherlands, he again scored the first goal and assisted a second strike to help his team to a 2-1 win in extra time.
After a 3-0 semi-final victory over Brazil, Messi assisted the only goal in the final as Argentina defeated Nigeria to claim Olympic gold medals.
Along with Riquelme, Messi was singled out by FIFA as the stand-out player from the tournament's best team.
2008-11: Collective decline
From late 2008, the national team experienced a three-year period marked by poor performances.
Under manager Diego Maradona, who had led Argentina to World Cup victory as a player, the team struggled to qualify for the 2010 World Cup, securing their place in the tournament only after defeating Uruguay 1-0 in their last qualifying match.
Maradona was criticised for his strategic decisions, which included playing Messi out of his usual position.
In eight qualifying matches under Maradona's stewardship, Messi scored only one goal, netting the opening goal in the first such match, a 4-0 victory over Venezuela.
Overall, Messi scored four goals in 18 appearances during the qualifying process.
In the round of 16, they defeated Mexico 3-1, with Messi assisting their first goal, a controversial strike that stood despite being offside.
Argentina were eliminated in the quarter-final against Germany, at the same stage of the tournament and by the same opponent as four years earlier.
Their 4-0 loss was their worst margin of defeat since 1974.
FIFA subsequently identified Messi as one of the tournament's 10 best players, citing his "outstanding" pace and creativity and "spectacular and efficient" dribbling, shooting and passing.
Back home, however, Messi was the subject of harsher judgement.
As the perceived best player in the world, he had been expected to lead an average team to the title, as Maradona arguably did in 1986, but he had failed to replicate his performances at Barcelona with the national team, leading to the accusation that he cared less about his country than his club.
Maradona was replaced by Sergio Batista, who had orchestrated Argentina's Olympic victory.
Batista publicly stated that he intended to build the team around Messi, employing him as a false nine within a 4-3-3 system, as used to much success by Barcelona.
Although Messi scored a record 53 goals during the 2010-11 club season, he had not scored for Argentina in an official match since March 2009.
In a further redesign of the team, Sabella dismissed Tevez and brought in players with whom Messi had won the World Youth Championship and Olympic Games.
Now playing in a free role in an improving team, Messi ended his goal drought by scoring during their first World Cup qualifying match against Chile on 7 October, his first official goal for Argentina in two-and-a-half years.
His first hat-trick with the Albicelestes came in a friendly against Switzerland on 29 February 2012, followed by two more hat-tricks over the next year-and-a-half in friendlies against Brazil and Guatemala.
Messi then helped the team secure their place in the 2014 World Cup with a 5-2 victory over Paraguay on 10 September 2013; in addition to providing an assist, he scored twice from a penalty kick, taking his international tally to 37 goals to become Argentina's second-highest goalscorer behind Batistuta.
Overall, he had scored a total of 10 goals in 14 matches during the qualifying campaign.
Concurrently with his bettered performances, his relationship with his compatriots improved, as he gradually began to be perceived more favourably in Argentina.
2014-15: World Cup and Copa América finals
Ahead of the World Cup in Brazil, doubts persisted over Messi's form, as he finished an unsuccessful and injury-plagued season with Barcelona.
At the start of the tournament, however, he gave strong performances, being elected man of the match in their first four matches.
In his first World Cup match as captain, he led them to a 2-1 victory over Bosnia and Herzegovina; he helped create Sead Kolašinac's own goal and scored their second strike after a dribble past three players, his first World Cup goal since his debut in the tournament eight years earlier.
During the second match against Iran, he scored an injury-time goal from out to end the game in a 1-0 win, securing their qualification for the knockout phase.
He scored twice in the last group match, a 3-2 victory over Nigeria, his second goal from a free kick, as they finished first in their group.
Messi assisted a late goal in extra time to ensure a 1-0 win against Switzerland in the round of 16, before starting the play that led to their match-winning 1-0 goal in the quarter-final against Belgium, helping Argentina progress to the semi-final of the World Cup for the first time since 1990.
Following a 0-0 draw in extra time, they eliminated the Netherlands 4-2 in a penalty shootout to reach the final, with Messi scoring his team's first penalty.
Billed as Messi versus Germany, the world's best player against the best team, the final was a repeat of the 1990 final featuring Diego Maradona.
Within the first half-hour, Messi had started the play that led to a goal, but it was ruled offside.
He missed several opportunities to open the scoring throughout the match, in particular at the start of the second half when his breakaway effort went wide of the far post.
Substitute Mario Götze finally scored in the 113th minute, followed in the last minute of extra time by a free kick that Messi sent over the net, as Germany won the match 1-0 to claim the World Cup.
At the conclusion of the final, Messi was awarded the Golden Ball as the best player of the tournament.
In addition to being the joint third-highest goalscorer, with four goals and an assist, he created the most chances, completed the most dribbling runs, made the most deliveries into the penalty area and produced the most throughballs in the competition.
However, his selection drew criticism due to his lack of goals in the knockout round; FIFA President Sepp Blatter expressed his surprise, while Maradona suggested that Messi had undeservedly been chosen for marketing purposes.
Another final appearance, the third of Messi's senior international career, followed in the 2015 Copa América, held in Chile.
Under the stewardship of former Barcelona manager Gerardo Martino, Argentina entered the tournament as title contenders due to their second-place achievement at the World Cup.
During the opening match against Paraguay, they were ahead two goals by half-time but lost their lead to end the match in a 2-2 draw; Messi had scored from a penalty kick, netting his only goal in the tournament.
Following a 1-0 win against defending champions Uruguay, Messi earned his 100th cap for his country in the final group match, a 1-0 win over Jamaica, becoming only the fifth Argentine to achieve this milestone.
In his 100 appearances, he had scored a total of 46 goals for Argentina, 22 of which came in official competitive matches.
In the quarter-final, they created numerous chances, including a rebound header by Messi, but were repeatedly denied by Colombia's goalkeeper, and ultimately ended the match scoreless, leading to a 5-4 penalty shootout in their favour, with Messi netting his team's first spot kick.
At the semi-final stage, Messi excelled as playmaker as he provided three assists and helped create three more goals in his side's 6-1 victory over Paraguay, receiving applause from the initially hostile crowd.
At the close of the tournament, he was reportedly selected to receive the Most Valuable Player award but rejected the honour.
As Argentina continued a trophy drought that began in 1993, the World Cup and Copa América defeats again brought intense criticism for Messi from Argentine media and fans.
2016:
Copa América Centenario, retirement, and return
Messi's place in Argentina's Copa América Centenario squad was initially put in jeopardy when he sustained a back injury in a 1-0 friendly win over Honduras in a pre-Copa América warm-up match on 27 May 2016.
It was later reported that he had suffered a deep bruise in his lumbar region.
He was later left on the bench in Argentina's 2-1 opening win over defending champions Chile on 6 June due to concerns regarding his fitness.
Although Messi was declared match-fit for his nation's second group match against Panama on 10 June, Martino left him on the bench once again; he replaced Augusto Fernández in the 61st minute and subsequently scored a hat-trick in 19 minutes, also starting the play which led to Sergio Agüero's goal, as the match ended in a 5-0 victory, sealing Argentina's place in the quarter-finals of the competition; he was elected man of the match for his performance.
QTEMPLATE box|width
30%|align
right|quote
"Did it annoy me that Messi took the record?
A little, yes.
You go around the world and people say, 'he's the top scorer for the Argentina national team.'
But the advantage I have is that I'm second to an extraterrestrial."|source
-Gabriel Batistuta on the consolation of Messi breaking his record.
On 18 June 2016, in the quarter-final of the Copa América against Venezuela, Messi produced another man of the match performance, assisting two goals and scoring another in a 4-1 victory, which enabled him to equal Gabriel Batistuta's national record of 54 goals in official international matches.
This record was broken three days later when Messi scored in a 4-0 win in the semi-final of the Copa América against hosts the United States; he also assisted two goals during the match as Argentina sealed a place in the final of the competition for a second consecutive year, and was named man of the match once again.
During a repeat of the previous year's final on 26 June, Argentina once again lost to Chile on penalties after a 0-0 deadlock, resulting in Messi's third consecutive defeat in a major tournament final with Argentina, and his fourth overall.
After the match, Messi, who had missed his penalty in the shootout, announced his retirement from international football.
He stated, "I tried my hardest.
The team has ended for me, a decision made."
Chile coach Juan Antonio Pizzi said after the match, "My generation can't compare him to Maradona that's for my generation, because of what Maradona did for Argentine football.
But I think the best player ever played today here in the United States."
Messi finished the tournament as the second highest scorer, behind Eduardo Vargas, with five goals, and was the highest assist provider with four assists, also winning more Man of the Match awards than any other player in the tournament (3); he was named to the team of the tournament for his performances, but missed out on the Golden Ball Award for best player, which went to Alexis Sánchez.
"Don't go, Leo"
Following his announcement, a campaign began in Argentina for Messi to change his mind about retiring.
He was greeted by fans with signs like "Don't go, Leo" when the team landed in Buenos Aires.
President of Argentina Mauricio Macri urged Messi not to quit, stating, "We are lucky, it is one of life's pleasures, it is a gift from God to have the best player in the world in a footballing country like ours...
Lionel Messi is the greatest thing we have in Argentina and we must take care of him."
Mayor of Buenos Aires Horacio Rodríguez Larreta unveiled a statue of Messi in the capital to convince him to reconsider retirement.
On social networks, NoTeVayasLeo became a global trending topic, and even a playlist on Spotify.
The campaign also continued in the streets and avenues of the Argentine capital, with about 50,000 supporters going to the Obelisco de Buenos Aires on 2 July, using the same slogan.
Return
QTEMPLATE box|quote
"A lot of things went through my mind on the night of the final and I gave serious thought to quitting, but my love for my country and this shirt is too great.
"| source
-Messi reversing his decision from retiring on 12 August 2016|align
left|width
30%
Just a week after Messi announced his international retirement, Argentine newspaper La Nación reported that he was reconsidering playing for Argentina at the 2018 FIFA World Cup qualifiers in September.
On 12 August, it was confirmed that Messi had reversed his decision to retire from international football, and he was included in the squad for the national team's upcoming 2018 World Cup qualifiers.
On 1 September 2016, in his first game back, he scored in a 1-0 home win over Uruguay in a 2018 World Cup qualifier.
On 28 March 2017, Messi was suspended for four international games for insulting an assistant referee in a game against Chile on 23 March 2017.
He was also fined CHF 10,000.
On 5 May 2017, Messi's four match ban as well as his 10,000 CHF fine was lifted by FIFA after Argentina Football Association appealed against his suspension, which meant he could now play Argentina's remaining World Cup Qualifiers.
Argentina's place in the 2018 World Cup was in jeopardy going into their final qualifying match as they were sixth in their group, outside the five possible CONMEBOL World Cup qualifying spots, meaning they risked failing to qualify for the World Cup for the first time since 1970.
On 10 October 2017, Messi led his country to World Cup qualification in scoring a hat-trick as Argentina came from behind to defeat Ecuador 3-1 away; Argentina had not defeated Ecuador in Quito since 2001.
2018: World Cup
QTEMPLATE box|width
30%|align
left|quote
"The squad is the worst in their history.
Even having the best player in the world was not capable of creating a competitive team.
All the decline of recent times was hidden by this unrivalled genius Messi"|source
-Former Argentine player Osvaldo Ardiles on the decline in quality of Argentina being masked by Messi.
Following on from their poor qualification campaign, salvaged by Messi, expectations were not high going into the 2018 World Cup, with the team, without an injured Messi, losing 6-1 to Spain in March 2018.
Prior to Argentina's opener, there was speculation in the media over whether this would be Messi's final World Cup.
In the team's opening group match against Iceland on 16 June, Messi missed a potential match-winning penalty in an eventual 1-1 draw.
In Argentina's second game of the 2018 World Cup on 21 June, the team lost 3-0 to Croatia.
Post match the Argentina coach Jorge Sampaoli spoke of the lack of quality in the team surrounding Messi, "the reality of the Argentina squad clouds his Messi's brilliance".
Croatia midfielder Luka Modrić also stated post match, "Messi is an incredible player but he can't do everything alone."
In Argentina's final group match against Nigeria at the Krestovsky Stadium, Saint Petersburg on 26 June, Messi scored the opening goal in an eventual 2-1 victory, becoming the third Argentine after Diego Maradona and Gabriel Batistuta to score in three different World Cups; he also became the first player to score in the World Cup in his teens, twenties, and his thirties.
A goal of the tournament contender, Messi received a long pass from midfield and controlled the ball on the run with two touches before striking it across goal into the net with his weaker right foot.
Argentina progressed to the second round as group runners-up behind Croatia.
In the round of 16 match against eventual champions France on 30 June, Messi set up Gabriel Mercado's and Sergio Agüero's goals in a 4-3 defeat, which saw Argentina eliminated from the World Cup.
With his two assists in his team's second round fixture, Messi became the first player to provide an assist in the last four World Cups, and also became the first player to provide two assists in a match for Argentina since Diego Maradona had managed the same feat against South Korea in 1986.
Following the tournament, Messi stated that he would not participate in Argentina's friendlies against Guatemala and Colombia in September 2018, and commented that it would be unlikely that he would represent his nation for the remainder of the calendar year.
Messi's absence from the national team and his continued failure to win a title with Argentina prompted speculation in the media that Messi might retire from international football once again.
In March 2019, however, he was called up to the Argentina squad once again for the team's friendlies against Venezuela and Morocco later that month.
He made his international return on 22 March, in a 3-1 friendly defeat to Venezuela, in Madrid.
2019:
Copa América
On 21 May 2019, Messi was included in Lionel Scaloni's final 23-man Argentina squad for the 2019 Copa América.
In Argentina's second group match of the tournament on 19 June, Messi scored the equalising goal from the penalty spot in a 1-1 draw against Paraguay.
After coming under criticism in the media over his performance following Argentina's 2-0 victory over Venezuela in the quarter-finals at the Maracanã Stadium on 28 June, Messi commented that it had not been his best Copa América, while also criticising the poor quality of the pitches.
Following Argentina's 2-0 defeat to hosts Brazil in the semi-finals on 2 July, Messi was critical of the refereeing during the match.
In the third-place match against Chile on 6 July, Messi set-up Agüero's opening goal from a free kick in an eventual 2-1 win, to help Argentina capture the bronze medal; however, he was sent off along with Gary Medel in the 37th minute of play, after being involved in an altercation with the Chilean.
Following the match, Messi refused to collect his medal, and implied in a post-match interview that his comments following the semi-final led to his sending off.
Messi later issued an apology for his comments, but was fined $1,500 and was handed a one-match ban by CONMEBOL, which ruled him out of Argentina's next World Cup qualifier.
On 2 August, Messi was banned for three months from international football and was fined $50,000 by CONMEBOL for his comments against the referee's decisions; this ban meant he would miss Argentina's friendly matches against Chile, Mexico and Germany in September and October.
Player profile
Style of play
Due to his short stature, Messi has a lower centre of gravity than taller players, which gives him greater agility, allowing him to change direction more quickly and evade opposing tackles; this has led the Spanish media to dub him La Pulga Atómica ("The Atomic Flea").
Despite being physically unimposing, he possesses significant upper-body strength, which, combined with his low centre of gravity and resulting balance, aids him in withstanding physical challenges from opponents; he has consequently been noted for his lack of diving in a sport rife with playacting.
His short, strong legs allow him to excel in short bursts of acceleration while his quick feet enable him to retain control of the ball when dribbling at speed.
His former Barcelona manager Pep Guardiola once stated, "Messi is the only player that runs faster with the ball than he does without it."
One of the most prolific goalscorers and clinical finishers of all time, Messi is known for his powerful and accurate striking ability from both inside and outside the area, as well as his positioning, quick reactions, and ability to make attacking runs to beat the defensive line.
While he is renowned for his eye for goal, he also functions in a playmaking role, courtesy of his vision and precise passing.
Moreover, he is an accurate free kick and penalty kick taker, though his ability on penalties has somewhat deteriorated in recent seasons.
Although his conversion rate from free kicks was initially low towards the beginning of his career, he later developed into one of the best free kick takers in the world, and was even considered by certain pundits to be one of the greatest set piece specialists of all time.
Messi's pace and technical ability enable him to undertake individual dribbling runs towards goal, in particular during counterattacks, usually starting from the halfway line or the right side of the pitch.
and one of the greatest of all time, with regard to this ability, his former Argentina manager Diego Maradona has said of him, "The ball stays glued to his foot; I've seen great players in my career, but I've never seen anyone with Messi's ball control."
while he was increasingly deployed in a deeper, free playmaking role in later seasons.
Under Valverde, Messi played in a variety of roles.
While he occasionally continued to be deployed in a deeper role, from which he could make runs from behind into the box, or even on the right wing or as a false nine, he was also used in a more offensive, central role in a 4-2-3-1,
As his career advanced, and his tendency to dribble diminished slightly with age, Messi began to dictate play in deeper areas of the pitch, and developed into one of the best passers and playmakers in world football.
His work-rate off the ball and defensive responsibilities also decreased as his career progressed; by covering less ground on the pitch, and instead conserving his energy for short bursts of speed, he was able to improve his efficiency, movement, and positional play, and was also able to avoid muscular injuries, despite often playing a large number of matches throughout a particular season on a consistent basis.
Indeed, while he was injury-prone in his early career, he was later able to improve his injury record by running less off the ball, and by adopting a stricter diet, training regime, and sleep schedule.
With the Argentina national team, Messi has similarly played anywhere along the frontline; under various managers, he has been employed on the right wing, as a false nine, as an out-and-out striker, in a supporting role alongside another forward, or in a deeper, free creative role as a classic number 10 playmaker or attacking midfielder behind the strikers.
Reception
QTEMPLATE box|width
33%|align
right|quote
"I've seen the player who will inherit my place in Argentinian football and his name is Messi."|source
-Diego Maradona hails the 18-year-old Messi as his successor in February 2006.
Four years later, after Messi had won his first Ballon d'Or by a record margin, the public debate regarding his qualities as a player moved beyond his status in contemporary football to the possibility that he was the greatest player in history.
An early proponent was his then-manager Pep Guardiola, who, as early as August 2009, declared Messi to be the best player he had ever seen.
In the following years, this opinion gained greater acceptance among pundits, managers, former and current players, and by the end of Barça's second treble-winning season, Messi's superiority, ahead of Maradona and Pelé, had become the predominant view among insiders in continental Europe.
A frequent dismissal, however, has centred on the fact that Messi has not won the FIFA World Cup with Argentina, leading some in the sport to instead cite him as the best club player in history., have expressed their belief that Messi has overtaken Maradona as the best player in history.
In Argentine society, Messi is generally held in lesser esteem than Maradona, a consequence of not only his perceived uneven performances with the national team, but also of differences in class, personality, and background.
Messi is in some ways the antithesis of his predecessor: where Maradona was an extroverted, controversial character who rose to greatness from the slums, Messi is reserved and unassuming, an unremarkable man outside of football.
An enduring mark against him is the fact that, although through no fault of his own, he never proved himself in the Argentine Primera División as an upcoming player, achieving stardom overseas from a young age, Moreover, several pundits and footballing figures, including Maradona, have also questioned Messi's leadership with Argentina at times, despite his playing ability.
In November 2016, with the Argentine Football Association being run by a FIFA committee for emergency due to an economic crisis, it was reported that three of the national team's security staff told Messi that they haven't been given their salaries for six months.
He stepped in and paid the salaries of the three members.
Comparisons to Cristiano Ronaldo
Among his contemporary peers, Messi is most often compared and contrasted with Portuguese forward Cristiano Ronaldo, as part of an ongoing rivalry that has been compared to past sports rivalries like the Muhammad Ali-Joe Frazier rivalry in boxing, the Björn Borg-John McEnroe rivalry in tennis, and the Ayrton Senna-Alain Prost rivalry from Formula One motor racing.
Although Messi has at times denied any rivalry, they are widely believed to push one another in their aim to be the best player in the world: with Messi winning six FIFA World's Best Player awards to Ronaldo's five, and six European Golden Shoes to Ronaldo's four.
Pundits and fans regularly argue the individual merits of both players; beyond their playing styles, the debate also revolves around their differing physiques-Ronaldo is with a muscular build-and contrasting public personalities, with Ronaldo's self-confidence and theatrics a foil to Messi's humility.
From 2009-10 to 2017-18, Messi faced Ronaldo at least twice every season in El Clásico, which ranks among the world's most viewed annual sports events.
In popular culture
According to France Football, Messi was the world's highest-paid footballer for five years out of six between 2009 and 2014; he was the first player to exceed the €40 million benchmark, with earnings of €41 million in 2013, and the €50-€60 million points, with income of €65 million in 2014.
Messi was second on Forbes list of the world's highest-paid athletes (after Cristiano Ronaldo) with income of $81.4 million from his salary and endorsements in 2015-16.
In 2018 he was the first player to exceed the €100m benchmark for a calendar year, with earnings of €126m ($154m) in combined income from salaries, bonuses and endorsements.
Forbes ranked him the world's highest-paid athlete in 2019.
Since 2008, he has been Barcelona's highest-paid player, receiving a salary that increased incrementally from €7.8 million to €13 million over the next five years.
His buyout clause is set at $835 million (€700 million).
His main sponsor since 2006 is the sportswear company Adidas.
As Barcelona's leading youth prospect, he had been signed with Nike since age 14, but transferred to Adidas after they successfully challenged their rival's claim to his image rights in court.
Over time, Messi established himself as their leading brand endorser; Since 2017, Messi has worn the latest version of the Adidas Nemeziz.
As a commercial entity, Messi's marketing brand has been based exclusively on his talents and achievements as a player, in contrast to arguably more glamorous players like Cristiano Ronaldo and David Beckham.
At the start of his career, he thus mainly held sponsorship contracts with companies that employ sports-oriented marketing, such as Adidas, Pepsi, and Konami.
From 2010 onwards, concurrently with his increased achievements as a player, his marketing appeal widened, leading to long-term endorsement deals with luxury brands Dolce & Gabbana and Audemars Piguet.
Messi is also a global brand ambassador for Gillette, Turkish Airlines, Ooredoo, and Tata Motors, among other companies.
Additionally, Messi was the face of Konami's video game series Pro Evolution Soccer, appearing on the covers of PES 2009, PES 2010, PES 2011 and PES 2020.
He subsequently signed with rival company EA Sports to become the face of their series FIFA and has since appeared on four consecutive covers from FIFA 13 to FIFA 16.
His 'Point to the Sky' goal celebration first appears in FIFA 14.
Messi's global popularity and influence are well documented.
He was among the Time 100, an annual list of the world's most influential people as published by Time, in 2011 and 2012.
His fanbase on the social media website Facebook is among the largest of all public figures: within seven hours of its launch in April 2011, his Facebook page had nearly seven million followers, and by November 2013, he had become only the second sportsperson, after Cristiano Ronaldo, to amass over 50 million followers.
He has over 130 million Instagram followers, the second highest for a sportsperson, after Cristiano Ronaldo.
According to a 2014 survey by sports research firm Repucom in 15 international markets, Messi was familiar to 87% of respondents around the world, of whom 78% perceived him favourably, making him the second-most recognised player globally, behind Ronaldo, and the most likable of all contemporary players.
Other events have illustrated Messi's presence in popular culture.
A solid gold replica of his left foot, weighing and valued at $5.25 million, went on sale in Japan in March 2013 to raise funds for victims of the 2011 Tōhoku earthquake and tsunami.
A 2013 Turkish Airlines advertisement starring Messi, in which he engages in a selfie competition with then-Los Angeles Lakers star Kobe Bryant, was the most-watched ad on YouTube in the year of its release, receiving 137 million views, and was subsequently voted the best advertisement of the 2005-15 decade to commemorate YouTube's founding.
World Press Photo selected "The Final Game", a photograph of Messi facing the World Cup trophy after Argentina's final defeat to Germany, as the best sports image of 2014.
Messi, a documentary about his life by filmmaker Álex de la Iglesia, premiered at the Venice Film Festival in August 2014.
Born in a zoo at Saransk, Mordovia, Russia in late 2015, Messi, a pet cougar who became popular on social media, was named after the player.
Personal life
Family and relationships
Since 2008, Messi has been in a relationship with Antonella Roccuzzo, a fellow native of Rosario.
He has known Roccuzzo since he was five years old, as she is the cousin of his best friend since childhood, Lucas Scaglia, who is also a football player.
After keeping their relationship private for a year, Messi first confirmed their romance in an interview in January 2009, before going public a month later during a carnival in Sitges after the Barcelona-Espanyol derby.
QTEMPLATE box|width
33%|align
right|quote
"Leo is not shy.
He's introverted.
He's reserved.
"|source
-Endocrinologist Dr. Diego Schwarzstein addressed Messi's growth hormone deficiency from 1997 to 2001.
According to Bleacher Report's Richard Fitzpatrick, "Schwarzstein and Messi built up a close relationship during more than four years of treatment."
Messi and Roccuzzo have three sons: Thiago (born 2012), Mateo (born 2015) and Ciro (born 2018).
To celebrate his partner's first pregnancy, Messi placed the ball under his shirt after scoring in Argentina's 4-0 win against Ecuador on 2 June 2012, before confirming the pregnancy in an interview two weeks later.
Thiago was born in Barcelona on 2 November 2012, with Messi attending the birth after being given permission by Barcelona to miss training.
He announced his son's arrival on his Facebook page, writing, "Today I am the happiest man in the world, my son was born and thanks to God for this gift!"
Thiago's name and handprints are tattooed on his left calf.
In April 2015, Messi confirmed on Facebook that they were expecting another child.
He missed training ahead of a match against Atlético Madrid to attend the birth of his second son, Mateo, on 11 September 2015 in Barcelona.
On 30 June 2017, he married Roccuzzo at a luxury hotel named Hotel City Center in Rosario with about 260 guests attending his wedding.
On 15 October 2017, his wife announced they were expecting their third child in an Instagram post, with the words "Family of 5".
On 10 March 2018, Messi skipped the match against Málaga after Ciro was born.
Messi enjoys a close relationship with his immediate family members, particularly his mother, Celia, whose face he has tattooed on his left shoulder.
His professional affairs are largely run as a family business: his father, Jorge, has been his agent since he was 14, and his oldest brother, Rodrigo, handles his daily schedule and publicity.
His mother and other brother, Matías, manage his charitable organisation, the Leo Messi Foundation, and take care of personal and professional matters in Rosario.
Since leaving for Spain at age 13, Messi has maintained close ties to his hometown of Rosario, even preserving his distinct Rosarino accent.
He has kept ownership of his family's old house, although it has long stood empty; he maintains a penthouse apartment in an exclusive residential building for his mother, as well as a family compound just outside the city.
Once when he was in training with the national team in Buenos Aires, he made a three-hour trip by car to Rosario immediately after practice to have dinner with his family, spent the night with them, and returned to Buenos Aires the next day in time for practice.
Messi keeps in daily contact via phone and text with a small group of confidants in Rosario, most of whom were fellow members of "The Machine of '87" at Newell's Old Boys.
He currently lives in Castelldefels, a village near Barcelona.
Although considered a one-club man, he has long planned to return to Rosario to end his playing career at Newell's.
He was on bad terms with the club after his transfer to Barcelona, but by 2012 their public feud had ended, with Newell's embracing their ties with Messi, even issuing a club membership card to his newborn son.
Philanthropy
Throughout his career, Messi has been involved in charitable efforts aimed at vulnerable children, a commitment that stems in part from the medical difficulties he faced in his own childhood.
Since 2004, he has contributed his time and finances to the United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF), an organisation with which Barcelona also have a strong association.
Messi has served as a UNICEF goodwill ambassador since his appointment in March 2010, completing his first field mission for the organisation four months later as he travelled to Haiti to bring public awareness to the plight of the country's children in the wake of the recent earthquake.
He has since participated in UNICEF campaigns targeting HIV prevention, education, and the social inclusion of disabled children.
To celebrate his son's first birthday, in November 2013, Messi and Thiago were part of a publicity campaign to raise awareness of mortality rates among disadvantaged children.
In addition to his work with UNICEF, Messi founded his own charitable organisation, the Leo Messi Foundation, which supports access to health care, education, and sport for children.
It was established in 2007 following a visit Messi paid to a hospital for terminally ill children in Boston, an experience that resonated with him to the point that he decided to reinvest part of his earnings into society.
Through his foundation, Messi has awarded research grants, financed medical training, and invested in the development of medical centres and projects in Argentina, Spain, and elsewhere in the world.
In addition to his own fundraising activities, such as his global "Messi and Friends" football matches, his foundation receives financial support from various companies to which he has assigned his name in endorsement agreements, with Adidas as their main sponsor.
Messi has also invested in youth football in Argentina: he financially supports Sarmiento, a football club based in the Rosario neighbourhood where he was born, committing in 2013 to the refurbishment of their facilities and the installation of all-weather pitches, and funds the management of several youth players at Newell's Old Boys and rival club Rosario Central, as well as at River Plate and Boca Juniors in Buenos Aires.
At Newell's Old Boys, his boyhood club, he funded the 2012 construction of a new gymnasium and a dormitory inside the club's stadium for their youth academy.
His former youth coach at Newell's, Ernesto Vecchio, is employed by the Leo Messi Foundation as a talent scout for young players.
Tax fraud
Messi's financial affairs came under investigation in 2013 for suspected tax evasion.
Offshore companies in tax havens Uruguay and Belize were used to evade €4.1 million in taxes related to sponsorship earnings between 2007 and 2009.
An unrelated shell company in Panama, set up in 2012, was subsequently identified as belonging to the Messis in the Panama Papers data leak.
Messi, who pleaded ignorance of the alleged scheme, voluntarily paid arrears of €5.1 million in August 2013.
On 6 July 2016, Messi and his father were both found guilty of tax fraud and were handed suspended 21-month prison sentences and respectively ordered to pay €1.7 million and €1.4 million in fines.
Facing the judge, he said, "I just played football.
I signed the contracts because I trusted my dad and the lawyers and we had decided that they would take charge of those things."
Career statistics
Club
International
Honours and achievements
Club
Barcelona
* La Liga: 2004-05, 2005-06, 2008-09, 2009-10, 2010-11, 2012-13, 2014-15, 2015-16, 2017-18, 2018-19
* Copa del Rey: 2008-09, 2011-12, 2014-15, 2015-16, 2016-17, 2017-18
* Supercopa de España: 2005, 2006, 2009, 2010, 2011, 2013, 2016, 2018
* UEFA Champions League: 2005-06, 2008-09, 2010-11, 2014-15
International
Argentina U20
Argentina U23
Individual
Awards
* FIFA Ballon d'Or/Ballon d'Or: 2009, 2010, 2011, 2012, 2015
* European Golden Shoe: 2009-10, 2011-12, 2012-13, 2016-17, 2017-18, 2018-19
* La Liga Best Forward: 2008-09, 2009-10, 2010-11, 2011-12, 2012-13, 2014-15, 2015-16
* Pichichi Trophy: 2009-10, 2011-12, 2012-13, 2016-17, 2017-18, 2018-19
* FIFA Club World Cup Final Most Valuable Player: 2009, 2011
* FIFPro Young World Player of the Year: 2006, 2007, 2008
* Golden Boy (Young European Footballer of the Year): 2005
* FIFA FIFPro World11: 2007, 2008, 2009, 2010, 2011, 2012, 2013, 2014, 2015, 2016, 2017, 2018, 2019
* UEFA Team of the Year: 2008, 2009, 2010, 2011, 2012, 2014, 2015, 2016, 2017, 2018
* List of men's footballers with 50 or more international goals
Notes
Bibliography
