Fra Angelico (born Guido di Pietro; February 18, 1455) was an Italian painter of the Early Renaissance, described by Vasari in his Lives of the Artists as having "a rare and perfect talent".
He was known to contemporaries as Fra Giovanni da Fiesole (Brother John of Fiesole) and Fra Giovanni Angelico (Angelic Brother John).
In modern Italian he is called Beato Angelico (Blessed Angelic One); the common English name Fra Angelico means the "Angelic friar".
In 1982, Pope John Paul II proclaimed his beatification in recognition of the holiness of his life, thereby making the title of "Blessed" official.
Fiesole is sometimes misinterpreted as being part of his formal name, but it was merely the name of the town where he took his vows as a Dominican friar, and was used by contemporaries to separate him from others who were also known as Fra Giovanni.
He is listed in the Roman Martyrology as Beatus Ioannes Faesulanus, cognomento Angelicus-"Blessed Giovanni of Fiesole, surnamed 'the Angelic' ".
Vasari wrote of Fra Angelico that "it is impossible to bestow too much praise on this holy father, who was so humble and modest in all that he did and said and whose pictures were painted with such facility and piety."
in the Tuscan area of Mugello near Fiesole towards the end of the 14th century.
Nothing is known of his parents.
He was baptized Guido or Guidolino.
The earliest recorded document concerning Fra Angelico dates from October 17, 1417 when he joined a religious confraternity or guild at the Carmine Church, still under the name of Guido di Pietro.
This record reveals that he was already a painter, a fact that is subsequently confirmed by two records of payment to Guido di Pietro in January and February 1418 for work done in the church of Santo Stefano del Ponte.
The first record of Angelico as a friar dates from 1423, when he is first referred to as Fra Giovanni (Friar John), following the custom of those entering one of the older religious orders of taking a new name.
He was a member of the local community at Fiesole, not far from Florence, of the Dominican Order; one of the medieval Orders belonging to a category known as mendicant Orders because they generally lived not from the income of estates but from begging or donations.
Fra, a contraction of frater (Latin for 'brother'), is a conventional title for a mendicant friar.
According to Vasari, Fra Angelico initially received training as an illuminator, possibly working with his older brother Benedetto who was also a Dominican and an illuminator.
The former Dominican convent of San Marco in Florence, now a state museum, holds several manuscripts that are thought to be entirely or partly by his hand.
Between 1418 and 1436 he was at the convent of Fiesole, where he also executed a number of frescoes for the church and the Altarpiece, which was deteriorated but has since been restored.
A predella of the Altarpiece remains intact and is conserved in the National Gallery, London, and is a great example of Fra Angelico's ability.
It shows Christ in Glory surrounded by more than 250 figures, including beatified Dominicans.
San Marco, Florence, 1436-1445
In 1436, Fra Angelico was one of a number of the friars from Fiesole who moved to the newly built convent or friary of San Marco in Florence.
This was an important move which put him in the centre of artistic activity of the region and brought about the patronage of Cosimo de' Medici, one of the wealthiest and most powerful members of the city's governing authority (or "Signoria") and founder of the dynasty that would dominate Florentine politics for much of the Renaissance.
Cosimo had a cell reserved for himself at the friary in order that he might retreat from the world.
It was, according to Vasari, at Cosimo's urging that Fra Angelico set about the task of decorating the convent, including the magnificent fresco of the Chapter House, the often-reproduced Annunciation at the top of the stairs leading to the cells, the Maesta (or Coronation of the Madonna) with Saints (cell 9) and the many other devotional frescoes, of smaller format but remarkable luminous quality, depicting aspects of the Life of Christ that adorn the walls of each cell.
The Vatican, 1445-1455
In 1445 Pope Eugene IV summoned him to Rome to paint the frescoes of the Chapel of the Holy Sacrament at St Peter's, later demolished by Pope Paul III.
Vasari claims that at this time Fra Angelico was offered the Archbishopric of Florence by Pope Nicholas V, and that he refused it, recommending another friar for the position.
The story seems possible and even likely.
However, if Vasari's date is correct, then the pope must have been Eugene IV and not Nicholas, who was elected Pope only on 6 March 1447.
Moreover, the archbishop in 1446-1459 was the Dominican Antoninus of Florence (Antonio Pierozzi), canonized by Pope Adrian VI in 1523.
In 1447 Fra Angelico was in Orvieto with his pupil, Benozzo Gozzoli, executing works for the Cathedral.
Among his other pupils were Zanobi Strozzi.
From 1447 to 1449 Fra Angelico was back at the Vatican, designing the frescoes for the Niccoline Chapel for Nicholas V.
The scenes from the lives of the two martyred deacons of the Early Christian Church, St. Stephen and St. Lawrence may have been executed wholly or in part by assistants.
The small chapel, with its brightly frescoed walls and gold leaf decorations gives the impression of a jewel box.
From 1449 until 1452, Fra Angelico returned to his old convent of Fiesole, where he was the Prior.
QTEMPLATE |When singing my praise, don't liken my talents to those of Apelles.
Say, rather, that, in the name of Christ, I gave all I had to the poor.
The deeds that count on Earth are not the ones that count in Heaven.
I, Giovanni, am the flower of Tuscany.|Translation of epitaph
Pope John Paul II beatified Fra Angelico on October 3, 1982, and in 1984 declared him patron of Catholic artists.
Contemporaries
Fra Angelico was the contemporary of Gentile da Fabriano.
Gentile's altarpiece of the Adoration of the Magi, 1423, in the Uffizi is regarded as one of the greatest works of the style known as International Gothic.
At the time it was painted, another young artist, known as Masaccio, was working on the frescoes for the Brancacci Chapel at the church of the Carmine.
Masaccio had fully grasped the implications of the art of Giotto.
Few painters in Florence saw his sturdy, lifelike and emotional figures and were not affected by them.
His work partner was an older painter, Masolino, of the same generation as Fra Angelico.
Masaccio died at 27, leaving the work unfinished.
Artistic legacy
Through Fra Angelico's pupil Benozzo Gozzoli's careful portraiture and technical expertise in the art of fresco we see a link to Domenico Ghirlandaio, who in turn painted extensive schemes for the wealthy patrons of Florence, and through Ghirlandaio to his pupil Michelangelo and the High Renaissance.
Apart from the lineal connection, superficially there may seem little to link the humble priest with his sweetly pretty Madonnas and timeless Crucifixions to the dynamic expressions of Michelangelo's larger-than-life creations.
But both these artists received their most important commissions from the wealthiest and most powerful of all patrons, the Vatican.
When Michelangelo took up the Sistine Chapel commission, he was working within a space that had already been extensively decorated by other artists.
Around the walls the Life of Christ and Life of Moses were depicted by a range of artists including his teacher Ghirlandaio, Raphael's teacher Perugino and Botticelli.
They were works of large scale and exactly the sort of lavish treatment to be expected in a Vatican commission, vying with each other in complexity of design, number of figures, elaboration of detail and skillful use of gold leaf.
Above these works stood a row of painted Popes in brilliant brocades and gold tiaras.
None of these splendours have any place in the work which Michelangelo created.
Michelangelo, when asked by Pope Julius II to ornament the robes of the Apostles in the usual way, responded that they were very poor men.
Cortona
Fiesole
*Altarpiece - Coronation of the Virgin, with predellas of Miracles of St Dominic, Louvre, Paris
*Virgin and Child between Saints Thomas Aquinas, Barnabas, Dominic and Peter Martyr (1424) - Church of San Domenico, Fiesole
*Predella - Christ in Majesty, National Gallery, London.
Florence, Santa Trinita
*Deposition of Christ, said by Vasari to have been "painted by a saint or an angel".
Now in the National Museum of San Marco, Florence.
*Coronation of the Virgin (c. 1432), Uffizi, Florence
*Coronation of the Virgin (c. 1434-1435), Louvre, Paris
Florence, Santa Maria degli Angeli
Florence, Santa Maria Novella
San Marco, Florence, 1436-1445
* Altarpiece for chancel - Virgin with Saints Cosmas and Damian, attended by Saints Dominic, Peter, Francis, Mark, John Evangelist and Stephen.
Cosmas and Damian were patrons of the Medici.
The altarpiece was commissioned in 1438 by Cosimo de' Medici.
It was removed and disassembled during the renovation of the convent church in the seventeenth century.
Two of the nine predella panels remain at the convent; seven are in Washington, Munich, Dublin and Paris.
Unexpectedly, in 2006 the last two missing panels, Dominican saints from the side panels, turned up in the estate of a modest collector in Oxfordshire, who had bought them in California in the 1960s.
* Altarpiece ?
- Madonna and Child with twelve Angels (life sized); Uffizi.
* Two versions of the Crucifixion with St Dominic; in the Cloister
* Very large Crucifixion with Virgin and 20 saints; in the Chapter House
The Annunciation; at the top of the Dormitory stairs.
This is probably the most reproduced of all Fra Angelico's paintings.
*Virgin enthroned with Four Saints; in the Dormitory passage
Each cell is decorated with a fresco which matches in size and shape the single round-headed window beside it.
The frescoes are apparently for contemplative purpose.
They have a pale, serene, unearthly beauty.
Many of Fra Angelico's finest and most reproduced works are among them.
There are, particularly in the inner row of cells, some of less inspiring quality and of more repetitive subject, perhaps completed by assistants.
There was almost no demand at all for medieval art during the 1960s and no dealers showed any interest, so Preston's father bought them almost as an afterthought along with some manuscripts.
Coincidentally the manuscripts turned out to be high quality Victorian forgeries by The Spanish Forger.
The paintings are two of eight side panels of a large altarpiece painted in 1439 for Fra Angelico's monastery at San Marco, which was later split up by Napoleon's army.
While the centre section is still at the monastery, the other six small panels are in German and US museums.
These two panels were presumed lost forever.
The Italian Government had hoped to purchase them but they were outbid at auction on 20 April 2007 by a private collector for £1.7M. Both panels are now restored and exhibited in the San Marco Museum in Florence.
*Fray Angelico Chavez Franciscan Friar, historian and artist who was named after Fra Angelico due to his interest in painting.
*https:/ wiki/Fra_Angelico_catalog_raisonn%C3%A9,_1970 Fra Angelico catalog raisonné, 1970
Footnotes
* Rossetti's article includes an assessment of the body of work, from the pre-Raphaelite viewpoint.
*Hood, William.
Fra Angelico at San Marco.
Yale University Press, 1993.
*Morachiello, Paolo.
Fra Angelico: The San Marco Frescoes.
Thames and Hudson, 1990.
*Frederick Hartt.
A History of Italian Renaissance Art, Thames & Hudson, 1970.
*Giorgio Vasari.
Lives of the Artists.
first published 1568.
Penguin Classics, 1965.
*Donald Attwater.
The Penguin Dictionary of Saints.
Penguin Reference Books, 1965.
*Luciano Berti.
Florence, the city and its Art. Bercocci, 1979.
*Werner Cohn.
Il Beato Angelico e Battista di Biagio Sanguigni.
Revista d’Arte, V, (1955): 207-221.
*Stefano Orlandi.
Beato Angelico; Monographia Storica della Vita e delle Opere con Un’Appendice di Nuovi Documenti Inediti.
Florence: Leo S. Olschki Editore, 1964.
Further reading
* Fra Angelico: Heaven of Earth, ed. by Nathaniel Silver, Boston : Isabella Stewart Gardner Museum, 2018
* Gerardo de Simone, Il Beato Angelico a Roma.
Rinascita delle arti e Umanesimo cristiano nell'Urbe di Niccolò V e Leon Battista Alberti, Firenze, Olschki, 2017 (Fondazione Carlo Marchi, Studi, vol. 34)
* Cyril Gerbron, Fra Angelico.
Liturgie et mémoire (= Études Renaissantes, 18), Turnhout: Brepols Publishers, 2016. ;
* Gerardo de Simone, La bottega di un frate pittore: il Beato Angelico tra Fiesole, FIrenze e Roma, in " Revista Diálogos Mediterrânicos" (Curitiba, Brasil), n. 8, 2015, ISSN 2237-6585, pp.
48-85 - http:/ index.php/RevistaDM
* Gerardo de Simone, Fra Angelico : perspectives de recherche, passées et futures, in "Perspective, la revue de l'INHA.
Actualités de la recherche en histoire de l’art", 2013 - I, pp.
* Gerardo de Simone, Velut alter Iottus.
Il Beato Angelico e i suoi “profeti trecenteschi”, in “1492.
Rivista della Fondazione Piero della Francesca”, 2, 2009 (2010), pp.
* Gerardo de Simone, L’Angelico di Pisa.
Ricerche e ipotesi intorno al Redentore benedicente del Museo Nazionale di San Matteo, in “Polittico”, Edizioni Plus - Pisa University Press, 5, 2008, pp.
* Gerardo de Simone, L’ultimo Angelico.
Le “Meditationes” del cardinal Torquemada e il ciclo perduto nel chiostro di S. Maria sopra Minerva, in: “Ricerche di Storia dell’Arte” (Carocci Editore, Roma), 76, 2002, pp.
*Didi-Huberman, Georges.
Fra Angelico: Dissemblance and Figuration.
University of Chicago Press, 1995.
Discussion of how Fra Angelico challenged Renaissance naturalism and developed a technique to portray "unfigurable" theological ideas.
*Gilbert, Creighton, http:/ books 0-271-02140-3.html How Fra Angelico and Signorelli Saw the End of the World, Penn State Press, 2002
*Supino, J. B., http:/ etext/21561 Fra Angelico, Alinari Brothers, Florence, undated, from Project Gutenberg
