The meadow vole (Microtus pennsylvanicus), sometimes called the field mouse or meadow mouse, is a North American vole found across Canada, Alaska and the northern United States.
Its range extends farther south along the Atlantic coast.
One subspecies, the Florida salt marsh vole (M. p. dukecampbelli), is found in Florida, and is classified as endangered.
Previously it was also found in Chihuahua, Mexico, but has not been recorded since 1998.
The meadow vole is active year-round, usually at night.
It also digs burrows, where it stores food for the winter and females give birth to their young.
Although these animals tend to live close together, they are aggressive towards one another.
This is particularly evident in males during the breeding season.
They can cause damage to fruit trees, garden plants, and commercial grain crops.
Distribution
The meadow vole has the widest distribution of any North American species of Microtus.
It ranges from Labrador west to Alaska and south from Labrador and New Brunswick to South Carolina and extreme northeastern Georgia; west through Tennessee, Missouri, north-central Nebraska, the northern half of Wyoming, and central Washington to Alaska; south through Idaho into north-central Utah.
It is excluded only from the extreme polar regions.
A disjunct subset of its range occurs from central Colorado to northwestern New Mexico.
The United States portion of the Souris River is alternately known as the Mouse River because of the large numbers of field mice that lived along its banks.
Plant communities
Meadow voles are most commonly found in grasslands, preferring moister areas, but are also found in wooded areas.
Meadow voles are listed as riparian-dependent vertebrates in the Snake River drainage of Wyoming.
In a compilation of 11 studies on small mammals, meadow voles were reported in only three of 29 sites in subalpine forests of the central Rocky Mountains.
Their range extensions were likely to be related to irrigation practices.
They are now common in hayfields, pastures, and along ditches in the Rocky Mountain states.
In Pipestone National Monument, Minnesota, meadow voles were present in riparian shrublands, tallgrass prairie, and other habitats.
In east-central Ohio, meadow voles were captured in reconstructed common cattail (Typha latifolia) wetlands.
In Virginia, meadow voles were least abundant in eastern red cedar (Juniperus virginiana) glades and most abundant in fields with dense grass cover.
Habits
Meadow voles are active year-round and day or night, with no clear 24-hour rhythm in many areas.
Most changes in activity are imposed by season, habitat, cover, temperature, and other factors.
Meadow voles have to eat frequently, and their active periods (every two to three hours) are associated with food digestion.
Patterns of mortality apparently vary among meadow vole populations.
The average meadow vole lifespan is less than one month because of high nestling and juvenile mortality.
and postnestling juveniles had the highest mortality rate (61%), followed by young adults (58%) and older age groups (53%).
Nestlings were estimated to have the lowest mortality rate (50%).
Estimated mean longevity ranges from two to 16 months.
Breeding often ceases in January and starts again in March.
Meadow voles in optimal habitats in Virginia (old fields with dense vegetation) reached densities of 983/ha at the lowest point in the cycle.
Above the threshold amount, the quantity of cover influences the amplitude and possibly the duration of the population peak.
Local patches of dense cover could serve as source populations or reservoirs to colonize less favorable habitats with sparse cover.
Meadow voles are most commonly associated with sites having high soil moisture.
They are often restricted to the wetter microsites when they occur in sympatry with prairie voles (Microtus ochrogaster) or montane voles.
Meadow vole habitat devoid of tree cover and grasses dominated the herb layer.
with low tolerance for habitat variation (i. e., a species that is intolerant of variations in habitat, is restricted to few habitats, and/or uses habitats less evenly than tolerant species).
Meadow voles appeared to be randomly distributed within a grassland habitat in southern Quebec.
Grant and Morris
In West Virginia, the only forested habitats in which meadow voles were captured were seedling stands.
In South Dakota, meadow voles prefer grasslands to Rocky Mountain juniper (Juniperus scopulorum) woodlands.
In New Mexico, meadow voles were captured in stands of grasses, wild rose (Rosa spp.), prickly pear (Opuntia spp.), and various forbs; meadow voles were also captured in wet areas with tall marsh grasses.
Open habitat with a thick mat of perennial grass favors voles.
In west-central Illinois, they were the most common small mammals on Indian grass (Sorghastrum nutans)-dominated and switchgrass (Panicum virginicus)-dominated study plots.
They were present in very low numbers on orchard grass (Dactylis glomerata)-dominated plots.
The most stable population occurred on unburned big bluestem (Andropogon gerardii)-dominated plots.
In Ontario, meadow voles and white-footed mice (Peromyscus leucopus) occur together in ecotones.
Meadow voles were the most common small mammals in oak savanna/tallgrass
prairie dominated by northern pin oak (Quercus palustris) and grasses including bluejoint reedgrass (Calamagrostis canadensis), prairie cordgrass , big bluestem, switchgrass, and Indian grass.
In Michigan, strip clearcuts in a conifer swamp resulted in an increase in the relative abundance of meadow voles.
They were most abundant in clearcut strip interiors and least abundant in uncut strip interiors.
Slash burning did not appear to affect meadow vole numbers about 1.5 years after treatment.
In Pennsylvania, three subadult meadow voles were captured at least 1.6 miles (2.6 km) from the nearest appreciable suitable meadow vole habitat, suggesting they are adapted to long-distance dispersal.
In Ohio, the effects of patch shape and proportion of edge were investigated by mowing strips between study plots.
The square plots were 132 feet per side (40 m x 40 m), and the rectangular patches were 52.8 feet by 330 feet (16 m x 100 m).
Square habitat patches were not significantly different from rectangular patches in meadow vole density.
Edge effects in patches of this size were not found, suggesting meadow voles are edge-tolerant.
Habitat patch shape did affect dispersal and space use behaviors.
In rectangular patches, home ranges were similar in size to those in square patches, but were elongated.
Meadow voles tend to remain in home ranges and defend at least a portion of their home ranges from conspecifics.
Home ranges overlap and have irregular shapes.
Cover requirements
Nests are used as nurseries, resting areas, and as protection against weather.
They are constructed of woven grass; they are usually subterranean or are constructed under boards, rocks, logs, brush piles, hay bales, fenceposts, or in grassy tussocks.
Meadow voles dig shallow burrows,
Predators
Meadow voles are an important prey for many hawks, owls, and mammalian carnivores, and they are also taken by some snakes.
and in Wisconsin, meadow voles comprised 95% of short-eared owl (A. flammeus) prey.
Most mammalian predators take microtine prey.
Management
Meadow voles are abundant in agricultural habitats.
The list of crops damaged by meadow voles includes root and stem crops (asparagus, kohlrabi), tubers, leaf and leafstalks, immature inflorescent vegetables , low-growing fruits (beans, squash), the bark of fruit trees, pasture, grassland, hay, and grains.
In forest plantations in British Columbia, an apparently abundant (not measured) meadow vole population was associated with a high rate of "not sufficient regeneration"; damage to tree seedlings was attributed to meadow voles and lemmings (Synaptomys spp.).
In central New York, colonization of old fields by trees and shrubs was reduced due to seedling predation by meadow voles, particularly under the herb canopy.
Management of meadow vole populations in agricultural areas includes reduction of habitat in waste places such as roadsides and fencerows by mowing, plowing, and herbicide application.
Predators, particularly raptors, should be protected to keep meadow vole populations in check.
Direct control methods include trapping, fencing, and poisoning; trapping and fencing are of limited effectiveness.
Poisons are efficient.
Repellents are largely ineffective at present.
Properly timed cultivation and controlled fires are at least partially effective in reducing populations.
The cycle of meadow vole abundance is an important proximate factor affecting the life histories of its major predators.
Meadow voles are usually the most abundant small mammals in northern prairie wetlands, often exceeding 40% of all individual small mammals present.
Ecto- and endoparasites have been reported to include trematodes, cestodes, nematodes, acanthocephalans, lice (Anoplura), fleas (Siphonaptera), Diptera, and ticks and mites (Acari).
Ecological importance
As with many other small mammal species, M. pennsylvanicus plays important ecological roles.
The meadow vole is an important food source for many predators, and disperses mycorrhizal fungi.
It is a major consumer of grass and disperses grass nutrients in its feces.
