S = sentence
NP = noun phrase
RC = relative clause
VP = verb phrase
PN = proper noun
N = noun
V = verb
"Buffalo buffalo Buffalo buffalo buffalo buffalo Buffalo buffalo" is a grammatically correct sentence in American English, often presented as an example of how homonyms and homophones can be used to create complicated linguistic constructs through lexical ambiguity.
It has been discussed in literature in various forms since 1967, when it appeared in Dmitri Borgmann's Beyond Language: Adventures in Word and Thought.
The sentence employs three distinct meanings of the word buffalo:
*as a proper noun to refer to a specific place named Buffalo, the city of Buffalo, New York being the most notable;
*as a verb (uncommon in regular usage) to buffalo, meaning "to bully, harass, or intimidate" or "to baffle"; and
*as a noun to refer to the animal, bison (often called buffalo in North America).
The plural is also buffalo.
An expanded form of the sentence which preserves the original word order is: "Buffalo bison, that other Buffalo bison bully, also bully Buffalo bison."
Sentence construction
The sentence is unpunctuated and uses three different readings of the word "buffalo".
In order of their first use, these are:
* a. a city named Buffalo.
This is used as a noun adjunct in the sentence;
* n. the noun buffalo (American bison), an animal, in the plural (equivalent to "buffaloes" or "buffalos"), in order to avoid articles.
* v. the verb "" meaning to outwit, confuse, deceive, intimidate, or baffle.
The sentence is syntactically ambiguous; however, one possible parse would be as follows:
:Buffaloa buffalon Buffaloa buffalon buffalov buffalov Buffaloa buffalon.
When grouped syntactically, this is equivalent to: (Buffalonian bison)
(Buffalonian bison intimidate) intimidate (Buffalonian bison).
The sentence uses a restrictive clause, so there are no commas, nor is there the word "which," as in, "Buffalo buffalo, which Buffalo buffalo buffalo, buffalo Buffalo buffalo."
This clause is also a reduced relative clause, so the word that, which could appear between the second and third words of the sentence, is omitted.
An expanded form of the sentence which preserves the original word order is:
"Buffalo bison, that other Buffalo bison bully, also bully Buffalo bison."
Thus, the parsed sentence reads as a claim that bison who are intimidated or bullied by bison are themselves intimidating or bullying bison (at least in the city of Buffalo - implicitly, Buffalo, New York):
:#Buffalo buffalo (the animals called "buffalo" from the city of Buffalo)
that Buffalo buffalo buffalo (that the animals from the city bully) buffalo Buffalo buffalo (are bullying these animals from that city).
:#Those buffalo (es) from Buffalo that are intimidated by buffalo (es) from Buffalo intimidate buffalo (es) from Buffalo.
:#Bison from Buffalo, New York, who are intimidated by other bison in their community, also happen to intimidate other bison in their community.
:#The buffalo from Buffalo who are buffaloed by buffalo from Buffalo, buffalo (verb) other buffalo from Buffalo.
:#Buffalo buffalo (main clause subject) that Buffalo buffalo (subordinate clause subject) buffalo (subordinate clause verb) buffalo (main clause verb) Buffalo buffalo (main clause direct object).
:#Buffalo from Buffalo that buffalo from Buffalo buffalo, also buffalo buffalo from Buffalo.
Usage
Thomas Tymoczko has pointed out that there is nothing special about eight "buffalos"; any sentence consisting solely of the word "buffalo" repeated any number of times is grammatically correct.
The shortest is "Buffalo!", which can be taken as a verbal imperative instruction to bully someone ("You buffalo!") with the implied subject "you" removed,
* The phrase "Buffalo buffalo buffalo", a shortened allusion to the phrase, appears on the song "Wow Wow" from the album Mouth Moods by Neil Cicierega.
Other linguistically complex sentences
* James while John had had had had had had had had had had had a better effect on the teacher
* That that is is that that is not is not is that it it is
