The wolf (Canis lupus), also known as the gray/grey wolf, is a canine native to the wilderness and remote areas of Eurasia and North America.
It is the largest extant member of its family, with males averaging and females .
It is distinguished from other Canis species by its larger size and less pointed features, particularly on the ears and muzzle.
Its winter fur is long and bushy and predominantly a mottled gray in colour, although nearly pure white, red and brown to black also occur.
Mammal Species of the World (3rd ed., 2005), a standard reference work in zoology, recognizes 38 subspecies of C. lupus.
The wolf is the most specialized member of the genus Canis for cooperative big game hunting, as demonstrated by its morphological adaptations to tackling large prey, its more gregarious nature, and its highly advanced expressive behaviour.
It is nonetheless closely related enough to smaller Canis species, such as the coyote and golden jackal, to produce fertile hybrids with them.
It is the only species of Canis to have a range encompassing both Eurasia and North America.
It is a social animal, travelling in nuclear families consisting of a mated pair accompanied by their adult offspring.
The wolf is typically an apex predator throughout its range.
It feeds primarily on large wild ungulates, though it also eats smaller animals, livestock, carrion, and garbage.
A seven-year-old wolf is considered to be relatively old, and the maximum lifespan is about 16 years.
The global wolf population is estimated to be 300,000.
The wolf is one of the world's best-known and most-researched animals, with probably more books written about it than any other wild species.
It has a long history of association with humans, having been despised and hunted in most pastoral communities because of its attacks on livestock, while conversely being respected in some agrarian and hunter-gatherer societies.
Although the fear of wolves is pervasive in many human societies, the majority of recorded attacks on people have been attributed to animals suffering from rabies.
Non-rabid wolves have attacked and killed people, mainly children, but this is rare because wolves are relatively few, live away from people, and have developed a fear of humans due to their experiences with hunters and shepherds.
Etymology
The English 'wolf' stems from the Old English , which is itself thought to be derived from the Proto-Germanic .
The Latin is a Sabine loanword.
Both derive from the Proto-Indo-European root *
Bibliography
