The Louvre ( ), or the Louvre Museum ( ), is the world's largest art museum and a historic monument in Paris, France.
A central landmark of the city, it is located on the Right Bank of the Seine in the city's 1st arrondissement (district or ward).
Approximately 38,000 objects from prehistory to the 21st century are exhibited over an area of 72,735 square metres (782,910 square feet).
In 2018, the Louvre was the world's most visited art museum, receiving 10.2 million visitors.
The building was extended many times to form the present Louvre Palace.
In 1682, Louis XIV chose the Palace of Versailles for his household, leaving the Louvre primarily as a place to display the royal collection, including, from 1692, a collection of ancient Greek and Roman sculpture.
In 1692, the building was occupied by the Académie des Inscriptions et Belles-Lettres and the Académie Royale de Peinture et de Sculpture, which in 1699 held the first of a series of salons.
The Académie remained at the Louvre for 100 years.
During the French Revolution, the National Assembly decreed that the Louvre should be used as a museum to display the nation's masterpieces.
The museum opened on 10 August 1793 with an exhibition of 537 paintings, the majority of the works being royal and confiscated church property.
Because of structural problems with the building, the museum was closed in 1796 until 1801.
The collection was increased under Napoleon and the museum was renamed Musée Napoléon, but after Napoleon's abdication many works seized by his armies were returned to their original owners.
The collection was further increased during the reigns of Louis XVIII and Charles X, and during the Second French Empire the museum gained 20,000 pieces.
Holdings have grown steadily through donations and bequests since the Third Republic.
The collection is divided among eight curatorial departments: Egyptian Antiquities; Near Eastern Antiquities; Greek, Etruscan and Roman Antiquities; Islamic Art; Sculpture; Decorative Arts; Paintings; Prints and Drawings.
History
11th-20th centuries
Medieval, Renaissance, and Bourbon palace
The Louvre Palace, which houses the museum, was begun as a fortress by Philip II in the 12th century to protect the city from English soldiers which were in Normandy.
Remnants of this castle are still visible in the crypt.
Whether this was the first building on that spot is not known; it is possible that Philip modified an existing tower.
In the 7th century, St. Fare, an abbess in Meaux, left part of her "Villa called Luvra situated in the region of Paris" to a monastery, this territory probably did not correspond exactly to the modern site, however.
The Louvre Palace was altered frequently throughout the Middle Ages.
In the 14th century, Charles V converted the building into a residence and in 1546, Francis I renovated the site in French Renaissance style.
Francis acquired what would become the nucleus of the Louvre's holdings, his acquisitions including Leonardo da Vinci's Mona Lisa.
After Louis XIV chose Versailles as his residence in 1682, constructions slowed; however, the move permitted the Louvre to be used as a residence for artists, under Royal patronage.
Four generations of Boulle were granted Royal patronage and resided in the Louvre in the following order: Pierre Boulle, Jean Boulle, Andre-Charles Boulle and his four sons (Jean-Philippe, Pierre-Benoît (c. 1683-1741), Charles-André (1685-1749) and Charles-Joseph (1688-1754)), after him.
André-Charles Boulle (1642-1732) is the most famous French cabinetmaker and the preeminent artist in the field of marquetry, also known as "Inlay".
Boulle was "the most remarkable of all French cabinetmakers".
He was commended to Louis XIV of France, the "Sun King", by Jean-Baptiste Colbert (1619-1683) as being "the most skilled craftsman in his profession".
Before the fire of 1720 destroyed them, André-Charles Boulle held priceless works of art in the Louvre, including forty-eight drawings by Raphael.
By the mid-18th century there were an increasing number of proposals to create a public gallery, with the art critic La Font de Saint-Yenne publishing, in 1747, a call for a display of the royal collection.
On 14 October 1750, Louis XV agreed and sanctioned a display of 96 pieces from the royal collection, mounted in the Galerie royale de peinture of the Luxembourg Palace.
A hall was opened by Le Normant de Tournehem and the Marquis de Marigny for public viewing of the Tableaux du Roy on Wednesdays and Saturdays, and contained Andrea del Sarto's Charity and works by Raphael; Titian; Veronese; Rembrandt; Poussin or Van Dyck, until its closing in 1780 as a result of the gift of the palace to the Count of Provence (the future king, Louis XVIII) by the king in 1778.
The comte d'Angiviller broadened the collection and in 1776 proposed conversion of the Grande Galerie of the Louvre - which contained maps - into the "French Museum".
Many proposals were offered for the Louvre's renovation into a museum; however, none was agreed on.
Hence the museum remained incomplete until the French Revolution.
Opening
The museum opened on 10 August 1793, the first anniversary of the monarchy's demise.
The public was given free accessibility on three days per week, which was "perceived as a major accomplishment and was generally appreciated".
The collection showcased 537 paintings and 184 objects of art.
Three quarters were derived from the royal collections, the remainder from confiscated émigrés and Church property (biens nationaux).
To expand and organize the collection, the Republic dedicated 100,000 livres per year.
In 1794, France's revolutionary armies began bringing pieces from Northern Europe, augmented after the Treaty of Tolentino (1797) by works from the Vatican, such as Laocoön and His Sons and the Apollo Belvedere, to establish the Louvre as a museum and as a "sign of popular sovereignty".
The early days were hectic; privileged artists continued to live in residence, and the unlabelled paintings hung "frame to frame from floor to ceiling".
The structure itself closed in May 1796 due to structural deficiencies.
It reopened on 14 July 1801, arranged chronologically and with new lighting and columns.
Following the Egyptian campaign of 1798-1801, Napoléon appointed the museum's first director, Dominique Vivant Denon.
In tribute, the museum was renamed the "Musée Napoléon" in 1803, and acquisitions were made of Spanish, Austrian, Dutch, and Italian works, either as spoils or through treaties such as the Treaty of Tolentino.
One of the most famous pieces taken under this program was the Horses of Saint Mark.
The four antique bronze horses, which had adorned the basilica of San Marco in Venice after the sack of Constantinople in 1204, were brought to Paris to reside atop Napoleon's Arc du Carrousel in Paris in 1797.
In 1797, the Treaty of Tolentino was signed by Napoleon, and two statues, the Nile and Tiber, were taken to Paris.
These statues had previously been in the Vatican, and both were housed in the Louvre until 1815.
After the defeat of Napoleon, the Nile was returned to Italy.
However, the Tiber remained in the Louvre Museum and can be seen in the collections today.
The Italian Peninsula was not the only region from which Napoleon took art.
Under the Directory government of the 1790s, Napoleon (then a General) led an expedition to Egypt.
The campaign was an expansionist effort on the part of the government, but the Directory had another goal to make Paris the center of art, science, and culture.
The Directory wanted France to assume responsibility for liberating the works of art they deemed in danger in order to protect and nationalize the heritage and culture of their subjects.
As a result, there were teams of artists and scientists who accompanied the armies into battle equipped with lists of paintings, sculptures, and other pieces of patrimony that would be collected, crated, and shipped back to France.
Dominique Vivant Denon was Napoleon's art advisor, and accompanied him on the expedition to Egypt.
Through his initiative, the Valley of the Kings in Egypt was discovered and studied extensively.
As a result, he was later installed by Napoleon as the director of Musée Napoléon, formerly the Louvre, cementing the status of the museum as a center for global patrimony and storehouse for cultural heritage.
One of the most important discoveries made during Napoleon's campaign in Egypt was the Rosetta Stone.
It was discovered in 1799, and eventually led to the ability to decipher ancient hieroglyphs.
Although the Rosetta Stone was discovered by the French, it actually never made it to the Louvre Museum.
It was seized by British Forces following the defeat of Napoleon in Egypt and the subsequent signing of the Treaty of Alexandria in 1801.
It is now on display at the British Museum.
After the French defeat at Waterloo, the works' former owners sought their return.
The Louvre's administrators were loath to comply and hid many works in their private collections.
In response, foreign states sent emissaries to London to seek help, and many pieces were returned, even some that had been restored by the Louvre.
In 1815 Louis XVIII finally concluded agreements with the Austrian government for the keeping of pieces such as Veronese's Wedding at Cana which was exchanged for a large Le Brun or the repurchase of the Albani collection.
Restoration and Second Empire
During the Restoration (1814-1830), Louis XVIII and Charles X between them added 135 pieces at a cost of 720,000 francs and created the department of Egyptian antiquities curated by Champollion, increased by more than 7,000 works with the acquisition of antiquities in the Edme-Antoine Durand, the Egyptian collection of Henry Salt or the second collection former by Bernardino Drovetti.
This was less than the amount given for rehabilitation of Versailles, and the Louvre suffered relative to the rest of Paris.
After the creation of the French Second Republic in 1848, the new government allocated two million francs for repair work and ordered the completion of the Galerie d'Apollon, the Salon Carré, and the Grande Galérie.
Damage during the 1871 Paris Commune
The Louvre was damaged during the suppression of the Paris Commune.
On 23 May 1871, as the French Army advanced into Paris, a force of Communards led by Jules Bergeret set fire to the adjoining Tuileries Palace.
The fire burned for forty-eight hours, entirely destroying the interior of the palace and spreading to the museum next to it.
The library of the museum and some of the adjoining halls were destroyed, but the museum was saved by the efforts of Paris firemen and museum employees.
Third Republic and World Wars
During the Third Republic (1870-1940)
the Louvre acquired new pieces mainly via donations and gifts.
The Société des Amis du Louvre (established in 1897) donated the Pietà of Villeneuve-lès-Avignon, and in 1863 an expedition uncovered the sculpture Winged Victory of Samothrace in the Aegean Sea.
This piece, though heavily damaged, has been prominently displayed since 1884.
Museum expansion slowed after World War I, and the collection did not acquire many significant new works; exceptions were Georges de La Tour's Saint Thomas and Baron Edmond de Rothschild's (1845-1934) 1935 donation of 4,000 prints, 3,000 drawings, and 500 illustrated books.
On 27 August 1939, after two days of packing, truck convoys began to leave Paris.
By 28 December, the museum was cleared of most works, except those that were too heavy and "unimportant paintings that were left in the basement".
In early 1945, after the liberation of France, art began returning to the Louvre.
Grand Louvre Pyramids
By 1874, the Louvre Palace had achieved its present form of an almost rectangular structure with the Sully Wing to the east containing the Cour Carrée (Square Court) and the oldest parts of the Louvre; and two wings which wrap the Cour Napoléon, the Richelieu Wing to the north and the Denon Wing, which borders the Seine to the south.
In 1983, French President François Mitterrand proposed, as one of his Grands Projets, the Grand Louvre plan to renovate the building and relocate the Finance Ministry, allowing displays throughout the building.
Architect I. M. Pei was awarded the project and proposed a glass pyramid to stand over a new entrance in the main court, the Cour Napoléon.
The pyramid and its underground lobby were inaugurated on 15 October 1988 and the Louvre Pyramid was completed in 1989.
The second phase of the Grand Louvre plan, the Pyramide Inversée (Inverted Pyramid), was completed in 1993.
As of 2002, attendance had doubled since completion.
File:Louvre Museum Wikimedia Commons.jpg|The Louvre Palace and the pyramid (by night)
File:Paris July 2011-27a.jpg|The Louvre Palace and the pyramid (by day)
21st century
The Musée du Louvre contains more than 380,000 objects and displays 35,000 works of art in eight curatorial departments with more than dedicated to the permanent collection.
The Louvre exhibits sculptures, objets d'art, paintings, drawings, and archaeological finds.
pavilion eventually opened in 2012, consisting of ground- and lower-ground-level interior spaces topped by a golden, undulating roof (fashioned from almost 9,000 steel tubes that form an interior web) that seems to float within the neo-Classical Visconti Courtyard in the middle of the Louvre's south wing.
The galleries, which the museum had initially hoped to open by 2009, represent the first major architectural intervention at the Louvre since the addition of I.M. Pei's glass pyramid in 1989.
On 5 February 2015, about one hundred archaeologists, protesting against commercial private involvement to protect France's heritage, blocked Louvre's ticket desks to facilitate free access to the museum.
At least one announcement reading "Free entrance offered by the archeologists" has been attached to the ticket desk and a number of people visited the museum free of charge.
Since 2003, the museum has been required to generate funds for projects.
By 2006, government funds had dipped from 75 percent of the total budget to 62 percent.
Every year, the Louvre now raises as much as it gets from the state, about €122 million.
The government pays for operating costs (salaries, safety and maintenance), while the rest - new wings, refurbishments, acquisitions - is up to the museum to finance.
A further €3 million to €5 million a year is raised by the Louvre from exhibitions that it curates for other museums, while the host museum keeps the ticket money.
In 2008, the French government provided $180 million of the Louvre's yearly $350 million budget; the remainder came from private contributions and ticket sales.
The Louvre employs a staff of 2,000 led by Director Jean-Luc Martinez, who reports to the French Ministry of Culture and Communications.
Martinez replaced Henri Loyrette in April 2013.
Under Loyrette, who replaced Pierre Rosenberg in 2001, the Louvre has undergone policy changes that allow it to lend and borrow more works than before.
The €98.5 million expansion of the Islamic Art galleries in 2012 received state funding of €31 million, as well as €17 million from the Alwaleed Bin Talal Foundation founded by the eponymous Saudi prince.
The republic of Azerbaijan, the Emir of Kuwait, the Sultan of Oman and King Mohammed VI of Morocco donated in total €26 million.
In addition, the opening of the Louvre Abu Dhabi is supposed to provide €400 million over the course of 30 years for its use of the museum's brand.
Abu Dhabi
On 8 November 2017, a direct extension of the Louvre, Louvre Abu Dhabi, opened its doors to the public in the city of Abu Dhabi.
A 30-year agreement, signed by French Culture Minister Renaud Donnedieu de Vabres and Sheik Sultan bin Tahnoon Al Nahyan, established the museum on Saadiyat Island in Abu Dhabi in exchange for €832,000,000 (US$1.3 billion).
The Louvre Abu Dhabi, designed by the French architect Jean Nouvel and the engineering firm of Buro Happold, occupy and is covered by an iconic metallic roof designed to cast rays of light mimicking sunlight passing through date palm fronds in an oasis.
France agreed to rotate between 200 and 300 artworks during a 10-year period; to provide management expertise; and to provide four temporary exhibitions a year for 15 years.
The art will come from multiple museums, including the Louvre, the Georges Pompidou Centre, the Musée d'Orsay, Versailles, the Musée Guimet, the Musée Rodin, and the Musée du quai Branly.
Iran
In March 2018 an exhibition of dozens of artworks and relics belonging to France’s Louvre Museum was opened to visitors in Tehran, as a result of an agreement between Iranian and French presidents in 2016.
In the Louvre, two departments were allocated to the antiquities of the Iranian civilization, and the managers of the two departments visited Tehran.
Relics belonging to Ancient Egypt, Rome and Mesopotamia as well as French royal items were showcased at the Tehran exhibition.
Iran’s National Museum building was designed and constructed by French architect André Godard.
Following its time in Tehran, the exhibition is set to be held in the Khorasan Grand Museum in Mashhad, northeastern Iran in June 2018.
Conservation
In 2009, Minister of Culture Frédéric Mitterrand approved a plan that would have created a storage facility northwest of Paris to hold objects from the Louvre and two other national museums in Paris's flood zone, the Musée du Quai Branly and the Musée d'Orsay; the plan was later scrapped.
In 2013, his successor Aurélie Filippetti announced that the Louvre would move more than 250,000 works of art held in a basement storage area in Liévin; the cost of the project, estimated at €60 million, will be split between the region (49%) and the Louvre (51%).
The Louvre will be the sole owner and manager of the store.
and until the identification of their rightful owners, which declined at the end of the 1960s, they are registered indefinitely on separate inventories from the museum's collections.
They were exhibited in 1946 and shown all together to the public during four years (1950-1954) in order to allow rightful claimants to identify their properties, then stored or displayed, according to their interest, in several French museums including the Louvre.
From 1951 to 1965, about 37 pieces were restituted.
Since November 1996, the partly illustrated catalogue of 1947-1949 has been accessible online and completed.
In 1997, Prime Minister Alain Juppé initiated the Mattéoli Commission, headed by Jean Mattéoli, to investigate the matter and according to the government, the Louvre is in charge of 678 pieces of artwork still unclaimed by their rightful owners.
During the late 1990s, the comparison of the American war archives, which had not been done before, with the French and German ones as well as two court cases which finally settled some of the heirs' rights (Gentili di Giuseppe and Rosenberg families) allowed more accurate investigations.
Since 1996, the restitutions, according sometimes to less formal criteria, concerned 47 more pieces (26 paintings, with 6 from the Louvre including a then displayed Tiepolo), until the last claims of French owners and their heirs ended again in 2006.
According to Serge Klarsfeld, since the now complete and constant publicity which the artworks got in 1996, the majority of the French Jewish community is nevertheless in favour of the return to the normal French civil rule of prescription acquisitive of any unclaimed good after another long period of time and consequently to their ultimate integration into the common French heritage instead of their transfer to foreign institutions like during World War II.
Napoleon's campaigns acquired Italian pieces by treaties, as war reparations, and Northern European pieces as spoils as well as some antiquities excavated in Egypt, though the vast majority of the latter were seized as war reparations by the British army and are now part of collections of the British Museum.
On the other hand, the Dendera zodiac is, like the Rosetta Stone, claimed by Egypt even though it was acquired in 1821, before the Egyptian Anti-export legislation of 1835.
The Louvre administration has thus argued in favor of retaining this item despite requests by Egypt for its return.
The museum participates too in arbitration sessions held via UNESCO's Committee for Promoting the Return of Cultural Property to Its Countries of Origin.
The museum consequently returned in 2009 five Egyptian fragments of frescoes (30 cm x 15 cm each) whose existence of the tomb of origin had only been brought to the authorities attention in 2008, eight to five years after their good-faith acquisition by the museum from two private collections and after the necessary respect of the procedure of déclassement from French public collections before the Commission scientifique nationale des collections des musées de France.
Collections
The Musée du Louvre contains about 460,000 objects and displays 35,000 works of art in eight curatorial departments.
Egyptian antiquities
The department, comprising over 50,000 pieces,
The department's origins lie in the royal collection, but it was augmented by Napoleon's 1798 expeditionary trip with Dominique Vivant, the future director of the Louvre.
After Jean-François Champollion translated the Rosetta Stone, Charles X decreed that an Egyptian Antiquities department be created.
Champollion advised the purchase of three collections, formed by Edmé-Antoine Durand, Henry Salt and Bernardino Drovet; these additions added 7,000 works.
Growth continued via acquisitions by Auguste Mariette, founder of the Egyptian Museum in Cairo.
Mariette, after excavations at Memphis, sent back crates of archaeological finds including The Seated Scribe.
Near Eastern antiquities
Near Eastern antiquities, the second newest department, dates from 1881 and presents an overview of early Near Eastern civilization and "first settlements", before the arrival of Islam.
The department is divided into three geographic areas: the Levant, Mesopotamia (Iraq), and Persia (Iran).
The collection's development corresponds to archaeological work such as Paul-Émile Botta's 1843 expedition to Khorsabad and the discovery of Sargon II's palace.
This section also contains rare objects from Persepolis which were also lent to the British Museum for its Ancient Persia exhibition in 2005.
Greek, Etruscan, and Roman
The Greek, Etruscan, and Roman department displays pieces from the Mediterranean Basin dating from the Neolithic to the 6th century.
The collection spans from the Cycladic period to the decline of the Roman Empire.
This department is one of the museum's oldest; it began with appropriated royal art, some of which was acquired under Francis I.
Initially, the collection focused on marble sculptures, such as the Venus de Milo.
Works such as the Apollo Belvedere arrived during the Napoleonic Wars, but these pieces were returned after Napoleon I's fall in 1815.
In the 19th century, the Louvre acquired works including vases from the Durand collection, bronzes such as the Borghese Vase from the Bibliothèque nationale.
After the 4th century BC, focus on the human form increased, exemplified by the Borghese Gladiator.
The Louvre holds masterpieces from the Hellenistic era, including The Winged Victory of Samothrace (190 BC) and the Venus de Milo, symbolic of classical art.
These exhibits, comprising ceramics, glass, metalware, wood, ivory, carpet, textiles, and miniatures, include more than 5,000 works and 1,000 shards.
Originally part of the decorative arts department, the holdings became separate in 2003.
Among the works are the Pyxide d'al-Mughira, a 10th century ivory box from Andalusia; the Baptistery of Saint-Louis, an engraved brass basin from the 13th or 14th century Mamluk period; and the 10th century Shroud of Saint-Josse from Iran.
Sculpture
The sculpture department comprises work created before 1850 that does not belong in the Etruscan, Greek, and Roman department.
The Louvre has been a repository of sculpted material since its time as a palace; however, only ancient architecture was displayed until 1824, except for Michelangelo's Dying Slave and Rebellious Slave.
Initially the collection included only 100 pieces, the rest of the royal sculpture collection being at Versailles.
It remained small until 1847, when Léon Laborde was given control of the department.
Laborde developed the medieval section and purchased the first such statues and sculptures in the collection, King Childebert and stanga door, respectively.
Among the budding collection's most prized works were pietre dure vases and bronzes.
The Durand collection's 1825 acquisition added "ceramics, enamels, and stained glass", and 800 pieces were given by Pierre Révoil.
The onset of Romanticism rekindled interest in Renaissance and Medieval artwork, and the Sauvageot donation expanded the department with 1,500 middle-age and faïence works.
In 1862, the Campana collection added gold jewelry and maiolicas, mainly from the 15th and 16th centuries.
The works are displayed on the Richelieu Wing's first floor and in the Apollo Gallery, named by the painter Charles Le Brun, who was commissioned by Louis XIV (the Sun King) to decorate the space in a solar theme.
The medieval collection contains the coronation crown of Louis XIV, Charles V's sceptre, and the 12th century porphyry vase.
The Renaissance art holdings include Giambologna's bronze Nessus and Deianira and the tapestry Maximillian's Hunt.
From later periods, highlights include Madame de Pompadour's Sèvres vase collection and Napoleon III's apartments.
from the 13th century to 1848 and is managed by 12 curators who oversee the collection's display.
Nearly two-thirds are by French artists, and more than 1,200 are Northern European.
The Italian paintings compose most of the remnants of Francis I and Louis XIV's collections, others are unreturned artwork from the Napoleon era, and some were bought.
The collection began with Francis, who acquired works from Italian masters such as Raphael and Michelangelo and brought Leonardo da Vinci to his court.
After the French Revolution, the Royal Collection formed the nucleus of the Louvre.
When the d'Orsay train station was converted into the Musée d'Orsay in 1986, the collection was split, and pieces completed after the 1848 Revolution were moved to the new museum.
French and Northern European works are in the Richelieu wing and Cour Carrée; Spanish and Italian paintings are on the first floor of the Denon wing.
Hyacinthe Rigaud's Louis XIV; Jacques-Louis David's The Coronation of Napoleon; Théodore Géricault's The Raft of the Medusa; and Eugène Delacroix's Liberty Leading the People.
Nicolas Poussin, the Le Nain brothers, Philippe de Champaigne, Le Brun, La Tour, Watteau, Fragonard, Ingres, Corot, and Delacroix are well represented.
Northern European works include Johannes Vermeer's The Lacemaker and The Astronomer; Caspar David Friedrich's The Tree of Crows; Rembrandt's The Supper at Emmaus, Bathsheba at Her Bath, and The Slaughtered Ox.
The Italian holdings are notable, particularly the Renaissance collection.
The works include Andrea Mantegna and Giovanni Bellini's Calvarys, which reflect realism and detail "meant to depict the significant events of a greater spiritual world".
The High Renaissance collection includes Leonardo da Vinci's Mona Lisa, Virgin and Child with St. Anne, St. John the Baptist, and Madonna of the Rocks.
Caravaggio is represented by The Fortune Teller and Death of the Virgin.
From 16th century Venice, the Louvre displays Titian's Le Concert Champetre, The Entombment and The Crowning with Thorns.
The La Caze Collection, a bequest to the Musée du Louvre in 1869 by Louis La Caze, was the largest contribution of a person in the history of the Louvre.
La Caze gave 584 paintings of his personal collection to the museum.
The bequest included Antoine Watteau's Commedia dell'arte player of Pierrot ("Gilles").
In 2007, this bequest was the topic of the exhibition "1869:
Watteau, Chardin... entrent au Louvre.
La collection La Caze".
Some of the best known paintings of the museum have been digitized by the French Center for Research and Restoration of the Museums of France.
Prints and drawings
The prints and drawings department encompasses works on paper.
The origins of the collection were the 8,600 works in the Royal Collection (Cabinet du Roi), which were increased via state appropriation, purchases such as the 1,200 works from Fillipo Baldinucci's collection in 1806, and donations.
The department opened on 5 August 1797, with 415 pieces displayed in the Galerie d'Apollon.
The collection is organized into three sections: the core Cabinet du Roi, 14,000 royal copper printing-plates, and the donations of Edmond de Rothschild, which include 40,000 prints, 3,000 drawings, and 5,000 illustrated books.
The holdings are displayed in the Pavillon de Flore; due to the fragility of the paper medium, only a portion are displayed at one time.
Parallel to the Jeu de Paume is the Orangerie, home to the famous Water Lilies paintings by Claude Monet.
The Louvre is slightly askew of the Historic Axis (Axe historique), a roughly eight-kilometre (five-mile) architectural line bisecting the city.
It begins on the east in the Louvre courtyard and runs west along the Champs-Élysées.
In 1871, the burning of the Tuileries Palace by the Paris Commune revealed that the Louvre was slightly askew of the Axe despite past appearances to the contrary.
The Louvre can be reached by the Palais Royal - Musée du Louvre Métro or the Louvre-Rivoli stations.
The Louvre has three entrances: the main entrance at the pyramid, an entrance from the Carrousel du Louvre underground shopping mall, and an entrance at the Porte des Lions (near the western end of the Denon wing).
Under the main entrance to the museum is the Carrousel du Louvre, a shopping mall operated by Unibail-Rodamco.
Among other stores, it has the first Apple Store in France, and a McDonald's restaurant, the presence of which has created controversy.
The use of cameras and video recorders is permitted inside, but flash photography is forbidden.
Gallery
File:Statue Aïn Ghazal Louvre AO 14012018 1.jpg| Statue, plaster and reed, Ain Ghazal, Jordan, 6050-7050 BC
File:Head figurine Spedos Louvre Ma2709.jpg|Cycladic, a votive head, 2700-2300 BC
File:Stele Ra-Horakhty Louvre N3795.jpg|Egyptian, stele, Priest burning incense before Ra-Horakhty-Atum, c. 900 BC
File:Ibex rhyton AO3115.jpg|Ancient Persia, the Ibex Rhyton, 600-300 BC
File:003MA Equestrian Kouros (2).jpg|Ancient Greek, Athens, The Rampin Rider,
File:Etruscan amphora Louvre E703 side B.jpg|Etruscan amphora, Diomedes and Polyxena, c. 540-530 BC
File:Eros medallion Louvre Bj2248.jpg|Hellenic Near East, The Eros Medallion, c. 250-200 BC
File:Fayum-34.jpg|Fayum Egyptian, Fayum mummy portrait
File:Marcus agrippa louvre portrait.jpg|Roman, portrait of Marcus Agrippa, 25 BC
File:Apostles Christ ivory Louvre OA3850.jpg|Frankish, ivory, Christ between two apostles, 5th century
File:Cup lustre Louvre OA8179.jpg|Islamic art from Iraq, terracotta cup, 9th century
File:Reliure.jpg|Romanesque art from Maastricht, Reliquary, 11th century
File:Louvre saint michel rf1427.jpg|Romanesque architecture from France, St Michael and the Devil, 12th century
File:Giotto di Bondone 002.jpg|Italian Renaissance painting, St Francis receiving the stigmata, Giotto, c. 1300
File:Rogier van der Weyden 030.jpg|Early Netherlandish painting, The Annunciation, Rogier van der Weyden, 1435
File:Meister der Pietà von Avignon 004.jpg|Gothic art from France, The Pieta of Villeneuve les Avignon, Enguerrand Quarton, 1460
File:Domenico ghirlandaio, ritratto di nonno con nipote.jpg|Italian Renaissance painting, Portrait of an old man and his grandson, Ghirlandaio, 1488
File:Quentin Massys 001.jpg|Flemish painting, The Money Changer and His Wife, Quentin Massys, 1514
File:Baldassare Castiglione, by Raffaello Sanzio, from C2RMF retouched.jpg|Italian Renaissance painting, Baltasar de Castiglione, Raphael, c. 1515
File:'Dying_Slave'_Michelangelo_JBU004.jpg|Italian Renaissance sculpture, Dying Slave, Michelangelo, 1513-1516
File:Paolo Veronese 010.jpg|Venetian Mannerist painting, The Crucifixion, Paolo Veronese, c. 1550
File:La Diseuse de bonne aventure, Caravaggio (Louvre INV 55) 02.jpg|Italian Baroque painting, The Fortune Teller, Caravaggio, c. 1600
File:Charles I of England.jpg|English painting, Charles I at the Hunt, van Dyck, 1635
File:Jan Vermeer van Delft 016.jpg|Dutch
Baroque, The Lacemaker, Vermeer, 1664
File:Diego Velázquez 029.jpg|Spanish painting, Infanta María Margarita, Velázquez, 1655
File:The shepherds of arcadia.jpg|French Classicism, The Shepherds of Arcadia, Poussin, c. 1640
File:Boucher Diane sortant du bain Louvre 2712.jpg|French Rococo, Diana bathing, Boucher, 1742
File:Jean-Auguste-Dominique Ingres - La Baigneuse Valpinçon.jpg|French Classical painting, The Bather, Ingres, 1808
File:Eugène Delacroix - La liberté guidant le peuple.jpg|French Romantic art, Liberty Leading the People, Delacroix, 1830
File:Cabinet sur piètement - Cabinet on stand - Vers 1690-1710 - Boulle - Louvre - OA 5469.jpg|André-Charles Boulle Cabinet sur piètement, 1690-1710
File:Cabinet sur piètement - Tiroirs - Cabinet on stand - Drawers - Vers 1690-1710 - Boulle - Louvre - OA 5469.jpg|André-Charles Boulle Cabinet sur piètement
File:Musée du Louvre - Département des Objets d'art - Salle 34 -2.JPG|André-Charles Boulle
File:Gaine - Pedestal - vers 1700-1720 - Boulle - Louvre - OA 5058 ou 5061.jpg|André-Charles Boulle, 1700-1720
File:Musée du Louvre - Département des Objets d'art - Salle 34 -1.JPG|André-Charles Boulle
File:Régulateur - Regulator clock - vers 1714-1719 - Oppenordt - Boulle - Louvre - OA 6746.jpg|André-Charles Boulle 1714-1719
Exhibitions
*Leonardo da Vinci, Exhibition, Louvre Museum, Paris: 24 October 2019 - 24 February 2020
* Center for Research and Restoration of Museums of France
Works cited
