A tornado is a rapidly rotating column of air that is in contact with both the surface of the Earth and a cumulonimbus cloud or, in rare cases, the base of a cumulus cloud.
The windstorm is often referred to as a twister, whirlwind or cyclone, although the word cyclone is used in meteorology to name a weather system with a low-pressure area in the center around which, from an observer looking down toward the surface of the earth, winds blow counterclockwise in the Northern Hemisphere and clockwise in the Southern.
Tornadoes come in many shapes and sizes, and they are often visible in the form of a condensation funnel originating from the base of a cumulonimbus cloud, with a cloud of rotating debris and dust beneath it.
Most tornadoes have wind speeds less than , are about across, and travel a few miles (several kilometers) before dissipating.
The most extreme tornadoes can attain wind speeds of more than , are more than in diameter, and stay on the ground for dozens of miles (more than 100 km).
Various types of tornadoes include the multiple vortex tornado, landspout, and waterspout.
Waterspouts are characterized by a spiraling funnel-shaped wind current, connecting to a large cumulus or cumulonimbus cloud.
They are generally classified as non-supercellular tornadoes that develop over bodies of water, but there is disagreement over whether to classify them as true tornadoes.
These spiraling columns of air frequently develop in tropical areas close to the equator and are less common at high latitudes.
Other tornado-like phenomena that exist in nature include the gustnado, dust devil, fire whirl, and steam devil.
Tornadoes occur most frequently in North America, particularly in central and southeastern regions of the United States colloquially known as tornado alley, as well as in Southern Africa, northwestern and southeast Europe, western and southeastern Australia, New Zealand, Bangladesh and adjacent eastern India, and southeastern South America.
Doppler radar data, photogrammetry, and ground swirl patterns (trochoidal marks) may also be analyzed to determine intensity and assign a rating.
Etymology
The word tornado comes from the Spanish word tornado .
Tornadoes' opposite phenomena are the derechoes (, from , "straight").
A tornado is also commonly referred to as a "twister", and is also sometimes referred to by the old-fashioned colloquial term cyclone.
The term "cyclone" is used as a synonym for "tornado" in the often-aired 1939 film The Wizard of Oz.
The term "twister" is also used in that film, along with being the title of the 1996 tornado-related film Twister.
Definitions
A tornado is "a violently rotating column of air, in contact with the ground, either pendant from a cumuliform cloud or underneath a cumuliform cloud, and often (but not always) visible as a funnel cloud".
For a vortex to be classified as a tornado, it must be in contact with both the ground and the cloud base.
Scientists have not yet created a complete definition of the word; for example, there is disagreement as to whether separate touchdowns of the same funnel constitute separate tornadoes.
Funnel cloud
A tornado is not necessarily visible; however, the intense low pressure caused by the high wind speeds (as described by Bernoulli's principle) and rapid rotation (due to cyclostrophic balance) usually cause water vapor in the air to condense into cloud droplets due to adiabatic cooling.
This results in the formation of a visible funnel cloud or condensation funnel.
There is some disagreement over the definition of a funnel cloud and a condensation funnel.
According to the Glossary of Meteorology, a funnel cloud is any rotating cloud pendant from a cumulus or cumulonimbus, and thus most tornadoes are included under this definition.
Among many meteorologists, the 'funnel cloud' term is strictly defined as a rotating cloud which is not associated with strong winds at the surface, and condensation funnel is a broad term for any rotating cloud below a cumuliform cloud.
Several tornadoes are sometimes spawned from the same large-scale storm system.
If there is no break in activity, this is considered a tornado outbreak (although the term "tornado outbreak" has various definitions).
A period of several successive days with tornado outbreaks in the same general area (spawned by multiple weather systems) is a tornado outbreak sequence, occasionally called an extended tornado outbreak.
Characteristics
Size and shape
Most tornadoes take on the appearance of a narrow funnel, a few hundred yards (meters) across, with a small cloud of debris near the ground.
Tornadoes may be obscured completely by rain or dust.
These tornadoes are especially dangerous, as even experienced meteorologists might not see them.
In the United States, tornadoes are around across on average and travel on the ground for .
In terms of path length, the Tri-State Tornado, which affected parts of Missouri, Illinois, and Indiana on March 18, 1925, was on the ground continuously for .
Many tornadoes which appear to have path lengths of or longer are composed of a family of tornadoes which have formed in quick succession; however, there is no substantial evidence that this occurred in the case of the Tri-State Tornado.
In fact, modern reanalysis of the path suggests that the tornado may have begun further west than previously thought.
Appearance
Tornadoes can have a wide range of colors, depending on the environment in which they form.
Those that form in dry environments can be nearly invisible, marked only by swirling debris at the base of the funnel.
Condensation funnels that pick up little or no debris can be gray to white.
While traveling over a body of water (as a waterspout), tornadoes can turn white or even blue.
Slow-moving funnels, which ingest a considerable amount of debris and dirt, are usually darker, taking on the color of debris.
Tornadoes in the Great Plains can turn red because of the reddish tint of the soil, and tornadoes in mountainous areas can travel over snow-covered ground, turning white.
Dust kicked up by the winds of the parent thunderstorm, heavy rain and hail, and the darkness of night are all factors which can reduce the visibility of tornadoes.
Tornadoes occurring in these conditions are especially dangerous, since only weather radar observations, or possibly the sound of an approaching tornado, serve as any warning to those in the storm's path.
Most significant tornadoes form under the storm's updraft base, which is rain-free, making them visible.
Also, most tornadoes occur in the late afternoon, when the bright sun can penetrate even the thickest clouds.
Rotation
Tornadoes normally rotate cyclonically (when viewed from above, this is counterclockwise in the northern hemisphere and clockwise in the southern).
While large-scale storms always rotate cyclonically due to the Coriolis effect, thunderstorms and tornadoes are so small that the direct influence of the Coriolis effect is unimportant, as indicated by their large Rossby numbers.
Supercells and tornadoes rotate cyclonically in numerical simulations even when the Coriolis effect is neglected.
Low-level mesocyclones and tornadoes owe their rotation to complex processes within the supercell and ambient environment.
Approximately 1 percent of tornadoes rotate in an anticyclonic direction in the northern hemisphere.
Typically, systems as weak as landspouts and gustnadoes can rotate anticyclonically, and usually only those which form on the anticyclonic shear side of the descending rear flank downdraft (RFD) in a cyclonic supercell.
On rare occasions, anticyclonic tornadoes form in association with the mesoanticyclone of an anticyclonic supercell, in the same manner as the typical cyclonic tornado, or as a companion tornado either as a satellite tornado or associated with anticyclonic eddies within a supercell.
Sound and seismology
Tornadoes emit widely on the acoustics spectrum and the sounds are caused by multiple mechanisms.
Various sounds of tornadoes have been reported, mostly related to familiar sounds for the witness and generally some variation of a whooshing roar.
Popularly reported sounds include a freight train, rushing rapids or waterfall, a nearby jet engine, or combinations of these.
Many tornadoes are not audible from much distance; the nature of and the propagation distance of the audible sound depends on atmospheric conditions and topography.
The winds of the tornado vortex and of constituent turbulent eddies, as well as airflow interaction with the surface and debris, contribute to the sounds.
Funnel clouds also produce sounds.
Funnel clouds and small tornadoes are reported as whistling, whining, humming, or the buzzing of innumerable bees or electricity, or more or less harmonic, whereas many tornadoes are reported as a continuous, deep rumbling, or an irregular sound of "noise".
Since many tornadoes are audible only when very near, sound is not to be thought of as a reliable warning signal for a tornado.
Tornadoes are also not the only source of such sounds in severe thunderstorms; any strong, damaging wind, a severe hail volley, or continuous thunder in a thunderstorm may produce a roaring sound.
Tornadoes also produce identifiable inaudible infrasonic signatures.
Unlike audible signatures, tornadic signatures have been isolated; due to the long distance propagation of low-frequency sound, efforts are ongoing to develop tornado prediction and detection devices with additional value in understanding tornado morphology, dynamics, and creation.
Electromagnetic, lightning, and other effects
Tornadoes emit on the electromagnetic spectrum, with sferics and E-field effects detected.
There are observed correlations between tornadoes and patterns of lightning.
Tornadic storms do not contain more lightning than other storms and some tornadic cells never produce lightning at all.
More often than not, overall cloud-to-ground (CG) lightning activity decreases as a tornado touches the surface and returns to the baseline level when the tornado dissipates.
In many cases, intense tornadoes and thunderstorms exhibit an increased and anomalous dominance of positive polarity CG discharges.
Electromagnetics and lightning have little or nothing to do directly with what drives tornadoes (tornadoes are basically a thermodynamic phenomenon), although there are likely connections with the storm and environment affecting both phenomena.
Luminosity has been reported in the past and is probably due to misidentification of external light sources such as lightning, city lights, and power flashes from broken lines, as internal sources are now uncommonly reported and are not known to ever have been recorded.
In addition to winds, tornadoes also exhibit changes in atmospheric variables such as temperature, moisture, and pressure.
For example, on June 24, 2003 near Manchester, South Dakota, a probe measured a 100 mbar (hPa) (2.95 inHg) pressure decrease.
The pressure dropped gradually as the vortex approached then dropped extremely rapidly to 850 mbar (hPa) (25.10 inHg) in the core of the violent tornado before rising rapidly as the vortex moved away, resulting in a V-shape pressure trace.
Temperature tends to decrease and moisture content to increase in the immediate vicinity of a tornado.
Life cycle
Supercell relationship
Tornadoes often develop from a class of thunderstorms known as supercells.
Supercells contain mesocyclones, an area of organized rotation a few miles up in the atmosphere, usually across.
Most intense tornadoes (EF3 to EF5 on the Enhanced Fujita Scale) develop from supercells.
In addition to tornadoes, very heavy rain, frequent lightning, strong wind gusts, and hail are common in such storms.
Most tornadoes from supercells follow a recognizable life cycle.
That begins when increasing rainfall drags with it an area of quickly descending air known as the rear flank downdraft (RFD).
This downdraft accelerates as it approaches the ground, and drags the supercell's rotating mesocyclone towards the ground with it.
Maturity
Initially, the tornado has a good source of warm, moist air flowing inward to power it, and it grows until it reaches the "mature stage".
This can last from a few minutes to more than an hour, and during that time a tornado often causes the most damage, and in rare cases can be more than one mile (1.6 km) across.
The low pressured atmosphere at the base of the tornado is essential to the endurance of the system.
Meanwhile, the RFD, now an area of cool surface winds, begins to wrap around the tornado, cutting off the inflow of warm air which previously fed the tornado.
Types
Multiple vortex
A multiple-vortex tornado is a type of tornado in which two or more columns of spinning air rotate about their own axis and at the same time around a common center.
A multi-vortex structure can occur in almost any circulation, but is very often observed in intense tornadoes.
These vortices often create small areas of heavier damage along the main tornado path.
In contrast, tornadic waterspouts are stronger tornadoes over water.
They form over water similarly to mesocyclonic tornadoes, or are stronger tornadoes which cross over water.
Since they form from severe thunderstorms and can be far more intense, faster, and longer-lived than fair weather waterspouts, they are more dangerous.
In official tornado statistics, waterspouts are generally not counted unless they affect land, though some European weather agencies count waterspouts and tornadoes together.
Landspout
A landspout, or dust-tube tornado, is a tornado not associated with a mesocyclone.
The name stems from their characterization as a "fair weather waterspout on land".
Waterspouts and landspouts share many defining characteristics, including relative weakness, short lifespan, and a small, smooth condensation funnel which often does not reach the surface.
Landspouts also create a distinctively laminar cloud of dust when they make contact with the ground, due to their differing mechanics from true mesoform tornadoes.
Though usually weaker than classic tornadoes, they can produce strong winds which could cause serious damage.
They usually cause small areas of heavier rotational wind damage among areas of straight-line wind damage.
Dust devil
A dust devil (also known as a whirlwind) resembles a tornado in that it is a vertical swirling column of air.
However, they form under clear skies and are no stronger than the weakest tornadoes.
They form when a strong convective updraft is formed near the ground on a hot day.
If there is enough low level wind shear, the column of hot, rising air can develop a small cyclonic motion that can be seen near the ground.
They are not considered tornadoes because they form during fair weather and are not associated with any clouds.
However, they can, on occasion, result in major damage.
Fire whirls
Small-scale, tornado-like circulations can occur near any intense surface heat source.
Those that occur near intense wildfires are called fire whirls.
They are not considered tornadoes, except in the rare case where they connect to a pyrocumulus or other cumuliform cloud above.
Fire whirls usually are not as strong as tornadoes associated with thunderstorms.
They can, however, produce significant damage.
Tornadoes vary in intensity regardless of shape, size, and location, though strong tornadoes are typically larger than weak tornadoes.
The association with track length and duration also varies, although longer track tornadoes tend to be stronger.
In the case of violent tornadoes, only a small portion of the path is of violent intensity, most of the higher intensity from subvortices.
Outside Tornado Alley, and North America in general, violent tornadoes are extremely rare.
This is apparently mostly due to the lesser number of tornadoes overall, as research shows that tornado intensity distributions are fairly similar worldwide.
A few significant tornadoes occur annually in Europe, Asia, southern Africa, and southeastern South America, respectively.
Climatology
The United States has the most tornadoes of any country, nearly four times more than estimated in all of Europe, excluding waterspouts.
This is mostly due to the unique geography of the continent.
North America is a large continent that extends from the tropics north into arctic areas, and has no major east-west mountain range to block air flow between these two areas.
In the middle latitudes, where most tornadoes of the world occur, the Rocky Mountains block moisture and buckle the atmospheric flow, forcing drier air at mid-levels of the troposphere due to downsloped winds, and causing the formation of a low pressure area downwind to the east of the mountains.
Increased westerly flow off the Rockies force the formation of a dry line when the flow aloft is strong, while the Gulf of Mexico fuels abundant low-level moisture in the southerly flow to its east.
This unique topography allows for frequent collisions of warm and cold air, the conditions that breed strong, long-lived storms throughout the year.
A large portion of these tornadoes form in an area of the central United States known as Tornado Alley.
This area extends into Canada, particularly Ontario and the Prairie Provinces, although southeast Quebec, the interior of British Columbia, and western New Brunswick are also tornado-prone.
Tornadoes also occur across northeastern Mexico.
NOAA's has a higher average 100 per year in Canada.
The Netherlands has the highest average number of recorded tornadoes per area of any country (more than 20, or 0.0013 per sq mi (0.00048 per km2), annually), followed by the UK (around 33, or 0.00035 per sq mi (0.00013 per km2), per year), although those are of lower intensity, briefer and cause minor damage.
Other areas of the world that have frequent tornadoes include South Africa, the La Plata Basin area, portions of Europe, Australia and New Zealand, and far eastern Asia.
Tornadoes are most common in spring and least common in winter, but tornadoes can occur any time of year that favorable conditions occur.
Tornadoes are focused in the right front quadrant of landfalling tropical cyclones, which tend to occur in the late summer and autumn.
Tornadoes can also be spawned as a result of eyewall mesovortices, which persist until landfall.
Tornado occurrence is highly dependent on the time of day, because of solar heating.
Worldwide, most tornadoes occur in the late afternoon, between 3 pm and 7 pm local time, with a peak near 5 pm.
Destructive tornadoes can occur at any time of day.
The Gainesville Tornado of 1936, one of the deadliest tornadoes in history, occurred at 8:30 am local time.
Unsettled conditions and weather fronts transverse the Islands at all times of the years and are responsible for spawning the tornadoes, which consequently form at all times of the year.
The United Kingdom has at least 34 tornadoes per year and possibly as many as 50, more than any other country in the world relative to its land area.
Most tornadoes in the United Kingdom are weak, but they are occasionally destructive.
For example, the Birmingham tornado of 2005 and the London tornado of 2006 both registered F2 on the Fujita scale and both caused significant damage and injury.
Associations with climate and climate change
Associations with various climate and environmental trends exist.
For example, an increase in the sea surface temperature of a source region (e.g. Gulf of Mexico and Mediterranean Sea) increases atmospheric moisture content.
Increased moisture can fuel an increase in severe weather and tornado activity, particularly in the cool season.
Some evidence does suggest that the Southern Oscillation is weakly correlated with changes in tornado activity, which vary by season and region, as well as whether the ENSO phase is that of El Niño or La Niña.
Research has found that fewer tornadoes and hailstorms occur in winter and spring in the U.S. central and southern plains during El Niño, and more occur during La Niña, than in years when temperatures in the Pacific are relatively stable.
Ocean conditions could be used to forecast extreme spring storm events several months in advance.
Climatic shifts may affect tornadoes via teleconnections in shifting the jet stream and the larger weather patterns.
The climate-tornado link is confounded by the forces affecting larger patterns and by the local, nuanced nature of tornadoes.
Although it is reasonable to suspect that global warming may affect trends in tornado activity, any such effect is not yet identifiable due to the complexity, local nature of the storms, and database quality issues.
Any effect would vary by region.
Detection
Rigorous attempts to warn of tornadoes began in the United States in the mid-20th century.
Before the 1950s, the only method of detecting a tornado was by someone seeing it on the ground.
Often, news of a tornado would reach a local weather office after the storm.
However, with the advent of weather radar, areas near a local office could get advance warning of severe weather.
The first public tornado warnings were issued in 1950 and the first tornado watches and convective outlooks came about in 1952.
In 1953, it was confirmed that hook echoes were associated with tornadoes.
By recognizing these radar signatures, meteorologists could detect thunderstorms probably producing tornadoes from several miles away.
Radar
Today, most developed countries have a network of weather radars, which serves as the primary method of detecting hook signatures that are likely associated with tornadoes.
In the United States and a few other countries, Doppler weather radar stations are used.
These devices measure the velocity and radial direction (towards or away from the radar) of the winds within a storm, and so can spot evidence of rotation in storms from over away.
When storms are distant from a radar, only areas high within the storm are observed and the important areas below are not sampled.
Data resolution also decreases with distance from the radar.
Some meteorological situations leading to tornadogenesis are not readily detectable by radar and tornado development may occasionally take place more quickly than radar can complete a scan and send the batch of data.
Doppler radar systems can detect mesocyclones within a supercell thunderstorm.
This allows meteorologists to predict tornado formations throughout thunderstorms.
Storm spotting
In the mid-1970s, the U.S. National Weather Service (NWS) increased its efforts to train storm spotters so they could spot key features of storms that indicate severe hail, damaging winds, and tornadoes, as well as storm damage and flash flooding.
The program was called Skywarn, and the spotters were local sheriff's deputies, state troopers, firefighters, ambulance drivers, amateur radio operators, civil defense (now emergency management) spotters, storm chasers, and ordinary citizens.
When severe weather is anticipated, local weather service offices request these spotters to look out for severe weather and report any tornadoes immediately, so that the office can warn of the hazard.
Spotters usually are trained by the NWS on behalf of their respective organizations, and report to them.
The organizations activate public warning systems such as sirens and the Emergency Alert System (EAS), and they forward the report to the NWS.
There are more than 230,000 trained Skywarn weather spotters across the United States.
In Canada, a similar network of volunteer weather watchers, called Canwarn, helps spot severe weather, with more than 1,000 volunteers.
In Europe, several nations are organizing spotter networks under the auspices of Skywarn Europe and the Tornado and Storm Research Organisation (TORRO) has maintained a network of spotters in the United Kingdom since 1974.
Storm spotters are required because radar systems such as NEXRAD do not really detect tornadoes; merely signatures which hint at the presence of tornadoes.
Radar may give a warning before there is any visual evidence of a tornado or an imminent one, but ground truth from an observer can either verify the threat or determine that a tornado is not imminent.
The spotter's ability to see what radar can't is especially important as distance from the radar site increases, because the radar beam becomes progressively higher in altitude further away from the radar, chiefly due to curvature of Earth, and the beam also spreads out.
Only wall clouds that rotate spawn tornadoes, and they usually precede the tornado between five and thirty minutes.
Rotating wall clouds may be a visual manifestation of a low-level mesocyclone.
Barring a low-level boundary, tornadogenesis is highly unlikely unless a rear flank downdraft occurs, which is usually visibly evidenced by evaporation of cloud adjacent to a corner of a wall cloud.
A tornado often occurs as this happens or shortly afterwards; first, a funnel cloud dips and in nearly all cases by the time it reaches halfway down, a surface swirl has already developed, signifying a tornado is on the ground before condensation connects the surface circulation to the storm.
Tornadoes may also develop without wall clouds, under flanking lines and on the leading edge.
Spotters watch all areas of a storm, and the cloud base and surface.
Extremes
The most record-breaking tornado in recorded history was the Tri-State Tornado, which roared through parts of Missouri, Illinois, and Indiana on March 18, 1925.
It was likely an F5, though tornadoes were not ranked on any scale in that era.
It holds records for longest path length (), longest duration (about 3.5 hours), and fastest forward speed for a significant tornado () anywhere on Earth.
In addition, it is the deadliest single tornado in United States history (695 dead).
The deadliest tornado in world history was the Daultipur-Salturia Tornado in Bangladesh on April 26, 1989, which killed approximately 1,300 people.
Though the reading was taken about above the ground, this is a testament to the power of the strongest tornadoes.
Waterspouts and tornadoes have been advanced as an explanation for instances of raining fish and other animals.
Safety
Though tornadoes can strike in an instant, there are precautions and preventative measures that people can take to increase the chances of surviving a tornado.
Authorities such as the Storm Prediction Center advise having a pre-determined plan should a tornado warning be issued.
When a warning is issued, going to a basement or an interior first-floor room of a sturdy building greatly increases chances of survival.
In tornado-prone areas, many buildings have storm cellars on the property.
These underground refuges have saved thousands of lives.
Some countries have meteorological agencies which distribute tornado forecasts and increase levels of alert of a possible tornado (such as tornado watches and warnings in the United States and Canada).
Weather radios provide an alarm when a severe weather advisory is issued for the local area, though these are mainly available only in the United States.
Unless the tornado is far away and highly visible, meteorologists advise that drivers park their vehicles far to the side of the road (so as not to block emergency traffic), and find a sturdy shelter.
If no sturdy shelter is nearby, getting low in a ditch is the next best option.
Highway overpasses are one of the worst places to take shelter during tornadoes, as the constricted space can be subject to increased wind speed and funneling of debris underneath the overpass.
It is often thought that opening windows will lessen the damage caused by the tornado.
While there is a large drop in atmospheric pressure inside a strong tornado, it is unlikely that the pressure drop would be enough to cause the house to explode.
Opening windows may actually increase the severity of the tornado's damage.
Another commonly held misconception is that highway overpasses provide adequate shelter from tornadoes.
This belief is partly inspired by widely circulated video captured during the 1991 tornado outbreak near Andover, Kansas, where a news crew and several other people take shelter under an overpass on the Kansas Turnpike and safely ride out a tornado as it passes by.
However, a highway overpass is a dangerous place during a tornado, and the subjects of the video remained safe due to an unlikely combination of events: the storm in question was a weak tornado, the tornado did not directly strike the overpass, and the overpass itself was of a unique design.
Indeed, in the 1999 Oklahoma tornado outbreak of May 3, 1999, three highway overpasses were directly struck by tornadoes, and at each of the three locations there was a fatality, along with many life-threatening injuries.
By comparison, during the same tornado outbreak, more than 2000 homes were completely destroyed, with another 7000 damaged, and yet only a few dozen people died in their homes.
An old belief is that the southwest corner of a basement provides the most protection during a tornado.
The safest place is the side or corner of an underground room opposite the tornado's direction of approach (usually the northeast corner), or the central-most room on the lowest floor.
Taking shelter in a basement, under a staircase, or under a sturdy piece of furniture such as a workbench further increases chances of survival.
Tornadoes have been known to cross major rivers, climb mountains, affect valleys, and have damaged several city centers.
As a general rule, no area is safe from tornadoes, though some areas are more susceptible than others.
Scientists have a fairly good understanding of the development of thunderstorms and mesocyclones, and the meteorological conditions conducive to their formation.
However, the step from supercell, or other respective formative processes, to tornadogenesis and the prediction of tornadic vs. non-tornadic mesocyclones is not yet well known and is the focus of much research.
In particular, the role of downdrafts, particularly the rear-flank downdraft, and the role of baroclinic boundaries, are intense areas of study.
Reliably predicting tornado intensity and longevity remains a problem, as do details affecting characteristics of a tornado during its life cycle and tornadolysis.
Other rich areas of research are tornadoes associated with within linear thunderstorm structures and within tropical cyclones.
Scientists still do not know the exact mechanisms by which most tornadoes form, and occasional tornadoes still strike without a tornado warning being issued.
Analysis of observations including both stationary and mobile (surface and aerial) in-situ and remote sensing (passive and active) instruments generates new ideas and refines existing notions.
Numerical modeling also provides new insights as observations and new discoveries are integrated into our physical understanding and then tested in computer simulations which validate new notions as well as produce entirely new theoretical findings, many of which are otherwise unattainable.
Importantly, development of new observation technologies and installation of finer spatial and temporal resolution observation networks have aided increased understanding and better predictions.
Research programs, including field projects such as the VORTEX projects (Verification of the Origins of Rotation in Tornadoes Experiment), deployment of TOTO (the TOtable Tornado Observatory), Doppler on Wheels (DOW), and dozens of other programs, hope to solve many questions that still plague meteorologists.
Universities, government agencies such as the National Severe Storms Laboratory, private-sector meteorologists, and the National Center for Atmospheric Research are some of the organizations very active in research; with various sources of funding, both private and public, a chief entity being the National Science Foundation.
The pace of research is partly constrained by the number of observations that can be taken; gaps in information about the wind, pressure, and moisture content throughout the local atmosphere; and the computing power available for simulation.
Solar storms similar to tornadoes have been recorded, but it is unknown how closely related they are to their terrestrial counterparts.
Gallery
File:Tornado time lapse.webm|Time-lapse of a tornado's life cycle near Prospect Valley, Colorado on June 19, 2018
File:Seymour Texas Tornado.jpg|A tornado that occurred at Seymour, Texas in April 1979
File:Roanoke tornado.jpg|F4 tornado in Roanoke, Illinois on July 13, 2004
File:Union City Oklahoma Tornado (mature).jpg| The mature stage of a tornado that occurred in Union City, Oklahoma on May 24, 1973
File:Tornadic classic supercell radar.gif|A radar image of a violently tornadic classic supercell near Oklahoma City, Oklahoma on May 3, 1999
File:F5 tornado Elie Manitoba 2007.jpg|F5 tornado approaching Elie, Manitoba on June 22, 2007
File:NorthSeaTornadoEF0.jpg| F0 tornado in its final stages over the North Sea near Vrångö, Sweden on July 17, 2011
Further reading
* Pybus, Nani, "'Cyclone' Jones: Dr. Herbert L. Jones and the Origins of Tornado Research in Oklahoma," Chronicles of Oklahoma 94 (Spring 2016), 4-31.
Heavily illustrated.
