Beringia is defined today as the land and maritime area bounded on the west by the Lena River in Russia; on the east by the Mackenzie River in Canada; on the north by 72 degrees north latitude in the Chukchi Sea; and on the south by the tip of the Kamchatka Peninsula.
It includes the Chukchi Sea, the Bering Sea, the Bering Strait, the Chukchi and Kamchatka Peninsulas in Russia as well as Alaska in the United States.
The area includes land lying on the North American Plate and Siberian land east of the Chersky Range.
Historically, it formed a land bridge that was up to wide at its greatest extent and which covered an area as large as British Columbia and Alberta together, totaling approximately .
Today, the only land that is visible from the central part of the Bering land bridge are the Diomede Islands, the Pribilof Islands of St. Paul and St. George, St. Lawrence Island, and King Island.
During the ice ages, Beringia, like most of Siberia and all of North and Northeast China, was not glaciated because snowfall was very light.
It was a grassland steppe, including the land bridge, that stretched for hundreds of kilometres into the continents on either side.
It is believed that a small human population of at most a few thousand arrived in Beringia from eastern Siberia during the Last Glacial Maximum before expanding into the settlement of the Americas sometime after 16,500 years BP.
This would have occurred as the American glaciers blocking the way southward melted, but before the bridge was covered by the sea about 11,000 years BP.
Geography
The remains of Late Pleistocene mammals that had been discovered on the Aleutians and islands in the Bering Sea at the close of the nineteenth century indicated that a past land connection might lie beneath the shallow waters between Alaska and Chukotka.
The underlying mechanism was first thought to be tectonics, but by 1930 changes in the icemass balance, leading to global sea-level fluctuations, were viewed as the cause of the Bering Land Bridge.
In 1937, Eric Hultén proposed that around the Aleutians and the Bering Strait region were tundra plants that had originally dispersed from a now-submerged plain between Alaska and Chukotka, which he named Beringia after Vitus Bering who had sailed into the strait in 1728.
During the Pleistocene epoch, global cooling led periodically to the expansion of glaciers and lowering of sea levels.
This created land connections in various regions around the globe.
Today, the average water depth of the Bering Strait is , therefore the land bridge opened when the sea level dropped more than below the current level.
A reconstruction of the sea-level history of the region indicated that a seaway existed from BP, a land bridge from BP, intermittent connection from BP, a land bridge from BP, followed by a Holocene sea-level rise that reopened the strait.
Post-glacial rebound has continued to raise some sections of coast.
During the last glacial period, enough of the earth's water became frozen in the great ice sheets covering North America and Europe to cause a drop in sea levels.
For thousands of years the sea floors of many interglacial shallow seas were exposed, including those of the Bering Strait, the Chukchi Sea to the north, and the Bering Sea to the south.
Other land bridges around the world have emerged and disappeared in the same way.
Around 14,000 years ago, mainland Australia was linked to both New Guinea and Tasmania, the British Isles became an extension of continental Europe via the dry beds of the English Channel and North Sea, and the dry bed of the South China Sea linked Sumatra, Java, and Borneo to Indochina.
Beringian refugium
The last glacial period, commonly referred to as the "Ice Age", spanned 125,000 Commencing from BP (MIS 3), steppe-tundra vegetation dominated large parts of Beringia with a rich diversity of grasses and herbs.
There were patches of shrub tundra with isolated refugia of larch (Larix) and spruce (Picea) forests with birch (Betula) and alder (Alnus) trees.
It has been proposed that the largest and most diverse megafaunal community residing in Beringia at this time could only have been sustained in a highly diverse and productive environment.
Analysis at Chukotka on the Siberian edge of the land bridge indicated that from BP (MIS 3 to MIS 2)
the environment was wetter and colder than the steppe-tundra to the east and west, with warming in parts of Beringia from BP.
These changes provided the most likely explanation for mammal migrations after BP, as the warming provided increased forage for browsers and mixed feeders.
Beringia did not block the movement of most dry steppe-adapted large species such as saiga antelope, woolly mammoth, and caballid horses.
However, from the west the woolly rhino went no further east than the Anadyr River, and from the east North American camels, the American kiang-like equids, the short-faced bear, bonnet-headed muskoxen, and American badger did not travel west.
At the beginning of the Holocene, some mesic habitat-adapted species left the refugium and spread westward into what had become tundra-vegetated northern Asia and eastward into northern North America.
The Yukon corridor opened between the receding ice sheets BP, and this once again allowed gene flow between Eurasia and continental North America until the land bridge was finally closed by rising sea levels BP.
During the Holocene, many mesic-adapted species left the refugium and spread eastward and westward, while at the same time the forest-adapted species spread with the forests up from the south.
The arid adapted species were reduced to minor habitats or became extinct.
Mastodons, which depended on shrubs for food, were uncommon in the open dry tundra landscape characteristic of Beringia during the colder periods.
In this tundra, mammoths flourished instead.
The extinct pine species Pinus matthewsii has been described from Pliocene sediments in the Yukon areas of the refugium.
The paleo-environment changed across time.
First gray wolf
The earliest Canis lupus specimen was a fossil tooth discovered at Old Crow, Yukon, Canada.
The specimen was found in sediment dated 1 million YBP, An open corridor through the ice-covered North American Arctic was too barren to support human migrations before around 12,600 BP.
A study has indicated that the genetic imprints of only 70 of all the individuals who settled and traveled the land bridge into North America are visible in modern descendants.
This genetic bottleneck finding is an example of the founder effect and does not imply that only 70 individuals crossed into North America at the time; rather, the genetic material of these individuals became amplified in North America following isolation from other Asian populations.
Seagoing coastal settlers may also have crossed much earlier, but there is no scientific consensus on this point, and the coastal sites that would offer further information now lie submerged in up to a hundred metres of water offshore.
Land animals migrated through Beringia as well, introducing to North America species that had evolved in Asia, like mammals such as proboscideans and American lions, which evolved into now-extinct endemic North American species.
Meanwhile, equids and camelids that had evolved in North America (and later became extinct there) migrated into Asia as well at this time.
A 2007 analysis of mtDNA found evidence that a human population lived in genetic isolation on the exposed Beringian landmass during the Last Glacial Maximum for approximately 5,000 years.
This population is often referred to as the Beringian Standstill population.
A number of other studies, relying on more extensive genomic data, have come to the same conclusion.
Genetic data demonstrate that at the end of the Last Glacial Maximum, as sea levels rose, some members of the Beringian Standstill Population migrated back into eastern Asia while others migrated into the Western Hemisphere, where they became the ancestors of the indigenous people of the Western Hemisphere.
Environmental selection on this Beringian Standstilll Population has been suggested for genetic variation in the Fatty Acid Desaturase gene cluster and the ectodysplasin
A receptor gene.
Using Y Chromosome data Pinotti et.
al. have estimated the Beringian Standstill to be less than 4600 years and taking place between 19.5 kya and 15 kya.
Previous connections
Biogeographical evidence demonstrates previous connections between North America and Asia.
Similar dinosaur fossils occur both in Asia and in North America.
For instance the dinosaur Saurolophus was found in both Mongolia and western North America.
Relatives of Troodon, Triceratops, and even Tyrannosaurus rex all came from Asia.
Fossil evidence indicates an exchange of primates between North America and Asia around 55.8 million years ago.
By 20 million years ago, evidence in North America shows a further interchange of mammalian species.
Some, like the ancient saber-toothed cats, have a recurring geographical range: Europe, Africa, Asia, and North America.
The only way they could reach the New World was by the Bering land bridge.
Had this bridge not existed at that time, the fauna of the world would be very different.
Further reading
* Pielou, E. C., After the Ice Age: The Return of Life to Glaciated North America (Chicago: University of Chicago Press) 1992
