Tel Aviv-Yafo ( - Tel Aviv-Yafo ; - Tall &#702;Abīb - Yāfā), often referred to as just Tel Aviv, is the most populous city in the Gush Dan metropolitan area of Israel.
Located on the Israeli Mediterranean coastline and with a population of , it is the economic and technological center of the country.
If East Jerusalem is considered part of Israel, Tel Aviv is the country's second most populous city after Jerusalem; if not, Tel Aviv is the most populous city before West Jerusalem.
Tel Aviv is governed by the Tel Aviv-Yafo Municipality, headed by Mayor Ron Huldai, and is home to many foreign embassies.
It is a global city and is ranked 25th in the Global Financial Centres Index.
Tel Aviv has the third- or fourth-largest economy and the largest economy per capita in the Middle East.
The city has the 31st highest cost of living in the world.
Tel Aviv receives over 2.5 million international visitors annually.
A "party capital" in the Middle East, it has a lively nightlife and 24-hour culture.
Tel Aviv has been called The World's Vegan Food Capital, as it possesses the highest per capita population of vegans in the world, with many vegan eateries throughout the city.
Tel Aviv is home to Tel Aviv University, the largest university in the country with more than 30,000 students.
The city was founded in 1909 by the Yishuv (Jewish residents) as a modern housing estate on the outskirts of the ancient port city of Jaffa, then part of the Jerusalem province of Ottoman Syria.
It was at first called 'Ahuzat Bayit' (lit.
"House Estate" or "Homestead"), the name of the association which established the neighbourhood, a name changed the following year to 'Tel Aviv'.
Its name means "Tell of Spring", symbolising both ancient legacy and renewal.
Other Jewish suburbs of Jaffa established outside Jaffa's Old City even before Tel Aviv, eventually became part of Tel Aviv, the oldest among them being Neve Tzedek (est. 1886).
Immigration by mostly Jewish refugees meant that the growth of Tel Aviv soon outpaced that of Jaffa, which had a majority Arab population at the time.
Tel Aviv and Jaffa were later merged into a single municipality in 1950, two years after the Israeli Declaration of Independence, which was proclaimed in the city.
Tel Aviv's White City, designated a UNESCO World Heritage Site in 2003, comprises the world's largest concentration of International Style buildings, including Bauhaus and other related modernist architectural styles.
Etymology and origins
Tel Aviv is the Hebrew title of Theodor Herzl's Altneuland ("Old New Land"), translated from German by Nahum Sokolow.
Sokolow had adopted the name of a Mesopotamian site near the city of Babylon mentioned in Ezekiel: "Then I came to them of the captivity at Tel Aviv, that lived by the river Chebar, and to where they lived; and I sat there overwhelmed among them seven days."
The name was chosen in 1910 from several suggestions, including "Herzliya".
It was found fitting as it embraced the idea of a renaissance in the ancient Jewish homeland.
Aviv is Hebrew for "spring", symbolizing renewal, and tel is a man-made mound accumulating layers of civilization built one over the other and symbolizing the ancient.
Although founded in 1909 as a small settlement on the sand dunes north of Jaffa, Tel Aviv was envisaged as a future city from the start.
Its founders hoped that in contrast to what they perceived as the squalid and unsanitary conditions of neighbouring Arab towns, Tel Aviv was to be a clean and modern city, inspired by the European cities of Warsaw and Odessa.
The marketing pamphlets advocating for its establishment in 1906, wrote: Its natural harbour has been used since the Bronze Age.
By the time Tel Aviv was founded as a separate city during Ottoman rule of the region, Jaffa had been ruled by the Canaanites, Egyptians, Philistines, Israelites, Assyrians, Babylonians, Persians, Phoenicians, Ptolemies, Seleucids, Hasmoneans, Romans, Byzantines, the early Islamic caliphates, Crusaders, Ayyubids, and Mamluks before coming under Ottoman rule in 1515.
It had been fought over numerous times.
The city is mentioned in ancient Egyptian documents, as well as the Hebrew Bible.
Other ancient sites in Tel Aviv include: Tell Qasile and Tel Gerisa.
Late 19th-century Jewish neighborhoods north of Jaffa
During the First Aliyah in the 1880s, when Jewish immigrants began arriving in the region in significant numbers, new neighborhoods were founded outside Jaffa on the current territory of Tel Aviv.
The first was Neve Tzedek, founded by Mizrahi Jews due to overcrowding in Jaffa and built on lands owned by Aharon Chelouche.
The urban planning for the new city was influenced by the Garden city movement.
The first 60 plots were purchased in Kerem Djebali near Jaffa by Jacobus Kann, a Dutch citizen, who registered them in his name to circumvent the Turkish prohibition on Jewish land acquisition.
Meir Dizengoff, later Tel Aviv's first mayor, also joined the Ahuzat Bayit society.
His vision for Tel Aviv involved peaceful co-existence with Arabs.
On 11 April 1909, 66 Jewish families gathered on a desolate sand dune to parcel out the land by lottery using seashells.
This gathering is considered the official date of the establishment of Tel Aviv.
The lottery was organised by Akiva Aryeh Weiss, president of the building society.
Weiss collected 120 sea shells on the beach, half of them white and half of them grey.
The members' names were written on the white shells and the plot numbers on the grey shells.
A boy drew names from one box of shells and a girl drew plot numbers from the second box.
A photographer, Avraham Soskin, documented the event.
The first water well was later dug at this site, located on what is today Rothschild Boulevard, across from Dizengoff House.
Within a year, Herzl, Ahad Ha'am, Yehuda Halevi, Lilienblum, and Rothschild streets were built; a water system was installed; and 66 houses (including some on six subdivided plots) were completed.
By 1914, Tel Aviv had grown to more than .
However, growth halted in 1917 when the Ottoman authorities expelled the residents of Jaffa and Tel Aviv.
Jews were free to return to their homes in Tel Aviv at the end of the following year when, with the end of World War I and the defeat of the Ottomans, the British took control of Palestine.
The town had rapidly become an attraction to immigrants, with a local activist writing:
QTEMPLATE |The immigrants were attracted to Tel Aviv because they found in it all the comforts they were used to in Europe: electric light, water, a little cleanliness, cinema, opera, theatre, and also more or less advanced schools... busy streets, full restaurants, cafes open until 2 a.m., singing, music, and dancing.
British Mandate
Tel Aviv, along with Jaffa, was conquered by the British imperial army in late 1917 during the Sinai and Palestine Campaign of World War I and became part of British-administered Mandatory Palestine until 1948.
Tel Aviv, established as suburb of Jaffa, received township or local council status in 1921, and city status in 1934.
According to a census conducted in 1922 by the British Mandate authorities, Tel Aviv had a population of 15,185 inhabitants, consisting of 15,065 Jews, 78 Muslims and 42 Christians.
Increasing in the 1931 census to 46,101, in 12,545 houses.
With increasing Jewish immigration during the British administration, friction between Arabs and Jews in Palestine increased.
On 1 May 1921, the Jaffa Riots resulted in the deaths of 48 Arabs and 47 Jews and injuries to 146 Jews and 73 Arabs.
In the wake of this violence, many Jews left Jaffa for Tel Aviv, increasing the population of Tel Aviv from 2,000 in 1920 to around 34,000 by 1925.
Tel Aviv began to develop as a commercial center.
In 1923, Tel Aviv was the first town to be wired to electricity in Palestine, followed by Jaffa later in the same year.
The opening ceremony of the Jaffa Electric Company powerhouse, on 10 June 1923, celebrated the lighting of the two main streets of Tel Aviv.
In 1925, the Scottish biologist, sociologist, philanthropist and pioneering town planner Patrick Geddes drew up a master plan for Tel Aviv which was adopted by the city council led by Meir Dizengoff.
Geddes's plan for developing the northern part of the district was based on Ebenezer Howard's garden city movement.
The plan consisted of four main features: a hierarchical system of streets laid out in a grid, large blocks consisting of small-scale domestic dwellings, the organization of these blocks around central open spaces, and the concentration of cultural institutions to form a civic center.
While most of the northern area of Tel Aviv was built according to this plan, the influx of European refugees in the 1930s necessitated the construction of taller apartment buildings on a larger footprint in the city.
Ben Gurion House was built in 1930-31, part of a new workers' housing development.
At the same time, Jewish cultural life was given a boost by the establishment of the Ohel Theatre and the decision of Habima Theatre to make Tel Aviv its permanent base in 1931.
During World War II, Tel Aviv was hit by Italian airstrikes on September 9, 1940, which killed 137 people in the city.
During the Jewish insurgency in Mandatory Palestine, Jewish Irgun and Lehi guerrillas launched repeated attacks against British military, police, and government targets in the city.
In 1946, following the King David Hotel bombing, the British carried out Operation Shark, in which the entire city was searched for Jewish militants and most of the residents questioned, during which the entire city was placed under curfew.
During the March 1947 martial law in Mandatory Palestine, Tel Aviv was placed under martial law by the British authorities for 15 days, with the residents kept under curfew for all but three hours a day as British forces hunted for militants.
In spite of this, Jewish guerrilla attacks continued in Tel Aviv and other areas under martial law in Palestine.
According to the 1947 UN Partition Plan for dividing Palestine into Jewish and Arab states, Tel Aviv, by then a city of 230,000, was to be included in the proposed Jewish state.
Jaffa with, as of 1945, a population of 101,580 people-53,930 Muslims, 30,820 Jews and 16,800 Christians-was designated as part of the Arab state.
Civil War broke out in the country and in particular between the neighbouring cities of Tel Aviv and Jaffa, which had been assigned to the Jewish and Arab states respectively.
After several months of siege, on 13 May 1948, Jaffa fell and the Arab population fled en masse.
File:Geddes Plan for Tel Aviv 1925.jpg|Master plan for Tel Aviv by Patrick Geddes, 1925
File:Jaffa 1929.jpg|Tel Aviv 1929 1:20,000
File:Jaffa 1943.jpg|Tel Aviv 1943 1:20,000
File:Bat Yam 1945.jpg|Tel Aviv 1945 1:250,000
State of Israel
Independence
When Israel declared Independence on 14 May 1948, the population of Tel Aviv was over 200,000.
Tel Aviv was the temporary government center of the State of Israel until the government moved to Jerusalem in December 1949.
Due to the international dispute over the status of Jerusalem, most embassies remained in or near Tel Aviv.
Growth in the 1950s and 1960s
The boundaries of Tel Aviv and Jaffa became a matter of contention between the Tel Aviv municipality and the Israeli government in 1948.
The former wished to incorporate only the northern Jewish suburbs of Jaffa, while the latter wanted a more complete unification.
In the 1960s, some of the older buildings were demolished, making way for the country's first high-rises.
The historic Herzliya Hebrew Gymnasium was controversially demolished, to make way for the Shalom Meir Tower, which was completed in 1965, and remained Israel's tallest building until 1999.
Tel Aviv's population peaked in the early 1960s at 390,000, representing 16 percent of the country's total.
1970s and 1980s population and urban decline
By the early 1970s, Tel Aviv had entered a long and steady period of continuous population decline, which was accompanied by urban decay.
By 1981, Tel Aviv had entered not just natural population decline, but an absolute population decline as well.
In the late 1980s the city had an aging population of 317,000.
as Tel Aviv's population fell 20% .
In the 1970s, the apparent sense of Tel Aviv's urban decline became a theme in the work of novelists such as Yaakov Shabtai, in works describing the city such as Sof Davar (The End of Things) and Zikhron Devarim (The Memory of Things).
The largest project built in this era was the Dizengoff Center, Israel's first shopping mall, which was completed in 1983.
Other notable projects included the construction of Marganit Tower in 1987, the opening of the Suzanne Dellal Center for Dance and Theater in 1989, and the Tel Aviv Cinematheque (opened in 1973 and located to the current building in 1989).
In the early 1980s, 13 embassies in Jerusalem moved to Tel Aviv as part of the UN's measures responding to Israel's 1980 Jerusalem Law.
Today, most national embassies are located in Tel Aviv or environs.
1990s to present
In the 1990s, the decline in Tel Aviv's population began to be reversed and stabilized, at first temporarily due to a wave of immigrants from the former Soviet Union.
In this period, the number of engineers in the city doubled.
Tel Aviv soon began to emerge as a global high-tech center.
However, the city's municipality struggled to cope with an influx of new immigrants.
Tel Aviv's tax base had been shrinking for many years, as a result of its preceding long term population decline, and this meant there was little money available at the time to invest in the city's deteriorating infrastructure and housing.
In 1998, Tel Aviv was on the “verge of bankruptcy” Economic difficulties would then be compounded by a wave of Palestinian suicide bombings in the city from the mid 1990s, to the end of the Second Intifada, as well as the Dot-com bubble, which affected the city's rapidly growing hi-tech sector.
On 4 November 1995, Israel's prime minister, Yitzhak Rabin, was assassinated at a rally in Tel Aviv in support of the Oslo peace accord.
The outdoor plaza where this occurred, formerly known as Kikar Malchei Yisrael, was renamed Rabin Square.
In the 2000s and early 2010s, Tel Aviv received tens of thousands of officially illegal immigrants, primarily from Sudan and Eritrea, changing the demographic profile of areas of the city.
In 2009, Tel Aviv celebrated its official centennial.
In addition to city- and country-wide celebrations, digital collections of historical materials were assembled.
These include the History section of the official Tel Aviv-Yafo Centennial Year website;
and Stanford University's http:/ telaviv Eliasaf Robinson Tel Aviv Collection, documenting the history of the city.
Today, the city is regarded as a strong candidate for global city status.
Over the past 60 years, Tel Aviv had developed into a secular, liberal-minded center with a vibrant nightlife and café culture.
while approximately 230 Israelis were injured.
Extensive property damage was also caused, and some 4,000 Israelis were left homeless.
It was feared that Iraq would fire missiles filled with nerve agents or sarin.
As a result, the Israeli government issued gas masks to its citizens.
When the first Iraqi missiles hit Israel, some people injected themselves with an antidote for nerve gas.
The inhabitants of the southeastern suburb of HaTikva erected an angel-monument as a sign of their gratitude that "it was through a great miracle, that many people were preserved from being killed by a direct hit of a Scud rocket."
Since the First Intifada, Tel Aviv has suffered from Palestinian political violence.
The first suicide attack in Tel Aviv occurred on 19 October 1994, on the Line 5 bus, when a bomber killed 22 civilians and injured 50 as part of a Hamas suicide campaign.
On 6 March 1996, another Hamas suicide bomber killed 13 people (12 civilians and 1 soldier), many of them children, in the Dizengoff Center suicide bombing.
Three women were killed by a Hamas terrorist in the Café Apropo bombing on 27 March 1997.
One of the most deadly attacks occurred on 1 June 2001, during the Second Intifada, when a suicide bomber exploded at the entrance to the Dolphinarium discothèque, killing 21, mostly teenagers, and injuring 132.
Another Hamas suicide bomber killed six civilians and injured 70 in the Allenby Street bus bombing.
Twenty-three civilians were killed and over 100 injured in the Tel Aviv central bus station massacre.
Al-Aqsa Martyrs Brigades claimed responsibility for the attack.
In the Mike's Place suicide bombing, an attack on a bar by a British Muslim suicide bomber resulted in the deaths of three civilians and wounded over 50.
Hamas and Al Aqsa Martyrs Brigades claimed joint responsibility.
An Islamic Jihad bomber killed five and wounded over 50 in the 25 February 2005 Stage Club bombing.
The most recent suicide attack in the city occurred on 17 April 2006, when 11 people were killed and at least 70 wounded in a suicide bombing near the old central bus station.
Another attack took place on 29 August 2011 in which a Palestinian attacker stole an Israeli taxi cab and rammed it into a police checkpoint guarding the popular Haoman 17 nightclub in Tel Aviv which was filled with 2,000 Israeli teenagers.
After crashing, the assailant went on a stabbing spree, injuring eight people.
On 21 November 2012, during Operation Pillar of Defense, the Tel Aviv area was targeted by rockets, and air raid sirens were sounded in the city for the first time since the Gulf War.
All of the rockets either missed populated areas or were shot down by an Iron Dome rocket defense battery stationed near the city.
During the operation, a bomb blast on a bus wounded at least 28 civilians, three seriously.
This was described as a terrorist attack by Israel, Russia, and the United States and was condemned by the United Nations, United States, United Kingdom, France and Russia, whilst Hamas spokesman Sami Abu Zuhri declared that the organisation "blesses" the attack.
Geography
Tel Aviv is located around on the Israeli Mediterranean coastline, in central Israel, the historic land bridge between Europe, Asia and Africa.
Immediately north of the ancient port of Jaffa, Tel Aviv lies on land that used to be sand dunes and as such has relatively poor soil fertility.
The land has been flattened and has no important gradients; its most notable geographical features are bluffs above the Mediterranean coastline and the Yarkon River mouth.
Because of the expansion of Tel Aviv and the Gush Dan region, absolute borders between Tel Aviv and Jaffa and between the city's neighborhoods do not exist.
The city is located northwest of Jerusalem and south of the city of Haifa.
Neighboring cities and towns include Herzliya to the north, Ramat HaSharon to the northeast, Petah Tikva, Bnei Brak, Ramat Gan and Giv'atayim to the east, Holon to the southeast, and Bat Yam to the south.
The city is economically stratified between the north and south.
Southern Tel Aviv is considered less affluent than northern Tel Aviv with the exception of Neve Tzedek and northern and north-western Jaffa.
Central Tel Aviv is home to Azrieli Center and the important financial and commerce district along Ayalon Highway.
The northern side of Tel Aviv is home to Tel Aviv University, Hayarkon Park, and upscale residential neighborhoods such as Ramat Aviv and Afeka.
Climate
Tel Aviv has a Mediterranean climate (Köppen climate classification: Csa), and enjoys plenty of sunshine throughout the year.
Most precipitation falls in the form of rain between the months of October and April, with intervening dry summers.
The average annual temperature is , and the average sea temperature is during the winter, and during the summer.
The city averages of precipitation annually.
Summers in Tel Aviv last about five months, from June to October.
August, the warmest month, averages a high of , and a low of .
The high relative humidity due to the location of the city by the Mediterranean Sea, in a combination with the high temperatures, creates a thermal discomfort during the summer.
Summer low temperatures in Tel Aviv seldom drop below .
Winters are mild and wet, with most of the annual precipitation falling within the months of December, January and February as intense rainfall and thunderstorms.
In January, the coolest month, the average maximum temperature is , the minimum temperature averages .
During the coldest days of winter, temperatures may vary between and .
Both freezing temperatures and snowfall are extremely rare in the city.
Autumns and springs are characterized by sharp temperature changes, with heat waves that might be created due to hot and dry air masses that arrive from the nearby deserts.
During heatwaves in autumn and springs, temperatures usually climb up to and even up to , accompanied with exceptionally low humidity.
An average day during autumn and spring has a high of to , and a low of to .
The highest recorded temperature in Tel Aviv was on 17 May 1916, and the lowest is on 7 February 1950, during a cold wave that brought the only recorded snowfall in Tel Aviv.
Local government
Tel Aviv is governed by a 31-member city council elected for a five-year term in direct proportional elections.
All Israeli citizens over the age of 18 with at least one year of residence in Tel Aviv are eligible to vote in municipal elections.
The municipality is responsible for social services, community programs, public infrastructure, urban planning, tourism and other local affairs.
The Tel Aviv City Hall is located at Rabin Square.
Ron Huldai has been mayor of Tel Aviv since 1998.
Huldai's term equals that of the previously longest-serving mayor, Shlomo Lahat, who was in office for 19 years.
The shortest-serving was David Bloch, in office for two years, 1925-27.
Politically, Tel Aviv is known to be a stronghold for the left, in both local and national issues.
The left wing vote is especially prevalent in the city's mostly affluent central and northern neighborhoods, though not the case for its working-class southeastern neighborhoods which tend to vote for right wing parties in national elections.
Outside the kibbutzim, Meretz receives more votes in Tel Aviv than in any other city in Israel.
List of Mayors of Tel Aviv
Mandatory Palestine (1920-1948)
State of Israel (1948-present)
City council
Following the 2013 municipal elections, Meretz gained an unprecedented 6 seats on the council.
However, having been reelected as mayor, Huldai and the Tel Aviv 1 list lead the coalition, which controls 29 of 31 seats.
Education
In 2006, 51,359 children attended school in Tel Aviv, of whom 8,977 were in municipal kindergartens, 23,573 in municipal elementary schools, and 18,809 in high schools.
Its campus is located in the neighborhood of Ramat Aviv.
Tel Aviv also has several colleges.
The Herzliya Hebrew Gymnasium moved from Jaffa to old Tel Aviv in 1909 and moved to Jabotinsky Street in the early 1960s.
Other notable schools in Tel Aviv include Shevah Mofet, the second Hebrew school in the city, Ironi Alef High School for Arts and Alliance.
Demographics
Tel Aviv has a population of spread over a land area of (20 mi²), yielding a population density of 7,606 people per square km (19,699 per square mile).
According to the Israel Central Bureau of Statistics (CBS), Tel Aviv's population is growing at an annual rate of 0.5 percent.
Jews of all backgrounds form 91.8 percent of the population, Muslims and Arab Christians make up 4.2 percent, and the remainder belong to other groups (including various Christian and Asian communities).
As Tel Aviv is a multicultural city, many languages are spoken in addition to Hebrew.
According to some estimates, about 50,000 unregistered African and Asian foreign workers live in the city.
Compared with Westernised cities, crime in Tel Aviv is relatively low.
According to Tel Aviv-Yafo Municipality, the average income in the city, which has an Unemployment Rate of 4.6%, is 20% above the national average.
The city's education standards are above the national average: of its 12th-grade students, 64.4 percent are eligible for matriculation certificates.
Tel Aviv's population reached a peak in the early 1960s at around 390,000, falling to 317,000 in the late 1980s as high property prices forced families out and deterred young couples from moving in.
In 2006, 22,000 people moved to the city, while only 18,500 left,
including historic buildings such as the Great Synagogue, established in the 1930s.
In 2008, a center for secular Jewish Studies and a secular yeshiva opened in the city.
Tensions between religious and secular Jews before the gay pride parade ended in vandalism of a synagogue.
The number of churches has grown to accommodate the religious needs of diplomats and foreign workers.
The population was 93% Jewish, 1% Muslim, and 1% Christian.
The remaining 5 percent were not classified by religion.
Israel Meir Lau is chief rabbi of the city.
Tel Aviv is an ethnically diverse city.
The Jewish population, which forms the majority group in Tel Aviv consists of the descendants of immigrants from all parts of the world, including Ashkenazi Jews from Europe, North America, South America, Australia and South Africa, as well as Sephardic and Mizrahi Jews from Southern Europe, North Africa, India, Central Asia, West Asia, and the Arabian Peninsula.
There are also a sizable number of Ethiopian Jews and their descendants living in Tel Aviv.
In addition to Muslim and Arab Christian minorities in the city, several hundred Armenian Christians who reside in the city are concentrated mainly in Jaffa and some Christians from the former Soviet Union who immigrated to Israel with Jewish spouses and relatives.
In recent years, Tel Aviv has received many non-Jewish migrants from Asia and Africa, students, foreign workers (documented and undocumented) and refugees.
There are many economic migrants and refugees from African countries, primarily Eritrea and Sudan, located in the southern part of the city.
Neighborhoods
Tel Aviv is divided into nine districts that have formed naturally over the city's short history.
The oldest of these is Jaffa, the ancient port city out of which Tel Aviv grew.
This area is traditionally made up demographically of a greater percentage of Arabs, but recent gentrification is replacing them with a young professional and artist population.
Similar processes are occurring in nearby Neve Tzedek, the original Jewish neighborhood outside of Jaffa.
Ramat Aviv, a district in the northern part of the city that is largely made up of luxury apartments and includes Tel Aviv University, is currently undergoing extensive expansion and is set to absorb the beachfront property of Sde Dov Airport after its decommissioning.
The area known as HaKirya is the Israel Defense Forces (IDF) headquarters and a large military base.
Florentin is now known as a hip, "cool" place to be in Tel Aviv with coffeehouses, markets, bars, galleries and parties.
Cityscape
Architecture
Tel Aviv is home to different architectural styles that represent influential periods in its history.
The early architecture of Tel Aviv consisted largely of European-style single-story houses with red-tiled roofs.
Neve Tzedek, the first neighborhood to be constructed outside of Jaffa is characterised by two-story sandstone buildings.
Some 3,000 buildings were created in this style between 1931 and 1939 alone.
High-rise construction and towers
The Shalom Meir Tower, Israel's first skyscraper, was built in Tel Aviv in 1965 and remained the country's tallest building until 1999.
At the time of its construction, the building rivaled Europe's tallest buildings in height, and was the tallest in the Middle East.
In the mid-1990s, the construction of skyscrapers began throughout the entire city, altering its skyline.
Before that, Tel Aviv had had a generally low-rise skyline.
However, the towers were not concentrated in certain areas, and were scattered at random locations throughout the city, creating a disjointed skyline.
New neighborhoods, such as Park Tzameret, have been constructed to house apartment towers such as YOO Tel Aviv towers, designed by Philippe Starck.
Other districts, such as Sarona, have been developed with office towers.
Other recent additions to Tel Aviv's skyline include the 1 Rothschild Tower and First International Bank Tower.
As Tel Aviv celebrated its centennial in 2009, the city attracted a number of architects and developers, including I. M. Pei, Donald Trump, and Richard Meier.
American journalist David Kaufman reported in New York magazine that since Tel Aviv "was named a UNESCO World Heritage site, gorgeous historic buildings from the Ottoman and Bauhaus era have been repurposed as fabulous hotels, eateries, boutiques, and design museums."
In November 2009, Haaretz reported that Tel Aviv had 59 skyscrapers more than 100 meters tall.
Currently, dozens of skyscrapers have been approved or are under construction throughout the city, and many more are planned.
The tallest building approved is the Egged Tower, which would become Israel's tallest building upon completion.
According to current plans, the tower is planned to have 80 floors, rise to a height of 270 meters, and will have a 50-meter spire.
In 2010, the Tel Aviv Municipality's Planning and Construction Committee launched a new master plan for the city for 2025.
It decided not to allow the construction of any additional skyscrapers in the city center, while at the same time greatly increasing the construction of skyscrapers in the east.
The ban extends to an area between the coast and Ibn Gabirol Street, and also between the Yarkon River and Eilat Street.
It did not extend to towers already under construction or approved.
One final proposed skyscraper project was approved, while dozens of others had to be scrapped.
Any new buildings there will usually not be allowed to rise above six and a half stories.
However, hotel towers along almost the entire beachfront will be allowed to rise up to 25 stories.
According to the plan, large numbers of skyscrapers and high-rise buildings at least 18 stories tall would be built in the entire area between Ibn Gabirol Street and the eastern city limits, as part of the master plan's goal of doubling the city's office space to cement Tel Aviv as the business capital of Israel.
Under the plan, "forests" of corporate skyscrapers will line both sides of the Ayalon Highway.
Further south, skyscrapers rising up to 40 stories will be built along the old Ottoman railway between Neve Tzedek and Florentine, with the first such tower there being the Neve Tzedek Tower.
Along nearby Shlavim Street, passing between Jaffa and south Tel Aviv, office buildings up to 25 stories will line both sides of the street, which will be widened to accommodate traffic from the city's southern entrance to the center.
In November 2012, it was announced that to encourage investment in the city's architecture, residential towers throughout Tel Aviv would be extended in height.
Buildings in Jaffa and the southern and eastern districts may have two and a half stories added, while those on Ibn Gabirol Street might be extended by seven and a half stories.
Economy
Tel Aviv has been ranked as the twenty-fifth most important financial center in the world.
It was built on sand dunes in an area unsuitable for farming.
Instead, it developed as a hub of business and scientific research.
By 1936, as tens of thousands of middle class immigrants arrived from Europe, Tel Aviv was already the largest city in Palestine.
A small port was built at the Yarkon estuary, and many cafes, clubs and cinemas opened.
Herzl Street became a commercial thoroughfare at this time.
Economic activities account for 17 percent of the GDP.
The city has been described as a "flourishing technological center" by Newsweek and a "miniature Los Angeles" by The Economist.
In 1998, the city was described by Newsweek as one of the 10 most technologically influential cities in the world.
Since then, high-tech industry in the Tel Aviv area has continued to develop.
Tel Aviv is home to the Tel Aviv Stock Exchange (TASE), Israel's only stock exchange, which has reached record heights since the 1990s.
The Tel Aviv Stock exchange has also gained attention for its resilience and ability to recover from war and disasters.
For example, the Tel Aviv Stock Exchange was higher on the last day of both the 2006 Lebanon war and the 2009 Operation in Gaza than on the first day of fighting Many international venture-capital firms, scientific research institutes and high-tech companies are headquartered in the city.
Industries in Tel Aviv include chemical processing, textile plants and food manufacturers.
The Kiryat Atidim high tech zone opened in 1972 and the city has become a major world high tech hub.
In December 2012, the city was ranked second on a list of top places to found a high tech startup company, just behind Silicon Valley.
In 2013, Tel Aviv had more than 700 startup companies and research and development centers, and was ranked the second-most innovative city in the world, behind Medellín and ahead of New York City.
According to Forbes, nine of its fifteen Israeli-born billionaires live in Israel; four live in Tel Aviv and its suburbs.
The cost of living in Israel is high, with Tel Aviv being its most expensive city to live in.
According to Mercer, a human resources consulting firm based in New York, Tel Aviv is the most expensive city in the Middle East and the 19th most expensive in the world.
Eighteen of Israel's 35 major centers for the performing arts are located in the city, including five of the country's nine large theatres, where 55% of all performances in the country and 75 percent of all attendance occurs.
The Tel Aviv Performing Arts Center is home of the Israeli Opera, where Plácido Domingo was house tenor between 1962 and 1965, and the Cameri Theatre.
With 2,482 seats, the Heichal HaTarbut is the city's largest theatre and home to the Israel Philharmonic Orchestra.
Habima Theatre, Israel's national theatre, was closed down for renovations in early 2008, and reopened in November 2011 after major remodeling.
Enav Cultural Center is one of the newer additions to the cultural scene.
The city often hosts international musicians at venues such as Yarkon Park, Expo Tel Aviv, the Barby Club, the Zappa Club and Live Park Rishon Lezion just south of Tel Aviv.
After Israel's victory in 2018, Tel Aviv was named host city for the 2019 Eurovision Song Contest (the first Israeli-hosted Eurovision held outside of Jerusalem).
Opera and classical music performances are held daily in Tel Aviv, with many of the world's leading classical conductors and soloists performing on Tel Aviv stages over the years.
Tel Aviv has been named the third "hottest city for 2011" (behind only New York City and Tangier) by Lonely Planet, third-best in the Middle East and Africa by Travel + Leisure magazine (behind only Cape Town and Jerusalem), and the ninth-best beach city in the world by National Geographic.
Tel Aviv is consistently ranked as one of the top LGBT destinations in the world.
The city has also been ranked as one of the top 10 oceanfront cities.
Tel Aviv is known as "the city that never sleeps" and a "party capital" due to its thriving nightlife, young atmosphere and famous 24-hour culture.
Tel Aviv has branches of some of the world's leading hotels, including the Crowne Plaza, Sheraton, Dan, Isrotel and Hilton.
It is home to many museums, architectural and cultural sites, with city tours available in different languages.
Apart from bus tours, architectural tours, Segway tours, and walking tours are also popular.
Tel Aviv has 44 hotels with more than 6,500 rooms.
Nightlife
Tel Aviv is an international hub of highly active and diverse nightlife with bars, dance bars and nightclubs staying open well past midnight.
The largest area for nightclubs is the Tel Aviv port, where the city's large, commercial clubs and bars draw big crowds of young clubbers from both Tel Aviv and neighboring cities.
The South of Tel Aviv is known for the popular Haoman 17 club, as well as for being the city's main hub of alternative clubbing, with underground venues including established clubs like the Block Club, Comfort 13 and Paradise Garage, as well as various warehouse and loft party venues.
The Allenby/Rothschild area is another popular nightlife hub, featuring such clubs as the Pasaz, Radio EPGB and the Penguin.
In 2013, Absolut Vodka introduced a specially designed bottle dedicated to Tel Aviv as part of its international cities series.
Fashion
Tel Aviv has become an international center of fashion and design.
It has been called the "next hot destination" for fashion.
Israeli designers, such as swimwear company Gottex show their collections at leading fashion shows, including New York's Bryant Park fashion show.
In 2011, Tel Aviv hosted its first Fashion Week since the 1980s, with Italian designer Roberto Cavalli as a guest of honor.
LGBT culture
Named "the best gay city in the world" by American Airlines, Tel Aviv is one of the most popular destinations for LGBT tourists internationally, with a large LGBT community.
American journalist David Kaufman has described the city as a place "packed with the kind of ‘we're here, we're queer’ vibe more typically found in Sydney and San Francisco.
The city hosts its well-known pride parade, the biggest in Asia, attracting over 200,000 people yearly.
In January 2008, Tel Aviv's municipality established the city's LGBT Community centre, providing all of the municipal and cultural services to the LGBT community under one roof.
In December 2008, Tel Aviv began putting together a team of gay athletes for the 2009 World Outgames in Copenhagen.
In addition, Tel Aviv hosts an annual LGBT Film Festival.
Tel Aviv's LGBT community is the subject of Eytan Fox's 2006 film The Bubble.
Cuisine
Tel Aviv is famous for its wide variety of world-class restaurants, offering traditional Israeli dishes as well as international fare.
More than 100 sushi restaurants, the third highest concentration in the world, do business in the city.
In Tel Aviv there are some dessert specialties, the most known is the Halva ice cream traditionally topped with date syrup and pistachios
Museums
Israel has the highest number of museums per capita of any country, with three of the largest located in Tel Aviv.
Among these are the Eretz Israel Museum, known for its collection of archaeology and history exhibits dealing with the Land of Israel, and the Tel Aviv Museum of Art. Housed on the campus of Tel Aviv University is Beth Hatefutsoth, a museum of the international Jewish diaspora that tells the story of Jewish prosperity and persecution throughout the centuries of exile.
Batey Haosef Museum specializes in Israel Defense Forces military history.
The Palmach Museum near Tel Aviv University offers a multimedia experience of the history of the Palmach.
Right next to Charles Clore Park is a museum of the Etzel.
The Israel Trade Fairs & Convention Center, located in the northern part of the city, hosts more than 60 major events annually.
Many offbeat museums and galleries operate in the southern areas, including the Tel Aviv Raw Art contemporary art gallery.
Sports
Tel Aviv is the only city with three clubs in Israeli Premier League, the country's top football league.
Maccabi Tel Aviv Sports Club was founded in 1906 and competes in more than 10 sport fields.
Its basketball team, Maccabi Tel Aviv, is a world-known professional team, that holds 50 Israeli titles, has won 39 editions of the Israel cup, and has six European Championships, and its football team has won 21 Israeli league titles and has won 23 State Cups, four Toto Cups and two Asian Club Championships.
Yael Arad, an athlete in Maccabi's judo club, won a silver medal in the 1992 Olympic Games.
National Sport Center - Tel Aviv (also Hadar Yosef Sports Center) is a compound of stadiums and sports facilities.
It also houses the Olympic Committee of Israel and the National Athletics Stadium with the Israeli Athletic Association.
Hapoel Tel Aviv Sports Club, founded in 1923, comprises more than 11 sports clubs, including Hapoel Tel Aviv Football Club (13 championships, 16 State Cups, one Toto Cup and once Asian champions) which plays in Bloomfield Stadium, men's and women's basketball clubs.
Bnei Yehuda (once Israeli champion, twice State Cup winners and twice Toto Cup winner) is the only Israeli football team in the top division that represents a neighborhood, the Hatikva Quarter in Tel Aviv, and not a city.
Shimshon Tel Aviv and Beitar Tel Aviv both formerly played in the top division, but dropped into the lower leagues, and merged in 2000, the new club now playing in Liga Artzit, the third tier.
Another former first division team, Maccabi Jaffa, is now defunct, as are Maccabi HaTzefon Tel Aviv, Hapoel HaTzefon Tel Aviv and Hakoah Tel Aviv, who merged with Maccabi Ramat Gan and moved to Ramat Gan in 1959.
Two rowing clubs operate in Tel Aviv.
The Tel Aviv Rowing Club, established in 1935 on the banks of the Yarkon River, is the largest rowing club in Israel.
Meanwhile, the beaches of Tel Aviv provide a vibrant Matkot (beach paddleball) scene.
Tel Aviv Lightning represent Tel Aviv in the Israel Baseball League.
Tel Aviv also has an annual half marathon, run in 2008 by 10,000 athletes with runners coming from around the world.
In 2009, the Tel Aviv Marathon was revived after a fifteen-year hiatus, and is run annually since, attracting a field of over 18,000 runners.
Tel Aviv is also ranked to be 10th best to-skateboarding city by Transworld Skateboarding.
Media
The three largest newspaper companies in Israel-Yedioth Ahronoth, Maariv and Haaretz-are all based within the city limits.
Several radio stations cover the Tel Aviv area, including the city-based Radio Tel Aviv.
The three major Israeli television networks, Israel Broadcasting Authority, Keshet, Reshet, and Channel 10, are based in the city, as well as two of the most popular radio stations in Israel: Galatz and Galgalatz, which are both based in Jaffa.
Studios of the international news channel i24news is located at Jaffa Port Customs House.
An English language radio station, TLV1, is based at Kikar Hamedina.
Environment and urban restoration
Tel Aviv is ranked as the greenest city in Israel.
Since 2008, city lights are turned off annually in support of Earth Hour.
In February 2009, the municipality launched a water saving campaign, including competition granting free parking for a year to the household that is found to have consumed the least amount of water per person.
In the early 21st century, Tel Aviv's municipality transformed a derelict power station into a public park, now named "Gan HaHashmal" ("Electricity Park"), paving the way for eco-friendly and environmentally conscious designs.
In October 2008, Martin Weyl turned an old garbage dump near Ben Gurion International Airport, called Hiriya, into an attraction by building an arc of plastic bottles.
The site, which was renamed Ariel Sharon Park to honor Israel's former prime minister, will serve as the centerpiece in what is to become a urban wilderness on the outskirts of Tel Aviv, designed by German landscape architect, Peter Latz.
In 2014, the Sarona Market Complex opened, following an 8-year renovation project of Sarona colony.
Transportation
Tel Aviv is a major transportation hub, served by a comprehensive public transport network, with many major routes of the national transportation network running through the city.
Bus and taxi
As with the rest of Israel, bus transport is the most common form of public transport and is very widely used.
The Tel Aviv Central Bus Station is located in the southern part of the city.
The main bus network in Tel Aviv metropolitan area operated by Dan Bus Company, Metropoline and Kavim.
the Egged Bus Cooperative, Israels's largest bus company, provides intercity transportation.
The city is also served by local and inter-city share taxis.
Many local and inter-city bus routes also have sherut taxis that follow the same route and display the same route number in their window.
Fares are standardised within the region and are comparable to or less expensive than bus fares.
Unlike other forms of public transport, these taxis also operate on Fridays and Saturdays (the Jewish sabbath "Shabbat").
Private taxis are white with a yellow sign on top.
Fares are standardised and metered, but may be negotiated ahead of time with the driver.
Rail
The Tel Aviv Central railway station is the main railway station of the city, and the busiest station in Israel.
The city has three additional railway stations along the Ayalon Highway: Tel Aviv University, HaShalom (adjacent to Azrieli Center) and HaHagana (near the Tel Aviv Central Bus Station), Tel Aviv Mercaz.
It is estimated that over a million passengers travel by rail to Tel Aviv monthly.
The trains do not run on Saturday and the principal Jewish festivals (Rosh Hashana (2 days), Yom Kippur, Sukkot, Simkhat Torah, Pessach (Passover) first and fifth days and Shavuot (Pentecost)).
Jaffa Railway Station was the first railway station in the Middle East.
It served as the terminus for the Jaffa-Jerusalem railway.
The station opened in 1891 and closed in 1948.
In 2005-2009, the station was restored and converted into an entertainment and leisure venue marketed as "HaTachana", Hebrew for "the station" (see homepage here:).
Light rail
The first line of a light rail system is under construction and scheduled to open in 2020.
The Red Line starts at Petah Tikva's Central Bus Station, east of Tel Aviv and follows the Jabotinsky Road (Route 481) westwards at street level.
At the point where Jabotinsky Road and Highway 4 intersect the line drops into a tunnel for through Bnei Brak, Ramat Gan and Tel Aviv and emerges again to street level just before Jaffa, where it turns southwards towards Bat Yam.
The underground section will include 10 stations, including an interchange with Israel Railways services at Tel Aviv Central Railway Station and the nearby 2000 Terminal.
A maintenance depot, connected via a branch line and tunnel to the main section of the line, will be constructed in Kiryat Arye, across from the existing Kiryat Arye suburban railway station.
The intended builder and operator of the first line, MTS, has had financial difficulties that postponed the line's opening.
In May 2010, the ministry of finance decided to cancel the agreement with MTS due to the difficulties and the agreement was cancelled in August 2010.
The line is being built instead by NTA-The Tel Aviv region's mass transit development authority.
Initially, the line's targeted opening was in 2012 and today the target is 2016 after several postponements due to the disagreements with MTS and NTA's takeover of the project.
The second line is scheduled to open in 2021.
Roads
The main highway leading to and within the city is the Ayalon Highway (Highway 20), which runs in the eastern side of the city from north to south along the Ayalon River riverbed.
Driving south on Ayalon gives access to Highway 4 leading to Ashdod, Highway 1, leading to Ben Gurion International Airport and Jerusalem and Highway 431 leading to Jerusalem, Modiin, Rehovot and the Highway 6 Trans-Israel Highway.
Driving north on Ayalon gives access to the Highway 2 coastal road leading to Netanya, Hadera and Haifa.
Within the city, main routes include Kaplan Street, Allenby Street, Ibn Gabirol Street, Dizengoff Street, Rothschild Boulevard, and in Jaffa the main route is Jerusalem Boulevard.
Namir Road connects the city to Highway 2, Israel's main north-south highway, and Begin/Jabotinsky Road, which provides access from the east through Ramat Gan, Bnei Brak and Petah Tikva.
Tel Aviv, accommodating about 500,000 commuter cars daily, suffers from increasing congestion.
In 2007, the Sadan Report recommended the introduction of a congestion charge similar to that of London in Tel Aviv as well as other Israeli cities.
Under this plan, road users traveling into the city would pay a fixed fee.
Air
The main airport serving Greater Tel Aviv is Ben Gurion International Airport.
Located in the neighbouring city of Lod, it handled over 20 million passengers in 2017.
Ben Gurion is the main hub of El Al, Arkia, Israir Airlines and Sun D'Or.
The airport is southeast of Tel Aviv, on Highway 1 between Tel Aviv and Jerusalem.
Sde Dov (IATA: SDV), in northwestern Tel Aviv, is a domestic airport and was closed in 2019 in favor of real-estate development.
All services to Sde Dov will be transferred to Ben Gurion Airport.
Cycling
Tel Aviv Municipality encourages the use of bicycles in the city.
Plans called for expansion of the paths to by 2009.
As of April 2011 the municipality has completed construction of the planned of bicycle paths.
In April 2011, Tel Aviv municipality launched Tel-O-Fun, a bicycle sharing system, in which 150 stations of bicycles for rent were installed within the city limits.
As of October 2011, there are 125 active stations, providing more than 1,000 bicycles.
Twin towns and sister cities
Future
The Israeli Interior Ministry is planning on eventually annexing the neighboring city of Bat Yam into Tel Aviv.
Current plans call for the merger to take place in 2023 after a few years' preparation.
It has been suggested that if this proves successful, other neighboring cities such as Ramat Gan and Givatayim would then be merged into Tel Aviv.
Some officials envision that as part of these mergers, Tel Aviv will become a supercity with several sub-municipalities in the style of Greater London.
People born in Tel Aviv
In alphabetical order by surname; stage names are treated as single names:
* Erez Komarovsky, chef, baker, educator, and author
* Ido Pariente, mixed martial artist fighter and trainer
Notes
Bibliography
* Michael Turner, Catherine Weill-Rochant, Geneviève Blondiau, Silvina Sosnovsky, Philippe Brandeis, Sur les traces du modernisme, Tel-Aviv-Haïfa-Jérusalem, CIVA (ed.), Bruxelles 2004.
* Catherine Weill-Rochant, L'Atlas de Tel-Aviv 1908-2008, Paris, CNRS Editions, 2008.
* Catherine Weill-Rochant, Bauhaus " - Architektur in Tel-Aviv, L’architecture " Bauhaus " à Tel- Aviv, Rita Gans (éd.), Zürich, Yad Yearim, 2008.
* Catherine Weill-Rochant, 'The Tel-Aviv School: a constrained rationalism', DOCOMOMO journal (Documentation and conservation of buildings, sites and neighbourhoods of the modern movement), April 2009.
* Catherine Weill-Rochant, Le travail de Patrick Geddes à Tel-Aviv, un plan d'ombre et de lumière, Saarbrücken, ةditions Universitaires Européennes, May 2010.
* Jochen Visscher (ed.): Tel Aviv
The White City, Photographs by Stefan Boness, JOVIS Verlag Berlin 2012,
