The kangaroo is a marsupial from the family Macropodidae (macropods, meaning "large foot").
In common use the term is used to describe the largest species from this family, especially those of the genus .
The Australian government estimates that 34.3 million kangaroos lived within the commercial harvest areas of Australia in 2011, up from 25.1 million one year earlier.
As with the terms "wallaroo" and "wallaby", "kangaroo" refers to a paraphyletic grouping of species.
All three refer to members of the same taxonomic family, Macropodidae, and are distinguished according to size.
The largest species in the family are called "kangaroos" and the smallest are generally called "wallabies".
The term "wallaroos" refers to species of an intermediate size.
and on some of its currency and is used by some of Australia's well known organisations, including Qantas and the Royal Australian Air Force.
The kangaroo is important to both Australian culture and the national image, and consequently there are numerous popular culture references.
Wild kangaroos are shot for meat, leather hides, and to protect grazing land.
Although controversial, kangaroo meat has perceived health benefits for human consumption compared with traditional meats due to the low level of fat on kangaroos.
Terminology
The word "kangaroo" derives from the Guugu Yimithirr word gangurru, referring to grey kangaroos.
The name was first recorded as "kanguru" on 12 July 1770 in an entry in the diary of Sir Joseph Banks; this occurred at the site of modern Cooktown, on the banks of the Endeavour River, where HMS Endeavour under the command of Lieutenant James Cook was beached for almost seven weeks to repair damage sustained on the Great Barrier Reef.
Cook first referred to kangaroos in his diary entry of 4 August.
Guugu Yimithirr is the language of the people of the area.
A common myth about the kangaroo's English name is that "kangaroo" was a Guugu Yimithirr phrase for "I don't understand you."
According to this legend, Cook and Banks were exploring the area when they happened upon the animal.
They asked a nearby local what the creatures were called.
The local responded "Kangaroo", meaning "I don't understand you", which Cook took to be the name of the creature.
This myth was debunked in the 1970s by linguist John B. Haviland in his research with the Guugu Yimithirr people.
Kangaroos are often colloquially referred to as "roos".
Male kangaroos are called bucks, boomers, jacks, or old men; females are does, flyers, or jills; and the young ones are joeys.
The collective noun for kangaroos is a mob, troop, or court.
Taxonomy and description
There are four extant species that are commonly referred to as kangaroos:
The red kangaroo (Macropus rufus) is the largest surviving marsupial anywhere in the world.
It occupies the arid and semi-arid centre of the country.
The highest population densities of the red kangaroo occur in the rangelands of western New South Wales.
Red kangaroos are commonly mistaken as the most abundant species of kangaroo, but eastern greys actually have a larger population.
A large male can be 2 metres (6 ft 7 in) tall and weighs 90 kg (200 lb).
The eastern grey kangaroo (Macropus giganteus) is less well-known than the red (outside Australia), but the most often seen, as its range covers the fertile eastern part of the country.
The range of the eastern grey kangaroo extends from the top of the Cape York Peninsula in north Queensland down to Victoria, as well as areas of south-eastern Australia and Tasmania.
Population densities of eastern grey kangaroos usually peak near 100 per km2 in suitable habitats of open woodlands.
Populations are more limited in areas of land clearance, such as farmland, where forest and woodland habitats are limited in size or abundance.
This ancestor was likely arboreal and lived in the canopies of the extensive forests that covered most of Australia at that time, when the climate was much wetter, and fed on leaves and stems.
There is dispute over the relationships of the two groups to modern kangaroos and rat kangaroos.
Some argue that the balbarines were the ancestors of rat kangaroos and the bulungmayines were the ancestors of kangaroos.
while others hold the contrary view.
The middle to late bulungmayines, Gungaroo and Wanburoo lacked digit 1 of the hind foot and digits 2 and 3 were reduced and partly under the large digit 4, much like the modern kangaroo foot.
This would indicate that they were bipedal.
In addition their ankle bones had an articulation that would have prohibited much lateral movements, an adaptation for bipedal hopping.
The animal was shot and its skin and skull transported back to England whereupon it was stuffed (by taxidermists who had never seen the animal before) and displayed to the general public as a curiosity.
The first glimpse of a kangaroo for many 18th-century Britons was a painting by George Stubbs.
Comparison with wallabies
Kangaroos and wallabies belong to the same taxonomic family (Macropodidae) and often the same genera, but kangaroos are specifically categorised into the six largest species of the family.
The term wallaby is an informal designation generally used for any macropod that is smaller than a kangaroo or wallaroo that has not been designated otherwise.
Biology and behaviour
Locomotion
Kangaroos are the only large animals to use hopping as a means of locomotion.
The comfortable hopping speed for a red kangaroo is about , but speeds of up to can be attained over short distances, while it can sustain a speed of for nearly .
During a hop, the powerful gastrocnemius muscles lift the body off the ground while the smaller plantaris muscle, which attaches near the large fourth toe, is used for push-off.
Seventy percent of potential energy is stored in the elastic tendons.
At slow speeds, it employs pentapedal locomotion, using its tail to form a tripod with its two forelimbs while bringing its hind feet forward.
Both pentapedal walking and fast hopping are energetically costly.
Hopping at moderate speeds is the most energy efficient and a kangaroo moving above maintain energy consistency more than similarly-sized animal running at the same speed.
Diet
Kangaroos have single-chambered stomachs quite unlike those of cattle and sheep, which have four compartments.
They sometimes regurgitate the vegetation they have eaten, chew it as cud, and then swallow it again for final digestion.
However, this is a different, more strenuous, activity than it is in ruminants, and does not take place as frequently.
Different species of kangaroos have different diets, although all are strict herbivores.
The eastern grey kangaroo is predominantly a grazer, and eats a wide variety of grasses, whereas some other species such as the red kangaroo include significant amounts of shrubs in their diets.
Smaller species of kangaroos also consume hypogeal fungi.
Many species are nocturnal, and crepuscular, usually spending the hot days resting in shade, and the cool evenings, nights and mornings moving about and feeding.
Because of its grazing habits, the kangaroo has developed specialised teeth that are rare amongst mammals.
Its incisors are able to crop grass close to the ground and its molars chop and grind the grass.
Since the two sides of the lower jaw are not joined or fused together, the lower incisors are farther apart, giving the kangaroo a wider bite.
The silica in grass is abrasive, so kangaroo molars are ground down and they actually move forward in the mouth before they eventually fall out, and are replaced by new teeth that grow in the back.
This process is known as polyphyodonty and, amongst other mammals, only occurs in elephants and manatees.
Absence of digestive methane release
Despite having herbivorous diets similar to ruminants such as cattle, which release large quantities of digestive methane through exhaling and eructation (burping), kangaroos release virtually none.
The hydrogen byproduct of fermentation is instead converted into acetate, which is then used to provide further energy.
Scientists are interested in the possibility of transferring the bacteria responsible for this process from kangaroos to cattle, since the greenhouse gas effect of methane is 23 times greater than carbon dioxide per molecule.
Social and sexual behaviour
Groups of kangaroos are called mobs, which usually have 10 or more kangaroos in them.
Living in mobs can provide protection for some of the weaker members of the group.
with eastern Australia having larger and more stable aggregations than in arid areas farther west.
The kangaroo performing the sniffing gains much information from smell cues.
This behaviour enforces social cohesion without consequent aggression.
During mutual sniffing, if one kangaroo is smaller, it will hold its body closer to the ground and its head will quiver, which serves as a possible form of submission.
A male will monitor a female and follow her every movement.
He sniffs her urine to see if she is in oestrus, a process exhibiting the flehmen response.
The male will then proceed to approach her slowly to avoid alarming her.
s of their large hind legs, providing most of the energy required for each hop by the spring action of the tendons rather than by any muscular effort.
This is true in all animal species which have muscles connected to their skeletons through elastic elements such as tendons, but the effect is more pronounced in kangaroos.
There is also a link between the hopping action and breathing: as the feet leave the ground, air is expelled from the lungs; bringing the feet forward ready for landing refills the lungs, providing further energy efficiency.
Studies of kangaroos and wallabies have demonstrated, beyond the minimum energy expenditure required to hop at all, increased speed requires very little extra effort (much less than the same speed increase in, say, a horse, dog or human), and the extra energy is required to carry extra weight.
For kangaroos, the key benefit of hopping is not speed to escape predators-the top speed of a kangaroo is no higher than that of a similarly sized quadruped, and the Australian native predators are in any case less fearsome than those of other countries-but economy: in an infertile country with highly variable weather patterns, the ability of a kangaroo to travel long distances at moderately high speed in search of food sources is crucial to survival.
New research has revealed that a kangaroo's tail acts as a third leg rather than just a balancing strut.
Kangaroos have a unique three-stage walk where they plant their front legs and tail first, then push off their tail, followed lastly by the back legs.
The propulsive force of the tail is equal to that of both the front and hind legs combined and performs as much work as what a human leg walking
can at the same speed.
A DNA sequencing project of the genome of a member of the kangaroo family, the tammar wallaby, was started in 2004.
It was a collaboration between Australia (mainly funded by the state of Victoria) and the National Institutes of Health in the US.
The tammar's genome was fully sequenced in 2011.
The genome of a marsupial such as the kangaroo is of great interest to scientists studying comparative genomics, because marsupials are at an ideal degree of evolutionary divergence from humans: mice are too close and have not developed many different functions, while birds are genetically too remote.
The dairy industry could also benefit from this project.
Blindness
Eye disease is rare but not new among kangaroos.
The first official report of kangaroo blindness took place in 1994, in central New South Wales.
The following year, reports of blind kangaroos appeared in Victoria and South Australia.
By 1996, the disease had spread "across the desert to Western Australia".
Australian authorities were concerned the disease could spread to other livestock and possibly humans.
Researchers at the Australian Animal Health Laboratories in Geelong detected a virus called the Wallal virus in two species of midges, believed to have been the carriers.
Veterinarians also discovered fewer than 3% of kangaroos exposed to the virus developed blindness.
Reproduction and life cycle
Kangaroo reproduction is similar to that of opossums.
The egg (still contained in the shell membrane, a few micrometres thick, and with only a small quantity of yolk within it) descends from the ovary into the uterus.
There it is fertilised and quickly develops into a neonate.
Even in the largest kangaroo (the red kangaroo), the neonate emerges after only 33 days.
Usually, only one young is born at a time.
It is blind, hairless, and only a few centimetres long; its hindlegs are mere stumps; it instead uses its more developed forelegs to climb its way through the thick fur on its mother's abdomen into the pouch, which takes about three to five minutes.
Once in the pouch, it fastens onto one of the four teats and starts to feed.
Almost immediately, the mother's sexual cycle starts again.
Another egg descends into the uterus and she becomes sexually receptive.
Then, if she mates and a second egg is fertilised, its development is temporarily halted.
Meanwhile, the neonate in the pouch grows rapidly.
After about 190 days, the baby (joey) is sufficiently large and developed to make its full emergence out of the pouch, after sticking its head out for a few weeks until it eventually feels safe enough to fully emerge.
From then on, it spends increasing time in the outside world and eventually, after about 235 days, it leaves the pouch for the last time.
The lifespan of kangaroos averages at six years in the wild to in excess of 20 years in captivity, varying by species.
Most individuals, however, do not reach maturity in the wild.
Interaction with humans
The kangaroo has always been a very important animal for Aboriginal Australians, for its meat, hide, bone, and tendon.
Kangaroo hides were also sometimes used for recreation; in particular there are accounts of some tribes (Kurnai) using stuffed kangaroo scrotum as a ball for the traditional football game of marngrook.
In addition, there were important Dreaming stories and ceremonies involving the kangaroo.
Aherrenge is a current kangaroo dreaming site in the Northern Territory.
Unlike many of the smaller macropods, kangaroos have fared well since European settlement.
European settlers cut down forests to create vast grasslands for sheep and cattle grazing, added stock watering points in arid areas, and have substantially reduced the number of dingoes.
Kangaroos are shy and retiring by nature, and in normal circumstances present no threat to humans.
In 2003, Lulu, an eastern grey which had been hand-reared, saved a farmer's life by alerting family members to his location when he was injured by a falling tree branch.
She received the RSPCA Australia National Animal Valour Award on 19 May 2004.
There are very few records of kangaroos attacking humans without provocation; however, several such unprovoked attacks in 2004 spurred fears of a rabies-like disease possibly affecting the marsupials.
The only reliably documented case of a fatality from a kangaroo attack occurred in New South Wales, in 1936.
A hunter was killed when he tried to rescue his two dogs from a heated fray.
Other suggested causes for erratic and dangerous kangaroo behaviour include extreme thirst and hunger.
In July 2011, a male red kangaroo attacked a 94-year-old woman in her own backyard as well as her son and two police officers responding to the situation.
The kangaroo was capsicum sprayed (pepper sprayed) and later put down after the attack.
Conflict with vehicles
A collision with a vehicle is capable of killing a kangaroo.
Kangaroos dazzled by headlights or startled by engine noise often leap in front of cars.
Since kangaroos in mid-bound can reach speeds of around 50 km/h (31 mph) and are relatively heavy, the force of impact can be severe.
Small vehicles may be destroyed, while larger vehicles may suffer engine damage.
The risk of harm or death to vehicle occupants is greatly increased if the windscreen is the point of impact.
As a result, "kangaroo crossing" signs are commonplace in Australia.
Vehicles that frequent isolated roads, where roadside assistance may be scarce, are often fitted with "roo bars" to minimise damage caused by collision.
Bonnet-mounted devices, designed to scare wildlife off the road with ultrasound and other methods, have been devised and marketed.
If a female is the victim of a collision, animal welfare groups ask that her pouch be checked for any surviving joey, in which case it may be removed to a wildlife sanctuary or veterinary surgeon for rehabilitation.
Likewise, when an adult kangaroo is injured in a collision, a vet, the RSPCA Australia or the National Parks and Wildlife Service can be consulted for instructions on proper care.
In New South Wales, rehabilitation of kangaroos is carried out by volunteers from WIRES.
Council road signs often list phone numbers for callers to report injured animals.
Emblems and popular culture
The kangaroo is a recognisable symbol of Australia.
The kangaroo and emu feature on the Australian Coat of Arms.
Kangaroos have also been featured on coins, most notably the five kangaroos on the Australian one dollar coin.
The Australian Made logo consists of a golden kangaroo in a green triangle to show that a product is grown or made in Australia.
The kangaroo and wallaby feature predominantly in Australian sports teams names and mascots.
Examples include the Australian national rugby league team (the Kangaroos) and the Australian national rugby union team (the Wallabies).
Australia's national airline, Qantas, uses a bounding kangaroo for its logo.
Kangaroos are well represented in films, television, books, toys and souvenirs around the world.
Skippy the Bush Kangaroo was the star of the popular 1960s Australian children's television series of the same name.
Kangaroos are featured in the Rolf Harris song Tie Me Kangaroo Down, Sport and several Christmas carols.
Meat
Historically, the kangaroo has been a source of food for indigenous Australians.
Kangaroo meat is high in protein and low in fat (about 2%).
Kangaroo meat has a high concentration of conjugated linoleic acid (CLA) compared with other foods, and is a rich source of vitamins and minerals.
Low fat diets rich in CLA have been studied for their potential in reducing obesity and atherosclerosis.
Most kangaroo meat is currently sourced from wild animals as a byproduct of population control programs.
Kangaroos are hunted by licensed shooters in accordance with a strict code of practice and are protected by state and federal legislation.
Kangaroo meat is exported to many countries around the world.
Further reading
