Louisa May Alcott (; November 29, 1832March 6, 1888) was an American novelist, short story writer and poet better known as the author of the novel Little Women (1868) and its sequels Little Men (1871) and Jo's Boys (1886).
in Germantown, where Alcott's father established an experimental school and joined the Transcendental Club with Ralph Waldo Emerson and Henry David Thoreau.
Bronson Alcott's opinions on education and tough views on child-rearing as well as his moments of mental instability shaped young Alcott's mind with a desire to achieve perfection, a goal of the transcendentalists.
His attitudes towards Alcott's wild and independent behavior, and his inability to provide for his family, created conflict between Bronson Alcott and his wife and daughters.
Abigail resented her husbands' inability to recognize her sacrifices and related his thoughtlessness to the larger issue of the inequality of sexes.
She passed this recognition and desire to redress wrongs done to women on to Louisa.
In 1840, after several setbacks with the school, the Alcott family moved to a cottage on of land, situated along the Sudbury River in Concord, Massachusetts.
The three years they spent at the rented Hosmer Cottage were described as idyllic.
By 1843, the Alcott family moved, along with six other members of the Consociate Family,
Poverty made it necessary for Alcott to go to work at an early age as a teacher, seamstress, governess, domestic helper, and writer.
Her sisters also supported the family, working as seamstresses, while their mother took on social work among the Irish immigrants.
Only the youngest, May, was able to attend public school.
Due to all of these pressures, writing became a creative and emotional outlet for Alcott.
and was driven in life not to be poor.
In 1847, she and her family served as station masters on the Underground Railroad, when they housed a fugitive slave for one week and had discussions with Frederick Douglass.
Alcott read and admired the "Declaration of Sentiments", published by the Seneca Falls Convention on women's rights, advocating for women's suffrage and became the first woman to register to vote in Concord, Massachusetts in a school board election.
The 1850s were hard times for the Alcotts, and in 1854 Louisa found solace at the Boston Theatre where she wrote The Rival Prima Donnas, which she later burned due to a quarrel between the actresses on who would play what role.
At one point in 1857, unable to find work and filled with such despair, Alcott contemplated suicide.
During that year, she read Elizabeth Gaskell's biography of Charlotte Brontë and found many parallels to her own life.
In 1858, her younger sister Elizabeth died, and her older sister Anna married a man named John Pratt.
This felt, to Alcott, to be a breaking up of their sisterhood.
She wrote about the mismanagement of hospitals and the indifference and callousness of some of the surgeons she encountered.
Her main character, Tribulation Periwinkle, showed a passage from innocence to maturity and is a "serious and eloquent witness".
After her service as a nurse, Alcott's father wrote her a heartfelt poem titled "To Louisa May Alcott.
From her father".
The poem describes how proud her father is of her for working as a nurse and helping injured soldiers as well as bringing cheer and love into their home.
He ends the poem by telling her she's in his heart for being a selfless faithful daughter.
This poem was featured in the book "Louisa May Alcott: Her Life, Letters, and Journals (1889)".
This poem is also featured in the book "Louisa May Alcott, the Children's Friend" that talks about her childhood and close relationship with her father.
In the mid-1860s, Alcott wrote passionate, fiery novels and sensational stories under the nom de plume A. M. Barnard.
Among these are A Long Fatal Love Chase and Pauline's Passion and Punishment.
Her protagonists for these books are strong and smart.
She also produced stories for children, and after they became popular, she did not go back to writing for adults.
Other books she wrote are the novelette A Modern Mephistopheles (1875), which people thought Julian Hawthorne wrote, and the semi-autobiographical novel Work (1873).
Alcott became even more successful with the first part of Little Women: or Meg, Jo, Beth and Amy (1868), a semi-autobiographical account of her childhood with her sisters in Concord, Massachusetts, published by the Roberts Brothers.
Alcott originally delayed writing the novel, seeing herself incapable of writing a story for girls, despite her publisher, Thomas Niles' urges for her to do so.
Part two, or Part Second, also known as Good Wives (1869), followed the March sisters into adulthood and marriage.
Little Men (1871) detailed Jo's life at the Plumfield School that she founded with her husband Professor Bhaer at the conclusion of Part Two of Little Women.
Jo's Boys (1886) completed the "March Family Saga".
In Little Women, Alcott based her heroine "Jo" on herself.
But whereas Jo marries at the end of the story, Alcott remained single throughout her life.
She explained her "spinsterhood" in an interview with Louise Chandler Moulton, "I am more than half-persuaded that I am a man's soul put by some freak of nature into a woman's body.
… because I have fallen in love with so many pretty girls and never once the least bit with any man.”
However, Alcott's romance while in Europe with the young Polish man Ladislas "Laddie" Wisniewski was detailed in her journals but then deleted by Alcott herself before her death.
Alcott identified Laddie as the model for Laurie in Little Women.
Likewise, every character seems to be paralleled to some extent, from Beth's death mirroring Lizzie's to Jo's rivalry with the youngest, Amy, as Alcott felt a sort of rivalry for (Abigail) May, at times.
Though Alcott never married, she did take in May's daughter, Louisa, after May's death in 1879 from childbed fever, caring for little "Lulu" until her death.
Little Women was well received, with critics and audiences finding it suitable for many age groups.
A reviewer of Eclectic Magazine called it "the very best of books to reach the hearts of the young of any age from six to sixty".
It was a fresh, natural representation of daily life.
With the success of Little Women, Alcott shied away from the attention and would sometimes act as a servant when fans would come to her house.
Along with Elizabeth Stoddard, Rebecca Harding Davis, Anne Moncure Crane, and others, Alcott was part of a group of female authors during the Gilded Age, who addressed women's issues in a modern and candid manner.
Their works were, as one newspaper columnist of the period commented, "among the decided 'signs of the times'".
Later years
In 1877 Alcott was one of the founders of the Women's Educational and Industrial Union in Boston.
After her youngest sister May died in 1879, Louisa took over for the care of niece, Lulu, who was named after Louisa.
Alcott suffered chronic health problems in her later years, including vertigo.
She and her earliest biographers attributed her illness and death to mercury poisoning.
During her American Civil War service, Alcott contracted typhoid fever and was treated with a compound containing mercury.
She is buried in Sleepy Hollow Cemetery in Concord, near Emerson, Hawthorne, and Thoreau, on a hillside now known as "Authors' Ridge".
Louisa frequently wrote in her journals about going on runs up until she died.
She challenged the social norms regarding gender by encouraging her young female readers to run as well.
Her Boston home is featured on the Boston Women's Heritage Trail.
Her childhood home Orchard House is now a museum that pays homage to Louisa May Alcott and her family that focuses on education.
In addition, Harriet Reisen wrote Louisa May Alcott: The Woman Behind "Little Women" which later became a film that was directed by Nancy Porter and aired on PBS television.
In 1996 Alcott was inducted into the National Women's Hall of Fame.
Selected works
The "Little Women" trilogy
There is a Part Second of Little Women, also known as "Good Wives", published in 1869; and afterward published together with Little Women.
* Little Men: Life at Plumfield with Jo's Boys (1871)
Jo's Boys and How They Turned Out: A Sequel to "Little Men" (1886)
Novels
* Beginning Again, Being a Continuation of Work (1875)
As A. M. Barnard
The Abbot's Ghost, or Maurice Treherne's Temptation (1867)
A Long Fatal Love Chase (1866; first published 1995)
Published anonymously
Short story collections for children
* Aunt Jo's Scrap-Bag (1872-1882).
* Lulu's Library (1886-1889)
A collection of 32 short stories in three volumes.
* Morning-Glories and Other Stories (1867)
Eight fantasy stories and four poems for children, including: *http:/ archives/a_strange_island.htm A Strange Island, (1868); *
The Rose Family: A Fairy Tale (1864), A Christmas Song, Morning Glories, Shadow-Children, Poppy's Pranks, What the Swallows did, Little Gulliver, The Whale's story, Goldfin and Silvertail.
* Kitty's Class Day and Other Stories (Three Proverb Stories), 1868,
* Spinning-Wheel Stories* Mountain-Laurel and Maidenhair (1887) (One short story)
* A Garland for Girls (1888).
A collection of eight short stories.
The Brownie and the Princess (2004).
A collection of ten short stories.
Other short stories and novelettes
* https:/ magazine 1863 thoreaus-flute Thoreau's Flute (1863)
*http:/ archives/perilous_play.htm Perilous Play, (1869)
* Transcendental Wild Oats (1873)
A Short story about Alcott's family and the Transcendental Movement.
* Silver Pitchers, and Independence: A Centennial Love Story" (1876)
In popular culture
* 1949:
An Old-Fashioned Girl, a movie version of novel.
* 1987: Tales of Little Women, an anime based on Little Women.
* 1997:
The Inheritance, a movie version of the novel, which was posthumously published for the first time that year.
* 2008:
An Old Fashioned Thanksgiving, a movie based on the short story.
* 2009: American Masters, PBS, episode "Louisa May Alcott - The Woman Behind 'Little Women'"
* 2016:
Google Doodle created by Google artist Sophie Diao.
* 2018: Little Women, a movie version of the novel, set in modern times.
Bibliography
Further reading
* Elbert, Sarah.
A Hunger for Home: Louisa May Alcott and Little Women (Temple UP, 1984).
* Paolucci, Stefano.
https:/ 35470808/Stefano_Paolucci_Da_Piccole_donne_a_Piccoli_uomini_Louisa_May_Alcott_ai_Colli_Albani_Castelli_Romani_LVII_n._6_novembre-dicembre_2017_pp._163-175 Da Piccole donne a Piccoli uomini: Louisa May Alcott ai Colli Albani, "Castelli Romani," LVII, n. 6, nov.-dec. 2017, pp. 163-175.
