The haka (; plural haka, in both Te Reo Māori and English) is a ceremonial dance or challenge in Māori culture.
It is a posture dance performed by a group, with vigorous movements and stamping of the feet with rhythmically shouted accompaniment.
Although commonly associated with the traditional battle preparations of male warriors, haka have long been performed by both men and women, and several varieties of the dance fulfil social functions within Māori culture.
Haka are performed to welcome distinguished guests, or to acknowledge great achievements, occasions or funerals.
Kapa haka groups are very common in schools.
The main Māori performing arts competition, Te Matatini, takes place every two years.
New Zealand sports teams' practice of performing a haka before their international matches has made the haka more widely known around the world.
This tradition began with the 1888-89 New Zealand Native football team tour and has been carried on by the New Zealand rugby union team ("All Blacks") since 1905.
This is considered by some Māori to be a form of cultural appropriation.
Etymology
The group of people performing a haka is referred to as a kapa haka (kapa meaning row or rank).
The Māori word haka has cognates in other Polynesian languages, for example: Tongan haka, 'hand action while singing'; Samoan saa (saasaa), Tokelau haka, Rarotongan aka, Hawaiian haa, Marquesan haka, all meaning 'dance'; Mangarevan aka, 'to dance in traditional fashion; dance accompanied by chant, usually of a warlike nature'.
In some languages, the meaning is divergent, for example in Tikopia saka means to 'perform rites in traditional ritual system'.
The form reconstructed for Proto-Polynesian is *saka, deriving ultimately from Proto-Oceanic *saŋka (g).
It may also be cognate to the Austronesian languages' words in Cebuano and Tagalog, sayaw, meaning dance or martial art.
History and practice
Origins
According to Tīmoti Kāretu, the haka has been "erroneously defined by generations of uninformed as 'war dances'", whereas Māori mythology places haka as the dance "about the celebration of life".
According to its creation story, the sun god, Tama-nui-te-rā, had two wives, the Summer Maid, Hine-raumati, and the Winter Maid, Hine-takurua.
Haka originated in the coming of Hine-raumati, whose presence on still, hot days was revealed in a quivering appearance in the air.
This was the haka of Tāne-rore, the son of Hine-raumati and Tama-nui-te-rā.
Hyland comments that "the haka is (and also represents) a natural phenomena sic; on hot summer days, the 'shimmering' atmospheric distortion of air emanating from the ground is personified as 'Te Haka a Tānerore'".
Jackson and Hokowhitu state, "haka is the generic name for all types of dance or ceremonial performance that involve movement."
The various types of haka include whakatū waewae, tūtū ngārahu and peruperu.
The tūtū ngārahu involves jumping from side to side, while in the whakatū waewae no jumping occurs.
Another kind of haka performed without weapons is the ngeri, the purpose of which was to motivate a warrior psychologically.
The movements are very free, and each performer is expected to be expressive of their feelings.
Manawa wera haka were generally associated with funerals or other occasions involving death.
Like the ngeri they were performed without weapons, and there was little or no choreographed movement.
War haka () were originally performed by warriors before a battle, proclaiming their strength and prowess in order to intimidate the opposition.
Various actions are employed in the course of a performance, including facial contortions such as showing the whites of the eyes (), and poking out the tongue headed by Ngā Tamatoa, a prominent Māori activist group.
The protesters included Hone Harawira, later a Member of Parliament.
Several of the engineering students were assaulted, and members of He Taua were arrested.
Their court case in Auckland sparked anti-racism protests outside the courthouse.
The choreographed dance and chant popularised around the world by the All Blacks and kiwis derives from "Ka Mate", Concerns were expressed that the authorship and significance of this haka to the Ngāti Toa were being lost and that it had "become the most performed, the most maligned, the most abused of all haka", and was now "the most globally recognised form of cultural appropriation".
Specific legal challenges regarding the rights of the Ngāti Toa to be acknowledged as the authors and owners of "Ka Mate" were eventually settled in agreements between Ngāti Toa and the New Zealand Government and New Zealand Rugby Union, as published in 2009.
Cultural impact
In the 21st century, kapa haka is offered as a subject in universities, including the study of haka, and is practised in schools and military institutions.
In addition to the national Te Matatini competition, local and regional competitions attract dozens of teams and thousands of spectators.
The All Blacks' use of the haka has become the most widely known, but several other New Zealand sports teams now perform the haka before commencing a game.
These include the national rugby league team ("the Kiwis"), and the men's national basketball team ("Tall Blacks").
In the lead up to the Rugby World Cup in 2011, flashmob haka became a popular way of expressing support for the All Blacks.
Some Māori leaders thought it was "inappropriate" and a "bastardisation" of haka.
Sizeable flashmob haka were performed in Wellington and Auckland, as well as London, which has a large New Zealander immigrant community.
In November 2012, a Māori kapa haka group from Rotorua performed a version of the "Gangnam Style" dance mixed with a traditional haka in Seoul, celebrating 50 years of diplomatic relations between South Korea and New Zealand.
On 7 December 2014, at the 2014 Roller Derby World Cup in Dallas, Texas, Team New Zealand performed a haka on roller skates to the Australian Roller Derby team before their bout in the quarter-finals.
Team New Zealand performed a haka before their debut game against Team USA at the 2011 Roller Derby World Cup, on 1 December 2011; however, it was unexpected and the arena music was still playing.
It has since become an expected tradition.
In March 2019, following the Christchurch mosque shootings, school pupils and other groups performed haka to honour those killed in the attacks.
Three or four American football teams are known to perform the haka as a pregame ritual.
This appears to have begun at Kahuku High School where both the student body and local community includes many Polynesian Hawaiians, Māori, Samoans, Tahitians, and Tongans.
The University of Hawaii Rainbow Warriors football team also adopted the haka as a pregame ritual during the 2006 season, and the practice has spread to a number of other teams overseas; however, this has been criticised as inappropriate and disrespectful.
;Similar dances
References
Inline citations
General references
* McLean, Mervyn (1996).
Maori music.
Auckland: Auckland University Press.
* Pōmare, Mīria (3 March 2017).
http:/ NewZealanders NgatiToarangatira ENZ-Resources 2/en "Ngāti Toarangatira - Chant composed by Te Rauparaha".
Te Ara:
The Encyclopedia of New Zealand.
