The bee hummingbird, zunzuncito or Helena hummingbird (Mellisuga helenae) is a species of hummingbird which is the world's smallest bird.
It is endemic to Cuba and the Isla de la Juventud.
Description
The bee hummingbird is the smallest living bird.
As its name suggests, it is scarcely larger than a bee.
Like all hummingbirds, it is a swift, strong flier.
The male has a green , bluish upper parts, and the rest of the underparts mostly greyish white.
The male is smaller than the female.
The female is green above, whitish below, with white tips to the outer tail feathers.
Compared to other small hummingbirds, which often have a slender appearance, the bee hummingbird looks rounded and plump.
Female bee hummingbirds are bluish green with a pale gray underside.
The tips of their tail feathers have white spots.
During the mating season, males have a reddish to pink head, chin, and throat.
The female lays only two eggs at a time, each about the size of a coffee bean.
Using bits of cobwebs, bark, and lichen, the female builds a cup-shaped nest that is about in diameter.
Nests have been built on single clothespins.
She lines the nest with soft plant fibers.
There she lays her eggs, which are no bigger than peas.
She alone incubates the eggs and raises the young.
Diet
The bee hummingbird has been reported to visit 10 plant species, nine of them endemic to Cuba.
These flowers include Hamelia patens (Rubiaceae), Chrysobalanus icaco (Chrysobalanaceae), Pavonia paludicola (Malvaceae), Forsteronia corymbosa (Apocynaceae), Lysiloma latisiliquum (Mimosaceae), Turnera ulmifolia (Passifloraceae), Antigonon leptopus (Polygonaceae), Clerodendrum aculeatum (Verbenaceae), Tournefortia hirsutissima (Boraginaceae), and Cissus obovata (Vitaceae).
and uncommonly in Playa Larga near Zapata Swamp.
Breeding
The bee hummingbird's breeding season is March-June.
They lay up to 2 eggs at a time.
Coevolution with flowers
The bee hummingbird interaction with the flowers that supply nectar is a notable example of bird-plant coevolution with its primary food source (flowers for nectar).
