Tortoises () are reptile species of the family Testudinidae of the order Testudines (the turtles).
They are particularly distinguished from other turtles by being land-dwelling, while many (though not all) other turtle species are at least partly aquatic.
However, like other turtles, tortoises have a shell to protect from predation and other threats.
The shell in tortoises is generally hard, and like other members of the suborder Cryptodira, they retract their necks and heads directly backwards into the shell to protect them.
Tortoises are unique among vertebrates in that the pectoral and pelvic girdles are inside the ribcage rather than outside.
Tortoises can vary in dimension from a few centimeters to two meters.
They are usually diurnal animals with tendencies to be crepuscular depending on the ambient temperatures.
They are generally reclusive animals.
Tortoises are the longest living land animal in the world, although the longest living species of tortoise is a matter of debate.
Galápagos tortoises are noted to live over 150 years, but an Aldabra giant tortoise named Adwaita may have been the longest living at an estimated 255 years.
In general, most tortoise species can live 80-150 years.
General information
With a single exception (Malacochersus tornieri), all tortoises are well-developed.
All tortoises share unique columnar or elephantine hindlimbs.
All tortoises are terrestrial.
They live in diverse habitats, including deserts, arid grasslands, and scrub to wet evergreen forests, and from sea level to mountainsides (1000m elevation; Indotestudo forstenii).
Most species, however, occupy semiarid habitats.
Adult CL ranges from 8.5 cm in the smallest tortoise, Homopus signatus, to 130 cm in the largest, Chelonoidis nigra.
Distribution
Tortoises are found from Southern North America to southern South America, circum-Mediterranean Euroafrica to Indomalaysia, sub-Saharan Africa, Madagascar, and some Oceanic islands.
Terminology
Differences exist in usage of the common terms turtle, tortoise, and terrapin, depending on the variety of English being used; usage is inconsistent and contradictory.
These terms are common names and do not reflect precise biological or taxonomic distinctions.
The American Society of Ichthyologists and Herpetologists uses "turtle" to describe all species of the order Testudines, regardless of whether they are land-dwelling or sea-dwelling, and uses "tortoise" as a more specific term for slow-moving terrestrial species.
In America, for example, the members of the genus Terrapene dwell on land, yet are referred to as box turtles rather than tortoises.
Australian usage is different from both American and British usage.
Some Australian experts disapprove of this usage-believing that the term tortoises is "better confined to purely terrestrial animals with very different habits and needs, none of which are found in this
country"-and promote the use of the term "freshwater turtle" to describe Australia's primarily aquatic members of the order Testudines because it avoids misleading use of the word "tortoise" and also is a useful distinction from marine turtles.
The size of the egg depends on the size of the mother and can be estimated by examining the width of the cloacal opening between the carapace and plastron.
The plastron of a female tortoise often has a noticeable V-shaped notch below the tail which facilitates passing the eggs.
Upon completion of the incubation period, a fully formed hatchling uses an egg tooth to break out of its shell.
It digs to the surface of the nest and begins a life of survival on its own.
They are hatched with an embryonic egg sac which serves as a source of nutrition for the first three to seven days until they have the strength and mobility to find food.
Juvenile tortoises often require a different balance of nutrients than adults, so may eat foods which a more mature tortoise would not.
For example, the young of a strictly herbivorous species commonly will consume worms or insect larvae for additional protein.
The number of concentric rings on the carapace, much like the cross-section of a tree, can sometimes give a clue to how old the animal is, but, since the growth depends highly on the accessibility of food and water, a tortoise that has access to plenty of forage (or is regularly fed by its owner) with no seasonal variation will have no noticeable rings.
Moreover, some tortoises grow more than one ring per season, and in some others, due to wear, some rings are no longer visible.
Tortoises generally have one of the longest lifespans of any animal, and some individuals are known to have lived longer than 150 years.
Because of this, they symbolize longevity in some cultures, such as China.
The oldest tortoise ever recorded, and one of the oldest individual animals ever recorded, was Tu'i Malila, which was presented to the Tongan royal family by the British explorer James Cook shortly after its birth in 1777.
Tu'i Malila remained in the care of the Tongan royal family until its death by natural causes on May 19, 1965, at the age of 188.
The record for the longest-lived vertebrate is exceeded only by one other, a koi named Hanako whose death on July 17, 1977, ended a 226-year lifespan.
The Alipore Zoo in India was the home to Adwaita, which zoo officials claimed was the oldest living animal until its death on March 23, 2006.
Adwaita (also spelled Addwaita) was an Aldabra giant tortoise brought to India by Lord Wellesley, who handed it over to the Alipur Zoological Gardens in 1875 when the zoo was set up.
West Bengal officials said records showed Adwaita was at least 150 years old, but other evidence pointed to 250.
Adwaita was said to be the pet of Robert Clive.
Harriet was a resident at the Australia Zoo in Queensland from 1987 to her death in 2006; she was believed to have been brought to England by Charles Darwin aboard the Beagle and then on to Australia by John Clements Wickham.
Harriet died on June 23, 2006, just shy of her 176th birthday.
Timothy, a spur-thighed tortoise, lived to be about 165 years old.
For 38 years, she was carried as a mascot aboard various ships in Britain's Royal Navy.
Then in 1892, at age 53, she retired to the grounds of Powderham Castle in Devon.
Up to the time of her death in 2004, she was believed to be the United Kingdom's oldest resident.
Jonathan, a Seychelles giant tortoise living on the island of St Helena, may be as old as years or years.
Sexual dimorphism
Many species of tortoises are sexually dimorphic, though the differences between males and females vary from species to species.
In some species, males have a longer, more protruding neck plate than their female counterparts, while in others, the claws are longer on the females.
In most tortoise species, the female tends to be larger than the male.
The male plastron is curved inwards to aid reproduction.
The easiest way to determine the sex of a tortoise is to look at the tail.
The females, as a general rule, have smaller tails, dropped down, whereas the males have much longer tails which are usually pulled up and to the side of the rear shell.
Brain
The brain of a tortoise is extremely small.
The tortoises, from Central and South America, do not have an area in the brain called the hippocampus, which relates to emotion, learning, memory and spatial navigation.
Studies have shown that red-footed tortoises may rely on an area of the brain called the medial cortex for emotional actions, an area that humans use for actions such as decision making.
In the 17th century, Francesco Redi performed an experiment that involved removing the brain of a land tortoise, which then proceeded to live six months.
Freshwater tortoises, when subjected to the same experiment, continued similarly, but did not live so long.
Redi also cut the head off a tortoise entirely, and it lived for 23 days.
Diet
Most land-based tortoises are herbivores, feeding on grasses, weeds, leafy greens, flowers, and some fruits, although some omnivorous species are in this family.
Pet tortoises typically require diets based on wild grasses, weeds, leafy greens and certain flowers.
Certain species consume worms or insects and carrion in their normal habitats.
Too much protein is detrimental in herbivorous species, and has been associated with shell deformities and other medical problems.
As different tortoise species vary greatly in their nutritional requirements, it is essential to thoroughly research the dietary needs of individual tortoises.
Taxonomy
This species list largely follows Turtle Taxonomy Working Group (2019)and the Turtle Extinctions Working Group (2015)
Family Testudinidae Batsch 1788
**†Aldabrachelys abrupta Late Holocene, extinct circa 1200 AD
**†Aldabrachelys grandidieri Late Holocene, extinct circa 884 AD
**Astrochelys yniphora, angonoka tortoise, (Madagascan) plowshare tortoise
**Centrochelys sulcata, African spurred tortoise, sulcata tortoise
*** Chelonoidis abingdonii, Pinta Island giant tortoise, Abingdon Island giant tortoise (extinct)
***Chelonoidis becki, Wolf Volcano giant tortoise, Cape Berkeley giant tortoise
***Chelonoidis chathamensis, San Cristobal giant tortoise, Chatham Island giant tortoise
***Chelonoidis darwini, San Salvador giant tortoise, James Island giant tortoise
***Chelonoidis duncanensis, Pinzon giant tortoise, Duncan Island giant tortoise
***Chelonoidis hoodensis, Espanola giant tortoise, Hood Island giant tortoise
*** Chelonoidis nigra, Floreana giant tortoise, Charles Island giant tortoise (extinct)
***Chelonoidis phantastica, Fernandina giant tortoise, Narborough Island giant tortoise
***Chelonoidis porteri, Santa Cruz giant tortoise, Indefatigable Island giant tortoise
***Chelonoidis vicina, Isabela Island giant tortoise, Albemarle Island giant tortoise
** Chelonoidis sellovii Southern Cone giant tortoise, Pleistocene
** Chelonoidis sombrerensis Sombrero giant tortoise, Late Pleistocene
**Chersina angulata, angulated tortoise, South African bowsprit tortoise
**†Cheirogaster gymnesica Late Pliocene to Early Pleistocene
**†Cheirogaster schafferi Pliocene to Early Pleistocene
**Chersobius boulengeri, Karoo padloper, Karoo dwarf tortoise, Boulenger's Cape tortoise
**Chersobius solus, Nama padloper, Berger's Cape tortoise
*†Cylindraspis Fitzinger 1835:112 (all species extinct) following Austin and Arnold, 2001:
**Cylindraspis indica, synonym Cylindraspis borbonica, Reunion giant tortoise
**Cylindraspis inepta, saddle-backed Mauritius giant tortoise or Mauritius giant domed tortoise
**Cylindraspis peltastes, domed Rodrigues giant tortoise
**Cylindraspis triserrata, domed Mauritius giant tortoise or Mauritius giant flat-shelled tortoise
**Cylindraspis vosmaeri, saddle-backed Rodrigues giant tortoise
**Gopherus agassizii, Mojave desert tortoise, Mohave desert tortoise, Agassiz's desert tortoise
**Gopherus berlandieri, Texas tortoise, Berlandier's tortoise
**Gopherus morafkai, Sonoran desert tortoise, Morafka's desert tortoise
**Homopus areolatus, common padloper, parrot-beaked tortoise, beaked Cape tortoise
**Homopus femoralis, greater padloper, greater dwarf tortoise
**Indotestudo elongata, elongated tortoise, yellow-headed tortoise
**Indotestudo forstenii, Forsten's tortoise, East Indian tortoise
**Kinixys erosa, forest hinge-back tortoise, serrated hinge-back tortoise
**Manouria emys, Asian giant tortoise, brown tortoise (mountain tortoise)
** Megalochelys atlas, Atlas tortoise, Extinct - Pliocene to Pleistocene
**Pyxis planicauda, flat-backed spider tortoise, (Madagascan) flat-tailed tortoise, flat-tailed spider tortoise
**Testudo graeca, Greek tortoise, spur-thighed tortoise, Moorish tortoise
**Testudo kleinmanni, Egyptian tortoise, including Negev tortoise
In religion
In Hinduism, Kurma () was the second Avatar of Vishnu.
Like the Matsya Avatara, Kurma also belongs to the Satya Yuga.
Vishnu took the form of a half-man, half-tortoise, the lower half being a tortoise.
He is normally shown as having four arms.
He sat on the bottom of the ocean after the Great Flood.
A mountain was placed on his back by the other gods so they could churn the sea and find the ancient treasures of the Vedic peoples.
In Judaism and early Christianity tortoises were seen as unclean animals .
Tortoise shells were used by ancient Chinese as oracle bones to make predictions.
The tortoise is a symbol of the Ancient Greek god, Hermes.
See also World Turtle and Cultural depictions of turtles.
Gallery
File:Tortoise-Hatchling.jpg|Baby Testudo marginata emerges from its egg
File:Baby_tortoise.jpg|Baby tortoise, less than a day old
File:Testudo x4.jpg|Testudo graeca ibera, Testudo hermanni boettgeri, Testudo hermanni hermanni, Testudo marginata sarda
File:Young Sulcata Tortoise.01.jpg|Young (3.5 years) African spurred tortoise, Geochelone sulcata
File:Tortoise closeup.jpg|Young, 20-year-old Tanzanian leopard tortoise feeding on grass
File:aldabra.giant.tortoise.arp.jpg|Aldabra giant tortoise, Geochelone gigantea
File:Leopards tortoise.jpg|22-year-old leopard tortoise
File:Geochelone sulcata -Oakland Zoo -feeding-8a.jpg|African spurred tortoise from the Oakland Zoo
File:Tortoise mating.jpg|Pair of African spurred tortoises mate in a zoo
File:TurtleRideIfrog.jpg|Boy rides a tortoise at a zoo
Further reading
