Mammals (from Latin , and others).
In cladistics, which reflect evolution, mammals-along with dinosaurs, and by extension, birds-are classified as endothermic amniotes.
This trait evolved separately in both cases and is an example of convergent evolution.
Mammals are the only living members of the clade Synapsida, which together with Sauropsida (reptiles and birds) form the Amniota clade.
The early synapsid mammalian ancestors were sphenacodont pelycosaurs, a group that produced the non-mammalian Dimetrodon.
At the end of the Carboniferous period around 300 million years ago, this group diverged from the sauropsid line that led to today's reptiles and birds.
The line following the stem group Sphenacodontia split into several diverse groups of non-mammalian synapsids-sometimes incorrectly referred to as mammal-like reptiles-before giving rise to Therapsida in the Early Permian period.
The modern mammalian orders arose in the Paleogene and Neogene periods of the Cenozoic era, after the extinction of non-avian dinosaurs, and have been among the dominant terrestrial animal groups from 66 million years ago to the present.
The basic body type is quadruped, and most mammals use their four extremities for terrestrial locomotion; but in some, the extremities are adapted for life at sea, in the air, in trees, underground, or on two legs.
Mammals range in size from the bumblebee bat to the blue whale-possibly the largest animal to have ever lived.
Maximum lifespan varies from two years for the shrew to 211 years for the bowhead whale.
All modern mammals give birth to live young, except the five species of monotremes, which are egg-laying mammals.
The most species-rich group of mammals, the cohort called placentals, have a placenta, which enables the feeding of the fetus during gestation.
Most mammals are intelligent, with some possessing large brains, self-awareness, and tool use.
Mammals can communicate and vocalize in several different ways, including the production of ultrasound, scent-marking, alarm signals, singing, and echolocation.
Mammals can organize themselves into fission-fusion societies, harems, and hierarchies-but can also be solitary and territorial.
Most mammals are polygynous, but some can be monogamous or polyandrous.
Domestication of many types of mammals by humans played a major role in the Neolithic revolution, and resulted in farming replacing hunting and gathering as the primary source of food for humans.
This led to a major restructuring of human societies from nomadic to sedentary, with more co-operation among larger and larger groups, and ultimately the development of the first civilizations.
Domesticated mammals provided, and continue to provide, power for transport and agriculture, as well as food (meat and dairy products), fur, and leather.
Mammals are also hunted and raced for sport, and are used as model organisms in science.
Mammals have been depicted in art since Palaeolithic times, and appear in literature, film, mythology, and religion.
Decline in numbers and extinction of many mammals is primarily driven by human poaching and habitat destruction, primarily deforestation.
Classification
(yellow) together make up over 70% of mammal species.
Mammal classification has been through several iterations since Carl Linnaeus initially defined the class.
No classification system is universally accepted; McKenna & Bell (1997) and Wilson & Reader (2005) provide useful recent compendiums.
George Gaylord Simpson's "Principles of Classification and a Classification of Mammals" (AMNH Bulletin v. 85, 1945) provides systematics of mammal origins and relationships that were universally taught until the end of the 20th century.
Since Simpson's classification, the paleontological record has been recalibrated, and the intervening years have seen much debate and progress concerning the theoretical underpinnings of systematization itself, partly through the new concept of cladistics.
Though field work gradually made Simpson's classification outdated, it remains the closest thing to an official classification of mammals.
Most mammals, including the six most species-rich orders, belong to the placental group.
The three largest orders in numbers of species are |volume
99 |issue
1 |pages
1-14 |doi
10.1093 gyx147
Definitions
The word ", this is a reasonable estimate for the appearance of the crown group.
T. S. Kemp has provided a more traditional definition: "synapsids that possess a dentary-squamosal jaw articulation and occlusion between upper and lower molars with a transverse component to the movement" or, equivalently in Kemp's view, the clade originating with the last common ancestor of Sinoconodon and living mammals.
The earliest known synapsid satisfying Kemp's definitions is Tikitherium, dated , so the appearance of mammals in this broader sense can be given this Late Triassic date.
McKenna Bell classification.
Their 1997 book, Classification of Mammals above the Species Level, is a comprehensive work on the systematics, relationships and occurrences of all mammal taxa, living and extinct, down through the rank of genus, though molecular genetic data challenge several of the higher level groupings.
The authors worked together as paleontologists at the American Museum of Natural History, New York.
McKenna inherited the project from Simpson and, with Bell, constructed a completely updated hierarchical system, covering living and extinct taxa that reflects the historical genealogy of Mammalia.
********** Mirorder †Meridiungulata: South American ungulates
Molecular classification of placentals
Molecular studies based on DNA analysis have suggested new relationships among mammal families over the last few years.
Most of these findings have been independently validated by retrotransposon presence/absence data.
Classification systems based on molecular studies reveal three major groups or lineages of placental mammals-Afrotheria, Xenarthra and Boreoeutheria-which diverged in the Cretaceous.
The relationships between these three lineages is contentious, and all three possible different hypotheses have been proposed with respect to which group is basal.
These hypotheses are Atlantogenata (basal Boreoeutheria), Epitheria and Exafroplacentalia (basal Afrotheria).
Boreoeutheria in turn contains two major lineages-Euarchontoglires and Laurasiatheria.
Estimates for the divergence times between these three placental groups range from 105 to 120 million years ago, depending on the type of DNA used (such as nuclear or mitochondrial) and varying interpretations of paleogeographic data.
Group I: Superorder Afrotheria
** Order Afrosoricida: tenrecs and golden moles (Africa)
** Order Tubulidentata: aardvark (Africa south of the Sahara)
** Order Hyracoidea: hyraxes or dassies (Africa, Arabia)
** Order Proboscidea: elephants (Africa, Southeast Asia)
Group II: Superorder Xenarthra
Evolution from amniotes
The first fully terrestrial vertebrates were amniotes.
Like their amphibious tetrapod predecessors, they had lungs and limbs.
Amniotic eggs, however, have internal membranes that allow the developing embryo to breathe but keep water in.
Hence, amniotes can lay eggs on dry land, while amphibians generally need to lay their eggs in water.
The first amniotes apparently arose in the Pennsylvanian subperiod of the Carboniferous.
They descended from earlier reptiliomorph amphibious tetrapods, which lived on land that was already inhabited by insects and other invertebrates as well as ferns, mosses and other plants.
Within a few million years, two important amniote lineages became distinct: the synapsids, which would later include the common ancestor of the mammals; and the sauropsids, which now include turtles, lizards, snakes, crocodilians, dinosaurs and birds.
Synapsids have a single hole (temporal fenestra) low on each side of the skull.
One synapsid group, the pelycosaurs, included the largest and fiercest animals of the early Permian.
Nonmammalian synapsids are sometimes (inaccurately) called "mammal-like reptiles".
They differ from basal eupelycosaurs in several features of the skull and jaws, including: larger skulls and incisors which are equal in size in therapsids, but not for eupelycosaurs.
The gradual development of a bony secondary palate.
* Progression towards an erect limb posture, which would increase the animals' stamina by avoiding Carrier's constraint.
But this process was slow and erratic: for example, all herbivorous nonmammaliaform therapsids retained sprawling limbs (some late forms may have had semierect hind limbs); Permian carnivorous therapsids had sprawling forelimbs, and some late Permian ones also had semisprawling hindlimbs.
In fact, modern monotremes still have semisprawling limbs.
The dentary gradually became the main bone of the lower jaw which, by the Triassic, progressed towards the fully mammalian jaw (the lower consisting only of the dentary) and middle ear (which is constructed by the bones that were previously used to construct the jaws of reptiles).
First mammals
The Permian-Triassic extinction event about 252 million years ago, which was a prolonged event due to the accumulation of several extinction pulses, ended the dominance of carnivorous therapsids.
In the early Triassic, most medium to large land carnivore niches were taken over by archosaurs which, over an extended period (35 million years), came to include the crocodylomorphs, the pterosaurs and the dinosaurs; however, large cynodonts like Trucidocynodon and traversodontids still occupied large sized carnivorous and herbivorous niches respectively.
By the Jurassic, the dinosaurs had come to dominate the large terrestrial herbivore niches as well.
The first mammals (in Kemp's sense) appeared in the Late Triassic epoch (about 225 million years ago), 40 million years after the first therapsids.
They expanded out of their nocturnal insectivore niche from the mid-Jurassic onwards; The Jurassic Castorocauda, for example, was a close relative of true mammals that had adaptations for swimming, digging and catching fish.
Most, if not all, are thought to have remained nocturnal (the nocturnal bottleneck), accounting for much of the typical mammalian traits.
The majority of the mammal species that existed in the Mesozoic Era were multituberculates, eutriconodonts and spalacotheriids.
The earliest known metatherian is Sinodelphys, found in 125 million-year-old Early Cretaceous shale in China's northeastern Liaoning Province.
The fossil is nearly complete and includes tufts of fur and imprints of soft tissues.
The oldest known fossil among the Eutheria ("true beasts") is the small shrewlike Juramaia sinensis, or "Jurassic mother from China", dated to 160 million years ago in the late Jurassic.
A later eutherian relative, Eomaia, dated to 125 million years ago in the early Cretaceous, possessed some features in common with the marsupials but not with the placentals, evidence that these features were present in the last common ancestor of the two groups but were later lost in the placental lineage.
In particular, the epipubic bones extend forwards from the pelvis.
These are not found in any modern placental, but they are found in marsupials, monotremes, other nontherian mammals and Ukhaatherium, an early Cretaceous animal in the eutherian order Asioryctitheria.
This also applies to the multituberculates.
They are apparently an ancestral feature, which subsequently disappeared in the placental lineage.
These epipubic bones seem to function by stiffening the muscles during locomotion, reducing the amount of space being presented, which placentals require to contain their fetus during gestation periods.
A narrow pelvic outlet indicates that the young were very small at birth and therefore pregnancy was short, as in modern marsupials.
This suggests that the placenta was a later development.
One of the earliest known monotremes was Teinolophos, which lived about 120 million years ago in Australia.
Monotremes have some features which may be inherited from the original amniotes such as the same orifice to urinate, defecate and reproduce (cloaca)-as lizards and birds also do-
and they lay eggs which are leathery and uncalcified.
Earliest appearances of features
Hadrocodium, whose fossils date from approximately 195 million years ago, in the early Jurassic, provides the first clear evidence of a jaw joint formed solely by the squamosal and dentary bones; there is no space in the jaw for the articular, a bone involved in the jaws of all early synapsids.
The earliest clear evidence of hair or fur is in fossils of Castorocauda and Megaconus, from 164 million years ago in the mid-Jurassic.
In the 1950s, it was suggested that the foramina (passages) in the maxillae and premaxillae (bones in the front of the upper jaw) of cynodonts were channels which supplied blood vessels and nerves to vibrissae (whiskers) and so were evidence of hair or fur; it was soon pointed out, however, that foramina do not necessarily show that an animal had vibrissae, as the modern lizard Tupinambis has foramina that are almost identical to those found in the nonmammalian cynodont Thrinaxodon.
Popular sources, nevertheless, continue to attribute whiskers to Thrinaxodon.
Studies on Permian coprolites suggest that non-mammalian synapsids of the epoch already had fur, setting the evolution of hairs possibly as far back as dicynodonts.
When endothermy first appeared in the evolution of mammals is uncertain, though it is generally agreed to have first evolved in non-mammalian therapsids.
Modern monotremes have lower body temperatures and more variable metabolic rates than marsupials and placentals, but there is evidence that some of their ancestors, perhaps including ancestors of the therians, may have had body temperatures like those of modern therians.
Likewise, some modern therians like afrotheres and xenarthrans have secondarily developed lower body temperatures.
The evolution of erect limbs in mammals is incomplete-living and fossil monotremes have sprawling limbs.
The parasagittal (nonsprawling) limb posture appeared sometime in the late Jurassic or early Cretaceous; it is found in the eutherian Eomaia and the metatherian Sinodelphys, both dated to 125 million years ago.
Epipubic bones, a feature that strongly influenced the reproduction of most mammal clades, are first found in Tritylodontidae, suggesting that it is a synapomorphy between them and mammaliformes.
They are omnipresent in non-placental mammaliformes, though Megazostrodon and Erythrotherium appear to have lacked them.
It has been suggested that the original function of lactation (milk production) was to keep eggs moist.
Much of the argument is based on monotremes, the egg-laying mammals.
Rise of the mammals
Therian mammals took over the medium- to large-sized ecological niches in the Cenozoic, after the Cretaceous-Paleogene extinction event approximately 66 million years ago emptied ecological space once filled by non-avian dinosaurs and other groups of reptiles, as well as various other mammal groups, and underwent an exponential increase in body size (megafauna).
Then mammals diversified very quickly; both birds and mammals show an exponential rise in diversity.
Molecular phylogenetic studies initially suggested that most placental orders diverged about 100 to 85 million years ago and that modern families appeared in the period from the late Eocene through the Miocene.
However, no placental fossils have been found from before the end of the Cretaceous.
In particular, scientists have identified an early Paleocene animal named Protungulatum donnae as one of the first placental mammals.
however it has been reclassified as a non-placental eutherian.
Recalibrations of genetic and morphological diversity rates have suggested a Late Cretaceous origin for placentals, and a Paleocene origin for most modern clades.
The earliest known ancestor of primates is Archicebus achilles from around 55 million years ago.
In classifying fossils, however, other features must be used, since soft tissue glands and many other features are not visible in fossils.
Many traits shared by all living mammals appeared among the earliest members of the group:
* Jaw joint - The dentary (the lower jaw bone, which carries the teeth) and the squamosal (a small cranial bone) meet to form the joint.
In most gnathostomes, including early therapsids, the joint consists of the articular (a small bone at the back of the lower jaw) and quadrate (a small bone at the back of the upper jaw).
Tooth replacement - Teeth are replaced once or (as in toothed whales and murid rodents) not at all, rather than being replaced continually throughout life.
* Prismatic enamel - The enamel coating on the surface of a tooth consists of prisms, solid, rod-like structures extending from the dentin to the tooth's surface.
* Occipital condyles - Two knobs at the base of the skull fit into the topmost neck vertebra; most other tetrapods, in contrast, have only one such knob.
For the most part, these characteristics were not present in the Triassic ancestors of the mammals.
Nearly all mammaliaforms possess an epipubic bone, the exception being modern placentals.
All mammalian brains possess a neocortex, a brain region unique to mammals.
Placental mammals have a corpus callosum, unlike monotremes and marsupials.
The lungs of mammals are spongy and honeycombed.
Breathing is mainly achieved with the diaphragm, which divides the thorax from the abdominal cavity, forming a dome convex to the thorax.
Contraction of the diaphragm flattens the dome, increasing the volume of the lung cavity.
Air enters through the oral and nasal cavities, and travels through the larynx, trachea and bronchi, and expands the alveoli.
Relaxing the diaphragm has the opposite effect, decreasing the volume of the lung cavity, causing air to be pushed out of the lungs.
During exercise, the abdominal wall contracts, increasing pressure on the diaphragm, which forces air out quicker and more forcefully.
The rib cage is able to expand and contract the chest cavity through the action of other respiratory muscles.
Consequently, air is sucked into or expelled out of the lungs, always moving down its pressure gradient.
The mammalian heart has four chambers, two upper atria, the receiving chambers, and two lower ventricles, the discharging chambers.
The heart has four valves, which separate its chambers and ensures blood flows in the correct direction through the heart (preventing backflow).
After gas exchange in the pulmonary capillaries (blood vessels in the lungs), oxygen-rich blood returns to the left atrium via one of the four pulmonary veins.
Blood flows nearly continuously back into the atrium, which acts as the receiving chamber, and from here through an opening into the left ventricle.
Most blood flows passively into the heart while both the atria and ventricles are relaxed, but toward the end of the ventricular relaxation period, the left atrium will contract, pumping blood into the ventricle.
The heart also requires nutrients and oxygen found in blood like other muscles, and is supplied via coronary arteries.
The integumentary system is made up of three layers: the outermost epidermis, the dermis and the hypodermis.
The epidermis is typically 10 to 30 cells thick; its main function is to provide a waterproof layer.
Its outermost cells are constantly lost; its bottommost cells are constantly dividing and pushing upward.
The middle layer, the dermis, is 15 to 40 times thicker than the epidermis.
The dermis is made up of many components, such as bony structures and blood vessels.
The hypodermis is made up of adipose tissue, which stores lipids and provides cushioning and insulation.
The thickness of this layer varies widely from species to species; Although other animals have features such as whiskers, feathers, setae, or cilia that superficially resemble it, no animals other than mammals have hair.
It is a definitive characteristic of the class.
Though some mammals have very little, careful examination reveals the characteristic, often in obscure parts of their bodies.
Herbivores have developed a diverse range of physical structures to facilitate the consumption of plant material.
To break up intact plant tissues, mammals have developed teeth structures that reflect their feeding preferences.
For instance, frugivores (animals that feed primarily on fruit) and herbivores that feed on soft foliage have low-crowned teeth specialized for grinding foliage and seeds.
Grazing animals that tend to eat hard, silica-rich grasses, have high-crowned teeth, which are capable of grinding tough plant tissues and do not wear down as quickly as low-crowned teeth.
Most carnivorous mammals have carnassialiforme teeth (of varying length depending on diet), long canines and similar tooth replacement patterns.
The stomach of Artiodactyls is divided into four sections: the rumen, the reticulum, the omasum and the abomasum (only ruminants have a rumen).
After the plant material is consumed, it is mixed with saliva in the rumen and reticulum and separates into solid and liquid material.
The solids lump together to form a bolus (or cud), and is regurgitated.
When the bolus enters the mouth, the fluid is squeezed out with the tongue and swallowed again.
Ingested food passes to the rumen and reticulum where cellulytic microbes (bacteria, protozoa and fungi) produce cellulase, which is needed to break down the cellulose in plants.
Perissodactyls, in contrast to the ruminants, store digested food that has left the stomach in an enlarged cecum, where it is fermented by bacteria.
Carnivora have a simple stomach adapted to digest primarily meat, as compared to the elaborate digestive systems of herbivorous animals, which are necessary to break down tough, complex plant fibers.
The caecum is either absent or short and simple, and the large intestine is not sacculated or much wider than the small intestine.
The mammalian excretory system involves many components.
Like most other land animals, mammals are ureotelic, and convert ammonia into urea, which is done by the liver as part of the urea cycle.
Bilirubin, a waste product derived from blood cells, is passed through bile and urine with the help of enzymes excreted by the liver.
The passing of bilirubin via bile through the intestinal tract gives mammalian feces a distinctive brown coloration.
Distinctive features of the mammalian kidney include the presence of the renal pelvis and renal pyramids, and of a clearly distinguishable cortex and medulla, which is due to the presence of elongated loops of Henle.
Only the mammalian kidney has a bean shape, although there are some exceptions, such as the multilobed reniculate kidneys of pinnipeds, cetaceans and bears.
In marsupials, the genital tract is separate from the anus, but a trace of the original cloaca does remain externally.
Monotremes, which translates from Greek into "single hole", have a true cloaca.
Sound production
As in all other tetrapods, mammals have a larynx that can quickly open and close to produce sounds, and a supralaryngeal vocal tract which filters this sound.
The lungs and surrounding musculature provide the air stream and pressure required to phonate.
The larynx controls the pitch and volume of sound, but the strength the lungs exert to exhale also contributes to volume.
More primitive mammals, such as the echidna, can only hiss, as sound is achieved solely through exhaling through a partially closed larynx.
Other mammals phonate using vocal folds, as opposed to the vocal cords seen in birds and reptiles.
The movement or tenseness of the vocal folds can result in many sounds such as purring and screaming.
Mammals can change the position of the larynx, allowing them to breathe through the nose while swallowing through the mouth, and to form both oral and nasal sounds; nasal sounds, such as a dog whine, are generally soft sounds, and oral sounds, such as a dog bark, are generally loud.
Large vocal pads can also lower the pitch, as in the low-pitched roars of big cats.
The production of infrasound is possible in some mammals such as the African elephant (Loxodonta spp.) and baleen whales.
Small mammals with small larynxes have the ability to produce ultrasound, which can be detected by modifications to the middle ear and cochlea.
Ultrasound is inaudible to birds and reptiles, which might have been important during the Mesozoic, when birds and reptiles were the dominant predators.
This private channel is used by some rodents in, for example, mother-to-pup communication, and by bats when echolocating.
Toothed whales also use echolocation, but, as opposed to the vocal membrane that extends upward from the vocal folds, they have a melon to manipulate sounds.
Some mammals, namely the primates, have air sacs attached to the larynx, which may function to lower the resonances or increase the volume of sound.
The vocal production system is controlled by the cranial nerve nuclei in the brain, and supplied by the recurrent laryngeal nerve and the superior laryngeal nerve, branches of the vagus nerve.
The vocal tract is supplied by the hypoglossal nerve and facial nerves.
Electrical stimulation of the periaqueductal gray (PEG) region of the mammalian midbrain elicit vocalizations.
The ability to learn new vocalizations is only exemplified in humans, seals, cetaceans, elephants and possibly bats; in humans, this is the result of a direct connection between the motor cortex, which controls movement, and the motor neurons in the spinal cord.
Many species of mammals have been hunted for sport and for food; deer and wild boar are especially popular as game animals.
Mammals such as horses and dogs are widely raced for sport, often combined with betting on the outcome.
There is a tension between the role of animals as companions to humans, and their existence as individuals with rights of their own.
Mammals further play a wide variety of roles in literature, film, mythology, and religion.
Uses and importance
Domestic mammals form a large part of the livestock raised for meat across the world.
They include (2009) around 1.4 billion cattle, 1 billion sheep, 1 billion domestic pigs, and (1985) over 700 million rabbits.
Working domestic animals including cattle and horses have been used for work and transport from the origins of agriculture, their numbers declining with the arrival of mechanised transport and agricultural machinery.
In 2004 they still provided some 80% of the power for the mainly small farms in the third world, and some 20% of the world's transport, again mainly in rural areas.
In mountainous regions unsuitable for wheeled vehicles, pack animals continue to transport goods.
Mammal skins provide leather for shoes, clothing and upholstery.
Wool from mammals including sheep, goats and alpacas has been used for centuries for clothing.
Mammals serve a major role in science as experimental animals, both in fundamental biological research, such as in genetics, and in the development of new medicines, which must be tested exhaustively to demonstrate their safety.
Millions of mammals, especially mice and rats, are used in experiments each year.
A knockout mouse is a genetically modified mouse with an inactivated gene, replaced or disrupted with an artificial piece of DNA.
They enable the study of sequenced genes whose functions are unknown.
A small percentage of the mammals are non-human primates, used in research for their similarity to humans.
Charles Darwin, Jared Diamond and others have noted the importance of domesticated mammals in the Neolithic development of agriculture and of civilization, causing farmers to replace hunter-gatherers around the world.
This transition from hunting and gathering to herding flocks and growing crops was a major step in human history.
The new agricultural economies, based on domesticated mammals, caused "radical restructuring of human societies, worldwide alterations in biodiversity, and significant changes in the Earth's landforms and its atmosphere... momentous outcomes".
Hybrids
Hybrids are offspring resulting from the breeding of two genetically distinct individuals, which usually will result in a high degree of heterozygosity, though hybrid and heterozygous are not synonymous.
The deliberate or accidental hybridizing of two or more species of closely related animals through captive breeding is a human activity which has been in existence for millennia and has grown for economic purposes.
Hybrids between different subspecies within a species (such as between the Bengal tiger and Siberian tiger) are known as intra-specific hybrids.
Hybrids between different species within the same genus (such as between lions and tigers) are known as interspecific hybrids or crosses.
Hybrids between different genera (such as between sheep and goats) are known as intergeneric hybrids.
Natural hybrids will occur in hybrid zones, where two populations of species within the same genera or species living in the same or adjacent areas will interbreed with each other.
Some hybrids have been recognized as species, such as the red wolf (though this is controversial).
Artificial selection, the deliberate selective breeding of domestic animals, is being used to breed back recently extinct animals in an attempt to achieve an animal breed with a phenotype that resembles that extinct wildtype ancestor.
A breeding-back (intraspecific) hybrid may be very similar to the extinct wildtype in appearance, ecological niche and to some extent genetics, but the initial gene pool of that wild type is lost forever with its extinction.
As a result, bred-back breeds are at best vague look-alikes of extinct wildtypes, as Heck cattle are of the aurochs.
Purebred wild species evolved to a specific ecology can be threatened with extinction through the process of genetic pollution, the uncontrolled hybridization, introgression genetic swamping which leads to homogenization or out-competition from the heterosic hybrid species.
When new populations are imported or selectively bred by people, or when habitat modification brings previously isolated species into contact, extinction in some species, especially rare varieties, is possible.
Interbreeding can swamp the rarer gene pool and create hybrids, depleting the purebred gene pool.
For example, the endangered wild water buffalo is most threatened with extinction by genetic pollution from the domestic water buffalo.
Such extinctions are not always apparent from a morphological standpoint.
Some degree of gene flow is a normal evolutionary process, nevertheless, hybridization threatens the existence of rare species.
Threats
The loss of species from ecological communities, defaunation, is primarily driven by human activity.
In the Quaternary extinction event, the mass die-off of megafaunal variety coincided with the appearance of humans, suggesting a human influence.
One hypothesis is that humans hunted large mammals, such as the woolly mammoth, into extinction.
The 2019 Global Assessment Report on Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services by IPBES states that the total biomass of wild mammals has declined by 82 percent since the beginning of human civilization.
Various species are predicted to become extinct in the near future, among them the rhinoceros, primates, pangolins, and giraffes.
Hunting alone threatens hundreds of mammalian species around the world.
Scientists claim that the growing demand for meat is contributing to biodiversity loss as this is a significant driver of deforestation and habitat destruction; species-rich habitats, such as significant portions of the Amazon rainforest, are being converted to agricultural land for meat production.
According to the World Wildlife Fund's 2016 Living Planet Index, global wildlife populations have declined 58% since 1970, primarily due to habitat destruction, over-hunting and pollution.
They project that if current trends continue, 67% of wildlife could disappear by 2020.
Another influence is over-hunting and poaching, which can reduce the overall population of game animals, especially those located near villages, as in the case of peccaries.
The effects of poaching can especially be seen in the ivory trade with African elephants.
Marine mammals are at risk from entanglement from fishing gear, notably cetaceans, with discard mortalities ranging from 65,000 to 86,000 individuals annually.
Attention is being given to endangered species globally, notably through the Convention on Biological Diversity, otherwise known as the Rio Accord, which includes 189 signatory countries that are focused on identifying endangered species and habitats.
Another notable conservation organization is the IUCN, which has a membership of over 1,200 governmental and non-governmental organizations.
Recent extinctions can be directly attributed to human influences.
The IUCN characterizes 'recent' extinction as those that have occurred past the cut-off point of 1500, and around 80 mammal species have gone extinct since that time and 2015.
Some species, such as the Père David's deer are extinct in the wild, and survive solely in captive populations.
Other species, such as the Florida panther, are ecologically extinct, surviving in such low numbers that they essentially have no impact on the ecosystem.
Other populations are only locally extinct (extirpated), still existing elsewhere, but reduced in distribution,
Notes
* List of recently extinct mammals - during recorded history
Further reading
