is a platform game developed and published by Nintendo.
The successor to the 1983 arcade game, Mario Bros., it was released in Japan in 1985 for the Famicom, and in North America and Europe for the Nintendo Entertainment System (NES) in 1985 and 1987 respectively.
Players control Mario, or his brother Luigi in the multiplayer mode, as they travel the Mushroom Kingdom to rescue Princess Toadstool from Bowser.
They must traverse side-scrolling stages while avoiding hazards such as enemies and pits with the aid of power-ups such as the Super Mushroom, Fire Flower, and Starman.
The game was designed by Shigeru Miyamoto and Takashi Tezuka as "a grand culmination" of the Famicom team's three years of game mechanics and programming.
The design of the first level, World 1-1, serves as a tutorial for first-time video gamers on the basic mechanics of platform gameplay.
The aggressively size-optimized profile was intended as a farewell to the Famicom's cartridge medium in favor of the forthcoming Famicom Disk System, whose floppy disks temporarily became the dominant distribution medium for a few years.
Super Mario Bros. is frequently cited as one of the greatest video games of all time, with praise on its precise controls.
It is one of the bestselling games of all time, with more than 40 million physical copies.
It is credited alongside the NES as one of the key factors in reviving the video game industry after the 1983 crash, and helped popularize the side-scrolling platform game genre.
Koji Kondo's soundtrack is one of the earliest and most popular in video games, making music into a centerpiece of game design.
The game inspired an expansive franchise including a long-running game series, an animated television series, and a feature film.
Re-releases and cameos of the game are on most of Nintendo's following systems.
Alongside Mario himself, Super Mario Bros. has become prominent in popular culture.
Gameplay
In Super Mario Bros., the player takes on the role of Mario, the protagonist of the series.
Mario's younger brother, Luigi, is controlled by the second player in the game's multiplayer mode and assumes the same plot role and functionality as Mario.
The objective is to race through the Mushroom Kingdom, survive the main antagonist Bowser's forces, and save Princess Toadstool.
Mario's primary attack is jumping on top of enemies, though many enemies have differing responses to this.
For example, a Goomba will flatten and be defeated,
Synopsis
In the fantasy setting of the Mushroom Kingdom, a tribe of turtle-like creatures known as the Koopa Troopas invade the kingdom and uses the magic of its king, Bowser, to turn its inhabitants, known as the Mushroom People, into inanimate objects such as bricks, stones and horsehair plants.
Bowser and his army also kidnap Princess Toadstool, the princess of the Mushroom Kingdom and the only one with the ability to reverse Bowser's spell.
After hearing the news, Mario sets out to save the princess and free the kingdom from Bowser.
After traveling through various parts of the kingdom and fighting Bowser's forces along the way, Mario reaches Bowser's final stronghold, where he is able to defeat him by striking an axe on the bridge suspended over lava he is standing on, breaking the bridge, defeating Bowser, and allowing for the princess to be freed and saving the Mushroom Kingdom.
Development
Super Mario Bros., the successor to the 1983 arcade game Mario Bros., was designed by Shigeru Miyamoto and Takashi Tezuka, both of whom belonged to Nintendo's Creative Department, and largely programmed by Toshihiko Nakago of SRD Company, Ltd.
Though not originally using any particular character, the very deliberate creative process of what would become their next game was motivated by "a grand culmination" of their technical knowledge from previous games such as Excitebike, Devil World, and Kung Fu, by a desire to give the ROM cartridge format "a final exclamation point" in light of the forthcoming Famicom Disk System as the new dominant medium, and by continuing their legacy in the platform game genre.
Miyamoto explained, "We felt strongly about how we were the first to come up with what we called the "athletic game" genre, and it was a goal of ours to keep pushing it.
Development was aimed at simplicity in order to have a new game available for the end-of-year shopping season.
They started with a prototype in which the player simply moves a 16 by 32 pixel square around a single screen.
The team chose to name the game "Super Mario Bros." after deciding to implement the Super Mushroom into the game.
the final game's sky-based bonus stages are a remnant of this concept.
After releasing Mario Bros., the team had reflected that it had been an illogical gameplay decision for Mario to be hurt by stomping upon the walking turtles, so they decided that any future Mario game would "definitely have it so that you could jump on turtles all you want."
The development of Super Mario Bros. is an early example of specialization in the video game industry, made possible and necessary by the Famicom's arcade-capable hardware.
Miyamoto designed the game world and led a team of seven programmers and artists who turned his ideas into code, sprites, music, and sound effects.
Developers of previous hit games joined the team, importing many special programming techniques, features, and design refinements such as these: "Donkey Kongs slopes, lifts, conveyor belts, and ladders; Donkey Kong Jr.s ropes, logs and springs; and Mario Bros.s enemy attacks, enemy movement, frozen platforms and POW Blocks".
The use of mushrooms to change size was influenced by common Japanese folktales in which people wander into forests and eat magical mushrooms; this also resulted in the game world being named the "Mushroom Kingdom".
The team also deliberately chose not to have Mario begin levels as Super Mario in order to make obtaining a mushroom more gratifying for the player.
A rumor stemming from a Japanese magazine claimed that the developers came up with the idea to include a small Mario after a bug in the game caused only the upper-half of his body to appear, but this claim has been disavowed by Miyamoto.
Other features, such as blocks containing multiple coins, were inspired by programming glitches.
Due to this storage limitation, the designers happily considered their aggressive search for space-saving opportunities to be akin to their own fun television game show competition.
After the addition of the game's music, around 20 bytes of open cartridge space remained.
Miyamoto used this remaining space to add a sprite of a crown into the game, which would appear in the player's life counter as a reward for obtaining at least 10 lives.
In an interview with Eurogamer, Miyamoto explained that he created "World 1-1" to contain everything a player needs to "gradually and naturally understand what they're doing", so that they can quickly understand how the game works.
According to Miyamoto, once the player understands the mechanics of the game, the player will be able to play more freely and it becomes "their game."
Music
Nintendo sound designer Koji Kondo wrote the six-track score for Super Mario Bros., as well as all of the game's sound effects.
At the time he was composing, video game music was mostly meant to attract attention, not necessarily to enhance or conform to the game.
Kondo's work on Super Mario Bros. was one of the major forces in the shift towards music becoming an integral and participatory part of video games.
Kondo had two specific goals for his music: "to convey an unambiguous sonic image of the game world", and "to enhance the emotional and physical experience of the gamer".
However, Kondo attempted to take the idea further, stating that the primary question determining the use of a game's music was "Do the game and music fit one another?"
Unlike most games at the time, for which composers were hired later in the process to add music to a nearly finished game, Kondo was a part of the development team almost from the beginning of production, working in tandem with the rest of the team to create the game's soundtrack.
Kondo's compositions were largely influenced by the game's gameplay, intending for it to "heighten the feeling of how the game controls".
Before composition began, a prototype of the game was presented to Kondo so that he could get an idea of Mario's general environment and revolve the music around it.
Kondo wrote the score with the help of a small piano to create appropriate melodies to fit the game's environments.
After the development of the game showed progress, Kondo began to feel that his music did not quite fit the pace of the game, so he changed it a bit by increasing the songs' tempos.
The music was further adjusted based on the expectations of Nintendo's play-testers.
Release
Super Mario Bros. was first released in Japan on September 13, 1985, for the Family Computer.
It was released later that year in North America for the Nintendo Entertainment System (NES).
Its exact North American release date is unknown and is frequently debated; though generally being cited as having been released alongside the NES in October 1985 as a launch game, several other sources conflict with this statement, suggesting that the game may have released in other varying time frames ranging from November 1985 to early 1986.
The game was released in Europe two years later on May 15, 1987 for the NES.
In 1988, the game was re-released along with the shooting range game Duck Hunt as part of a single ROM cartridge, which came packaged with the NES as a pack-in game, as part of the console's Action Set.
This version of the game is extremely common in North America, with millions of copies of it having been manufactured and sold in the United States.
In 1990, another cartridge, touting the two games as well as World Class Track Meet, was also released in North America as part of the NES Power Set.
It was released on May 15, 1987 in Europe, and during that year in Australia as well.
In 1988, the game was re-released in Europe in a cartridge containing the game plus Tetris and Nintendo World Cup.
The compilation was sold alone or bundled with the revised version of the NES.
Ports
Super Mario Bros. has been ported several times since its release.
On February 21, 1986, a port of the game was released there for the Family Computer Disk System, Nintendo's proprietary floppy disk drive for the Family Computer.
Super Mario Bros. Special
A version of the game titled Super Mario Bros. Special developed by Hudson Soft was released in Japan in 1986 for the NEC PC-8801 and Sharp X1 personal computers.
Though featuring similar controls and graphics, the game has different level designs and new items, as well as brand new enemies based on enemies from Mario Bros. and Donkey Kong.
Vs.
Super Mario Bros.
Vs.
Super Mario Bros. is a 1986 arcade adaptation of Super Mario Bros (1985), released on the Nintendo VS.
System and the Nintendo Vs.
Unisystem (and its variant, Nintendo Vs. Dualsystem).
Existing levels were made much more difficult, with narrower platforms, more dangerous enemies, and fewer hidden power-ups.
Several of the new levels went on to be featured in the Japanese sequel, Super Mario Bros 2.
The game was featured in an official contest during the 1986 ACME convention in Chicago.
An emulated version of the game was released for the Nintendo Switch via the Arcade Archives collection on December 22, 2017.
Playing that release, Chris Kohler of Kotaku called the game's intense difficulty "The meanest trick Nintendo ever played".
Remakes
Super Mario All-Stars
Super Mario All-Stars, a compilation game released in 1993 for the Super Nintendo Entertainment System, featured a remade version of Super Mario Bros. alongside remakes of several of the other Super Mario games released for the NES.
The version of Super Mario Bros. included in this compilation has improved graphics and sound to match the SNES's 16-bit capabilities, as well as minor alterations to some of the game's collision mechanics.
The game also features the ability for a player to save their progress midway through the game and changes the game's multiplayer mode so that the two players switch off after every level in addition to whenever a player dies.
Super Mario All-Stars was also re-released for the Wii as a re-packaged, 25th anniversary version, featuring the same version of the game, along with a 32-page art book and a compilation CD of music from various Super Mario games.
Super Mario Bros. Deluxe
sometimes referred to as Super Mario Bros. DX, was released on the Game Boy Color on May 10, 1999 in North America and Europe and in 2000 in Japan.
Based on the original Super Mario Bros., it features an overworld level map, simultaneous multiplayer, a Challenge mode in which the player finds hidden objects and achieves a certain score in addition to normally completing the level, and eight additional worlds based on the main worlds of the Japanese 1986 game Super Mario Bros. 2.
It is compatible with the Game Boy Printer.
Compared to Super Mario Bros., the game features a few minor visual upgrades such as water and lava now being animated rather than static, and a smaller screen due to the lower resolution of the Game Boy Color.
It was released on the Nintendo 3DS Virtual Console in 2014.
In Japan, users who registered a Nintendo Network ID on their Nintendo 3DS system between December 10, 2013 and January 10, 2014 received a free download code, with emails with download codes being sent out starting January 27, 2014.
In Europe and Australia, users who registered a Nintendo Network ID on their Nintendo 3DS system between December 10, 2013 and January 31, 2014 received a free download code, with emails with download codes being sent out from February 13 to 28, 2014.
It was released for purchase on the Nintendo 3DS eShop in Europe on February 27, 2014, in Australia on February 28, 2014, and in North America on December 25, 2014.
Emulation
As one of Nintendo's most popular games, Super Mario Bros. has been re-released and remade numerous times, with every single major Nintendo console up to the Nintendo Switch sporting its own port or remake of the game with the exception of the Nintendo 64.
In 2005, Nintendo re-released this port of the game as a part of the game's 20th Anniversary; this special edition of the game went on to sell approximately 876,000 units.
Super Mario Bros. is featured as one of the 30 included games with the NES Classic Edition, a dedicated video game console containing several NES games.
This version of the game allows for the use of suspension points to save in-game progress, and can be played in various different display styles, including its original 4:3 resolution, a "pixel-perfect" resolution and a style emulating the look of a cathode ray tube television.
This version of the game is also one of the "trial games" made available in the "Masterpieces" section in Super Smash Bros. Brawl, where it can be demoed for a limited amount of time.
A Nintendo 3DS release of the game was initially distributed exclusively to members of Nintendo's 3DS Ambassador Program in September 2011.
A general release of the game later came through in Japan on January 5, 2012, in North America on February 16, 2012 and in Europe on March 1, 2012.
The game was released for the Wii U's Virtual Console in Japan on June 5, 2013, followed by Europe on September 12, 2013 and North America on September 19, 2013.
Modified versions
Several modified variants of the game have been released, many of which are ROM hacks of the original NES game.
a promotional, graphically-modified version of Super Mario Bros., was officially released in Japan in December 1986 for the Family Computer Disk System as a promotional item given away by the popular Japanese radio show All Night Nippon.
The game was published by Fuji TV, the same company which later went on to publish Yume Kōjō: Doki Doki Panic (which was released outside of Japan as Super Mario Bros. 2).
The game features graphics based upon the show, with sprites of the enemies, mushroom retainers, and other characters being changed to look like famous Japanese music idols, recording artists, and DJs as well as other people related to All-Night Nippon.
The game also makes use of the same slightly upgraded graphics and alternate physics featured in Super Mario Bros.: The Lost Levels.
This version of the game is considered extremely rare, with copies going online for upwards of nearly $500.
On November 11, 2010, a special red variant of the Wii containing a pre-downloaded version of the game was released in Japan to celebrate Super Mario Bros.'s 25th anniversary.
This version of the game features several graphical changes, such as changing "?" blocks to have the number "25" on them to symbolize the game's anniversary.
Glitches
Minus World
The "Minus World" (also referred to as "World Negative One") is the name given to an unbeatable glitch level present in the original release of Super Mario Bros. World 1-2 contains a hidden warp zone, with warp pipes that transport the player to worlds 2, 3, and 4, accessed by running over a wall near the exit.
If the player is able to exploit a bug that allows Mario to pass through bricks, the player can enter the warp zone by passing through the wall and the pipe to World 2-1 and 4-1 may instead transport the player to a stage labeled "World -1".
This stage's map is identical to worlds 2-2 and 7-2, and upon entering the warp pipe at the end, the player is taken back to the start of the level, thus trapping the player in the level until all lives have been lost.
Although the level name is shown as " -1" with a leading space on the heads-up display, it is actually World 36-1, with the tile for 36 being shown as a blank space.
The Minus World bug in the Japanese Famicom Disk System version of the game behaves differently and creates multiple, completable stages.
"World -1" is an underwater version of World 1-3 with an underwater level color palette and underwater level music, and contains sprites of Princess Toadstool, Bowser, and
Hammer Bros. World -2 is an identical copy of World 7-3, and World -3 is a copy of World 4-4 with an underground level color palette and underground level music, and does not loop if the player takes the wrong path, contrary to the original World 4-4.
After completing the level, Toad's usual message is displayed, but Toad himself is absent.
After completing these levels, the game returns to the title screen as if completed, and is now replayable as if in a harder mode.
There are hundreds of glitch levels beyond the Minus World (256 worlds are present including the 8 playable ones), which can be accessed in a multitude of ways, such as cheat codes or ROM hacking.
Reception
Super Mario Bros. was immensely successful and helped popularize side-scrolling platform games.
Altogether, excluding ports and rereleases, the original NES version of the game has sold 40.24 million copies, making it the bestselling video game in the Mario series and one of the bestselling video games of all time, with 29 million copies sold in North America.
The game was the all-time bestselling game for over 20 years until its lifetime sales were ultimately surpassed by Wii Sports.
The game's Wii Virtual Console release was also successful, becoming the #1 selling game out of the service's lineup of games by mid-2007.
Computer Entertainer / Video Game Update magazine highly praised Super Mario Bros., writing that the game was worthy of "a spot in the hall of fame reserved for truly addictive action games", praising its "cute and comical" graphics and its lively music.
It stated that the game was a must-have for the system, and considered its greatest strength to be its depth of play.
Retrospective critical analysis of the game has been extremely positive, with many touting it as one of the best video games of all-time.
Nintendo Power listed it as the fourth best Nintendo Entertainment System video game, describing it as the game that started the modern era of video games as well as "Shigeru Miyamoto's masterpiece".
The game ranked first on Electronic Gaming Monthly "Greatest 200 Games of Their Time" list and was named in IGN top 100 games of all-time list twice, in 2005 and 2007.
In 2009, Game Informer put Super Mario Bros. in second place on its list of "The Top 200 Games of All Time", behind The Legend of Zelda, saying that it "remains a monument to brilliant design and fun gameplay".
The Game Informer staff also ranked it the second best in their 2001 list of the top 100 games ever made.
In 2012, G4 ranked Super Mario Bros. first of the "Top 100 Video Games of All Time", citing its revolutionary gameplay as well as its role in helping recover the NA gaming industry from the Video Game Crash of 1983.
In 2014, IGN ranked Super Mario Bros. as the best Nintendo game in their "Top 125 Nintendo Games of All Time" list, saying that "this is the most important Nintendo game ever made".
In a poll held by IGN in 2005, the game was ranked number one in the website's list of the 100 greatest video games of all-time.
In 2018, Business Insider included the game as number 2 in their list of the top 10 Super Mario games.
Several critics have praised the game for its precise controls, which allow the player to control how high and far Mario or Luigi jumps, and how fast he runs.
AllGame gave Super Mario Bros.
a five-star rating, stating that "The sense of excitement, wonder and - most of all - enjoyment felt upon first playing this masterpiece of videogame can't barely be put into words.
And while its sequels have far surpassed it in terms of length, graphics, sound and other aspects, Super Mario Bros., like any classic - whether of a cinematic or musical nature - has withstood the test of time, continuing to be fun and playable" and that any gamer "needs to play this game at least once, if not simply for a history lesson".
The Game Boy Advance port of Super Mario Bros. holds an aggregate score of 84 on Metacritic.
Many critics compared the port to previous ports of the game such as Super Mario Deluxe and Super Mario All-Stars, noting its comparative lack of brand new content to separate it from the original version of the game.
Jeremy Parish of called the game "The most fun you'll ever have while being robbed blind," ultimately giving the game a score of 80% and praising its larger-scaling screen compared to Deluxe while greatly criticizing its lack of new features.
IGN Craig Harris labeled the game as a "must-have," but also mused "just don't expect much more than the original NES game repackaged on a tiny GBA cart."
GameSpot gave the port a 6.8 out of 10, generally praising the gameplay but musing that the port's graphical and technical differences from the original version of the game "prevent this reissue from being as super as the original game."
The Game Boy Color port of the game also received wide critical appraisal; IGN Craig Harris gave Super Mario Bros. Deluxe a perfect score, praising it as a perfect translation of the NES game.
He hoped that it would be the example for other NES games to follow when being ported to the Game Boy Color.
GameSpot gave the game a 9.9, hailing it as the "killer app" for the Game Boy Color and praising the controls and the visuals (it was also the highest rated game in the series, later surpassed by Super Mario Galaxy 2 which holds a perfect 10).
Both gave it their Editors' Choice Award.
Allgame Colin Williamson praised the porting of the game as well as the extras, noting the only flaw of the game being that sometimes the camera goes with Mario as he jumps up.
Nintendo World Report Jon Lindemann, in 2009, called it their " (Likely) 1999 NWR Handheld Game of the Year," calling the quality of its porting and offerings undeniable.
Nintendo Life gave it a perfect score, noting that it retains the qualities of the original game and the extras.
St. Petersburg Times Robb Guido commented that in this form, Super Mario Bros. "never looked better."
The Lakeland Ledger Nick S. agreed, praising the visuals and the controls.
In 2004, a Game Boy Advance port of Super Mario Bros. was released, which had none of the extras or unlockables available in Super Mario Bros. Deluxe.
Of that version, IGN noted that the version did not "offer nearly as much as what was already given on the Game Boy Color" and gave it an 8.0 out of 10.
Super Mario Bros. Deluxe ranked third in the best-selling handheld game charts in the U.S. between June 6 and 12, 1999 and sold over 2.8 million copies in the U.S.
It was included on Singapore Airlines flights in 2006.
Lindemann noted Deluxe as a notable handheld release in 1999.
Legacy
The success of Super Mario Bros. led to the development of many successors in the Super Mario series of video games, which in turn form the core of the greater Mario franchise.
Two of these sequels, Super Mario Bros. 2 and Super Mario Bros. 3, were direct sequels to the game and were released for the NES, experiencing similar levels of commercial success.
A different sequel, also titled Super Mario Bros. 2, was released for the Famicom Disk System in 1986 exclusively in Japan, and was later released elsewhere as a part of Super Mario All-Stars under the name Super Mario Bros.: The Lost Levels.
The gameplay concepts and elements established in Super Mario Bros. are prevalent in nearly every Super Mario game.
The series consists of over 15 entries; at least one Super Mario game has been released on nearly every Nintendo console to date.
Super Mario 64, an entry in the series and the first to take place in a three-dimensional environment, is widely considered one of the greatest games ever made, and is largely credited with revolutionizing the platforming genre of video games and its step from 2D to 3D.
The series is one of the best-selling, with over 310 million copies of games sold worldwide as of September 2015.
In 2010, Nintendo released special red variants of the Wii and Nintendo DSi XL consoles in re-packaged, Mario-themed limited edition bundles as part of the 25th anniversary of the game's original release.
To celebrate the series' 30th anniversary, Nintendo released Super Mario Maker, a game for the Wii U which allows players to create custom platforming stages using assets from Super Mario games and in the style of Super Mario Bros. along with other styles based around different games in the series.
The game's success helped to push Mario as an American cultural icon; in 1990, a study taken in North America suggested that more children in the United States were familiar with Mario than they were with Mickey Mouse, another popular media character.
The game's musical score composed by Koji Kondo, particularly the game's "overworld" theme, has also become a prevalent aspect of popular culture, with the latter theme being featured in nearly every single Super Mario game.
Alongside the NES platform as a whole, Super Mario Bros. is often credited for having resurrected the video game industry after it had experienced a market crash in 1983.
Super Mario Bros. and its sequels inspired various projects in media; the 1986 anime film Super Mario Bros.: The Great Mission to Rescue Princess Peach! is acknowledged as one of the first feature-length films to be based directly off of a video game.
A live-action film based on the game was released theatrically in 1993, starring Bob Hoskins and John Leguizamo as Mario and Luigi, respectively.
An American animated television series titled The Super Mario Bros. Super Show! ran from 1989 to 1990, starring professional wrestler Lou Albano as Mario and Danny Wells as Luigi.
An animated film based on the series created by Illumination Entertainment is currently in production.
In the United States Supreme Court case Brown v. Entertainment Merchants Association, the Electronic Frontier Foundation submitted an amicus brief which supported the overturn a law which would ban violent video games in the state of California.
The brief cited social research that declared Super Mario Bros, among several others, to contain cartoon violence similar to that found in children's programs such as Mighty Mouse and Road Runner that garnered little negative reaction from the public.
Video game developer Yuji Naka has cited Super Mario Bros. as a large inspiration towards the concept for the immensely successful 1991 Sega Genesis game, Sonic the Hedgehog; according to Naka, the general idea for the game first materialized when he was playing through game and trying to beat the game's first level as quickly as possible, and thought about the concept of a platformer based around moving as fast as possible.
Super Mario Bros. Crossover, a PC fangame developed by Jay Pavlina and released in 2010 as a free browser-based game, is a full recreation of Super Mario Bros. that allows the player to alternatively control various other characters from Nintendo games, including Mega Man, Link from The Legend of Zelda, Samus from Metroid, and Simon Belmont from Castlevania.
Mari0, released in December 2012, combines elements of the game with that of Portal (2007) by giving Mario a portal-making gun with which to teleport through the level, and Full Screen Mario (2013) adds a level editor.
In 2015, game designer Josh Millard released Ennuigi, a metafictional fangame with commentary on the original game which relates to Luigi's inability to come to terms with the game's overall lack of narrative.
Notes
