Spiders (order Araneae) are air-breathing arthropods that have eight legs and chelicerae with fangs able to inject venom.
They are the largest order of arachnids and rank seventh in total species diversity among all orders of organisms.
Spiders are found worldwide on every continent except for Antarctica, and have become established in nearly every habitat with the exceptions of air and sea colonization.
, at least 48,200 spider species, and 120 families have been recorded by taxonomists.
Anatomically, spiders differ from other arthropods in that the usual body segments are fused into two tagmata, the cephalothorax and abdomen, and joined by a small, cylindrical pedicel.
Unlike insects, spiders do not have antennae.
In all except the most primitive group, the Mesothelae, spiders have the most centralized nervous systems of all arthropods, as all their ganglia are fused into one mass in the cephalothorax.
Unlike most arthropods, spiders have no extensor muscles in their limbs and instead extend them by hydraulic pressure.
Their abdomens bear appendages that have been modified into spinnerets that extrude silk from up to six types of glands.
Spider webs vary widely in size, shape and the amount of sticky thread used.
It now appears that the spiral orb web may be one of the earliest forms, and spiders that produce tangled cobwebs are more abundant and diverse than orb-web spiders.
Spider-like arachnids with silk-producing spigots appeared in the Devonian period about , but these animals apparently lacked spinnerets.
True spiders have been found in Carboniferous rocks from , and are very similar to the most primitive surviving suborder, the Mesothelae.
The main groups of modern spiders, Mygalomorphae and Araneomorphae, first appeared in the Triassic period, before .
The species Bagheera kiplingi was described as herbivorous in 2008, but all other known species are predators, mostly preying on insects and on other spiders, although a few large species also take birds and lizards.
It is estimated that the world's 25 million tons of spiders kill 400-800 million tons of prey per year.
Spiders use a wide range of strategies to capture prey: trapping it in sticky webs, lassoing it with sticky bolas, mimicking the prey to avoid detection, or running it down.
Most detect prey mainly by sensing vibrations, but the active hunters have acute vision, and hunters of the genus Portia show signs of intelligence in their choice of tactics and ability to develop new ones.
Spiders' guts are too narrow to take solids, so they liquefy their food by flooding it with digestive enzymes.
They also grind food with the bases of their pedipalps, as arachnids do not have the mandibles that crustaceans and insects have.
To avoid being eaten by the females, which are typically much larger, male spiders identify themselves to potential mates by a variety of complex courtship rituals.
Males of most species survive a few matings, limited mainly by their short life spans.
Females weave silk egg-cases, each of which may contain hundreds of eggs.
Females of many species care for their young, for example by carrying them around or by sharing food with them.
A minority of species are social, building communal webs that may house anywhere from a few to 50,000 individuals.
Social behavior ranges from precarious toleration, as in the widow spiders, to co-operative hunting and food-sharing.
Although most spiders live for at most two years, tarantulas and other mygalomorph spiders can live up to 25 years in captivity.
While the venom of a few species is dangerous to humans, scientists are now researching the use of spider venom in medicine and as non-polluting pesticides.
Spider silk provides a combination of lightness, strength and elasticity that is superior to that of synthetic materials, and spider silk genes have been inserted into mammals and plants to see if these can be used as silk factories.
As a result of their wide range of behaviors, spiders have become common symbols in art and mythology symbolizing various combinations of patience, cruelty and creative powers.
An abnormal fear of spiders is called arachnophobia.
Description
Body plan
Spiders are chelicerates and therefore arthropods.
As arthropods they have: segmented bodies with jointed limbs, all covered in a cuticle made of chitin and proteins; heads that are composed of several segments that fuse during the development of the embryo.
Being chelicerates, their bodies consist of two tagmata, sets of segments that serve similar functions: the foremost one, called the cephalothorax or prosoma, is a complete fusion of the segments that in an insect would form two separate tagmata, the head and thorax; the rear tagma is called the abdomen or opisthosoma.
The first appendages behind the mouth are called pedipalps, and serve different functions within different groups of chelicerates.
Spiders' chelicerae have two sections and terminate in fangs that are generally venomous, and fold away behind the upper sections while not in use.
The upper sections generally have thick "beards" that filter solid lumps out of their food, as spiders can take only liquid food.
Scorpions' pedipalps generally form large claws for capturing prey, However, in spiders, it occupies only the upper part of the abdomen, and blood is discharged into the hemocoel by one artery that opens at the rear end of the abdomen and by branching arteries that pass through the pedicle and open into several parts of the cephalothorax.
Hence spiders have open circulatory systems.
Spiders are ectotherms, so environmental temperatures affect their activity.
Feeding, digestion and excretion
Uniquely among chelicerates, the final sections of spiders' chelicerae are fangs, and the great majority of spiders can use them to inject venom into prey from venom glands in the roots of the chelicerae.
Like most arachnids, including scorpions, for example the tubules of insects and arachnids develop from completely different parts of the embryo.
Except for the primitive Mesothelae, of which the Liphistiidae are the sole surviving family, spiders have the much more centralized nervous system that is typical of arachnids: all the ganglia of all segments behind the esophagus are fused, so that the cephalothorax is largely filled with nervous tissue and there are no ganglia in the abdomen;
Sense organs
Eyes
Spiders have primarily four pairs of eyes on the top-front area of the cephalothorax, arranged in patterns that vary from one family to another.
The other pairs, called secondary eyes, are thought to be derived from the compound eyes of the ancestral chelicerates, but no longer have the separate facets typical of compound eyes.
Unlike the principal eyes, in many spiders these secondary eyes detect light reflected from a reflective tapetum lucidum, and wolf spiders can be spotted by torch light reflected from the tapeta.
On the other hand, jumping spiders' secondary eyes have no tapeta.
Some jumping spiders' visual acuity exceeds by a factor of ten that of dragonflies, which have by far the best vision among insects; in fact the human eye is only about five times sharper than a jumping spider's.
They achieve this by a telephoto-like series of lenses, a four-layer retina and the ability to swivel their eyes and integrate images from different stages in the scan.
The downside is that the scanning and integrating processes are relatively slow.
There are spiders with a reduced number of eyes.
Of these, those with six eyes (such as Periegops suterii) are the most numerous and are missing a pair of eyes on the anterior median line; other species have four eyes and some just two.
Cave dwelling species have no eyes, or possess vestigial eyes incapable of sight.
Other senses
As with other arthropods, spiders' cuticles would block out information about the outside world, except that they are penetrated by many sensors or connections from sensors to the nervous system.
In fact, spiders and other arthropods have modified their cuticles into elaborate arrays of sensors.
Various touch sensors, mostly bristles called setae, respond to different levels of force, from strong contact to very weak air currents.
Chemical sensors provide equivalents of taste and smell, often by means of setae.
An adult Araneus may have up to 1000 such chemosensitive setae, most on the tarsi of the first pair of legs.
Males have more chemosensitive hairs on their pedipalps than females.
They have been shown to be responsive to sex pheromones produced by females, both contact and air-borne.
The jumping spider Evarcha culicivora uses the scent of blood from mammals and other vertebrates, which is obtained by capturing blood-filled mosquitoes, to attract the opposite sex.
Because they are able to tell the sexes apart, it is assumed the blood scent is mixed with pheromones.
Spiders also have in the joints of their limbs slit sensillae that detects force and vibrations.
In web-building spiders, all these mechanical and chemical sensors are more important than the eyes, while the eyes are most important to spiders that hunt actively.
The only extensor muscles in spider legs are located in the three hip joints (bordering the coxa and the trochanter).
As a result, a spider with a punctured cephalothorax cannot extend its legs, and the legs of dead spiders curl up.
and jumping spiders can jump up to 50 times their own length by suddenly increasing the blood pressure in the third or fourth pair of legs.
Silk production
The abdomen has no appendages except those that have been modified to form one to four (usually three) pairs of short, movable spinnerets, which emit silk.
Each spinneret has many spigots, each of which is connected to one silk gland.
There are at least six types of silk gland, each producing a different type of silk.
It is similar in tensile strength to nylon and biological materials such as chitin, collagen and cellulose, but is much more elastic.
In other words, it can stretch much further before breaking or losing shape.
male spiders do not produce ready-made spermatophores (packages of sperm), but spin small sperm webs on to which they ejaculate and then transfer the sperm to special syringe-like structures, palpal bulbs or palpal organs, borne on the tips of the pedipalps of mature males.
When a male detects signs of a female nearby he checks whether she is of the same species and whether she is ready to mate; for example in species that produce webs or "safety ropes", the male can identify the species and sex of these objects by "smell".
A few exceptions exist, such as Parasteatoda tepidariorum.
In these species the female appears to be able to activate the dormant sperm before oviposition, allowing them to migrate to the ovarian cavity where fertilization occurs.
The only known example of direct fertilization between male and female is an Israeli spider, Harpactea sadistica, which has evolved traumatic insemination.
In this species the male will penetrate its pedipalps through the female's body wall and inject his sperm directly into her ovaries, where the embryos inside the fertilized eggs will start to develop before being laid.
Males of the genus Tidarren amputate one of their palps before maturation and enter adult life with one palp only.
The palps are 20% of male's body mass in this species, and detaching one of the two improves mobility.
In the Yemeni species Tidarren argo, the remaining palp is then torn off by the female.
The separated palp remains attached to the female's epigynum for about four hours and apparently continues to function independently.
In the meantime, the female feeds on the palpless male.
In over 60% of cases, the female of the Australian redback spider kills and eats the male after it inserts its second palp into the female's genital opening; in fact, the males co-operate by trying to impale themselves on the females' fangs.
Observation shows that most male redbacks never get an opportunity to mate, and the "lucky" ones increase the likely number of offspring by ensuring that the females are well-fed.
However, males of most species survive a few matings, limited mainly by their short life spans.
Some even live for a while in their mates' webs.
DirkvdM Nephila clavipes.jpg|The tiny male of the Golden orb weaver (Nephila clavipes) (near the top of the leaf) is protected from the female by producing the right vibrations in the web, and may be too small to be worth eating.
Orange spider egg sac.jpg|Orange spider egg sac hanging from ceiling
Gasteracantha mammosa spiderlings next to their eggs capsule.jpg|Gasteracantha mammosa spiderlings next to their eggs capsule
Lycosidae female carrying young.jpg|Wolf spider carrying its young on its abdomen
Females lay up to 3,000 eggs in one or more silk egg sacs, In some species males mate with newly molted females, which are too weak to be dangerous to the males.
and an Australian female trapdoor spider was documented to have lived in the wild for 43 years, dying of a parasitic wasp attack.
Size
Spiders occur in a large range of sizes.
The smallest, Patu digua from Colombia, are less than in body length.
The largest and heaviest spiders occur among tarantulas, which can have body lengths up to and leg spans up to .
Coloration
Only three classes of pigment (ommochromes, bilins and guanine) have been identified in spiders, although other pigments have been detected but not yet characterized.
Melanins, carotenoids and pterins, very common in other animals, are apparently absent.
In some species, the exocuticle of the legs and prosoma is modified by a tanning process, resulting in brown coloration.
Bilins are found, for example, in Micrommata virescens, resulting in its green color.
Guanine is responsible for the white markings of the European garden spider Araneus diadematus.
It is in many species accumulated in specialized cells called guanocytes.
In genera such as Tetragnatha, Leucauge, Argyrodes or Theridiosoma, guanine creates their silvery appearance.
While guanine is originally an end-product of protein metabolism, its excretion can be blocked in spiders, leading to an increase in its storage.
Juveniles of some spiders in the families Anyphaenidae, Corinnidae, Clubionidae, Thomisidae and Salticidae feed on plant nectar.
Laboratory studies show that they do so deliberately and over extended periods, and periodically clean themselves while feeding.
These spiders also prefer sugar solutions to plain water, which indicates that they are seeking nutrients.
Since many spiders are nocturnal, the extent of nectar consumption by spiders may have been underestimated.
Nectar contains amino acids, lipids, vitamins and minerals in addition to sugars, and studies have shown that other spider species live longer when nectar is available.
Feeding on nectar avoids the risks of struggles with prey, and the costs of producing venom and digestive enzymes.
Various species are known to feed on dead arthropods (scavenging), web silk, and their own shed exoskeletons.
Pollen caught in webs may also be eaten, and studies have shown that young spiders have a better chance of survival if they have the opportunity to eat pollen.
In captivity, several spider species are also known to feed on bananas, marmalade, milk, egg yolk and sausages.
A few spiders use the surfaces of lakes and ponds as "webs", detecting trapped insects by the vibrations that these cause while struggling.
Mature female bolas spiders of the genus Mastophora build "webs" that consist of only a single "trapeze line", which they patrol.
They also construct a bolas made of a single thread, tipped with a large ball of very wet sticky silk.
They emit chemicals that resemble the pheromones of moths, and then swing the bolas at the moths.
Although they miss on about 50% of strikes, they catch about the same weight of insects per night as web-weaving spiders of similar size.
The spiders eat the bolas if they have not made a kill in about 30 minutes, rest for a while, and then make new bolas.
Juveniles and adult males are much smaller and do not make bolas.
Instead they release different pheromones that attract moth flies, and catch them with their front pairs of legs.
The primitive Liphistiidae, the "trapdoor spiders" of the family Ctenizidae and many tarantulas are ambush predators that lurk in burrows, often closed by trapdoors and often surrounded by networks of silk threads that alert these spiders to the presence of prey.
However, they seem to be relatively slow "thinkers", which is not surprising, as their brains are vastly smaller than those of mammalian predators.
Defense
There is strong evidence that spiders' coloration is camouflage that helps them to evade their major predators, birds and parasitic wasps, both of which have good color vision.
Many spider species are colored so as to merge with their most common backgrounds, and some have disruptive coloration, stripes and blotches that break up their outlines.
In a few species, such as the Hawaiian happy-face spider, Theridion grallator, several coloration schemes are present in a ratio that appears to remain constant, and this may make it more difficult for predators to recognize the species.
Most spiders are insufficiently dangerous or unpleasant-tasting for warning coloration to offer much benefit.
However, a few species with powerful venoms, large jaws or irritant hairs have patches of warning colors, and some actively display these colors when threatened.
Many of the family Theraphosidae, which includes tarantulas and baboon spiders, have urticating hairs on their abdomens and use their legs to flick them at attackers.
These hairs are fine setae (bristles) with fragile bases and a row of barbs on the tip.
The barbs cause intense irritation but there is no evidence that they carry any kind of venom.
A few defend themselves against wasps by including networks of very robust threads in their webs, giving the spider time to flee while the wasps are struggling with the obstacles.
The golden wheeling spider, Carparachne aureoflava, of the Namibian desert escapes parasitic wasps by flipping onto its side and cartwheeling down sand dunes.
Socialization
A few spider species that build webs live together in large colonies and show social behavior, although not as complex as in social insects.
Anelosimus eximius (in the family Theridiidae) can form colonies of up to 50,000 individuals.
The genus Anelosimus has a strong tendency towards sociality: all known American species are social, and species in Madagascar are at least somewhat social.
Members of other species in the same family but several different genera have independently developed social behavior.
For example, although Theridion nigroannulatum belongs to a genus with no other social species, T. nigroannulatum build colonies that may contain several thousand individuals that co-operate in prey capture and share food.
Other communal spiders include several Philoponella species (family Uloboridae), Agelena consociata (family Agelenidae) and Mallos gregalis (family Dictynidae).
Social predatory spiders need to defend their prey against kleptoparasites ("thieves"), and larger colonies are more successful in this.
The herbivorous spider Bagheera kiplingi lives in small colonies which help to protect eggs and spiderlings.
Web types
There is no consistent relationship between the classification of spiders and the types of web they build: species in the same genus may build very similar or significantly different webs.
Nor is there much correspondence between spiders' classification and the chemical composition of their silks.
Convergent evolution in web construction, in other words use of similar techniques by remotely related species, is rampant.
Orb web designs and the spinning behaviors that produce them are the best understood.
The basic radial-then-spiral sequence visible in orb webs and the sense of direction required to build them may have been inherited from the common ancestors of most spider groups.
However, the majority of spiders build non-orb webs.
It used to be thought that the sticky orb web was an evolutionary innovation resulting in the diversification of the Orbiculariae.
Now, however, it appears that non-orb spiders are a sub-group that evolved from orb-web spiders, and non-orb spiders have over 40% more species and are four times as abundant as orb-web spiders.
Their greater success may be because sphecid wasps, which are often the dominant predators of spiders, much prefer to attack spiders that have flat webs.
Orb
About half the potential prey that hit orb webs escape.
A web has to perform three functions: intercepting the prey (intersection), absorbing its momentum without breaking (stopping), and trapping the prey by entangling it or sticking to it (retention).
No single design is best for all prey.
For example: wider spacing of lines will increase the web's area and hence its ability to intercept prey, but reduce its stopping power and retention; closer spacing, larger sticky droplets and thicker lines would improve retention, but would make it easier for potential prey to see and avoid the web, at least during the day.
However, there are no consistent differences between orb webs built for use during the day and those built for use at night.
In fact, there is no simple relationship between orb web design features and the prey they capture, as each orb-weaving species takes a wide range of prey.
However, a laboratory study showed that spiders reduce the building of these decorations if they sense the presence of predators.
There are several unusual variants of orb web, many of them convergently evolved, including: attachment of lines to the surface of water, possibly to trap insects in or on the surface; webs with twigs through their centers, possibly to hide the spiders from predators; "ladder-like" webs that appear most effective in catching moths.
However, the significance of many variations is unclear.
Cobweb
Members of the family Theridiidae weave irregular, tangled, three-dimensional webs, popularly known as cobwebs.
There seems to be an evolutionary trend towards a reduction in the amount of sticky silk used, leading to its total absence in some species.
The construction of cobwebs is less stereotyped than that of orb-webs, and may take several days.
Evolution
Fossil record
Although the fossil record of spiders is considered poor, almost 1000 species have been described from fossils.
Because spiders' bodies are quite soft, the vast majority of fossil spiders have been found preserved in amber.
Earlier spider fossils come from a few lagerstätten, places where conditions were exceptionally suited to preserving fairly soft tissues.
The oldest known exclusively terrestrial arachnid is the trigonotarbid Palaeotarbus jerami, from about in the Silurian period, and had a triangular cephalothorax and segmented abdomen, as well as eight legs and a pair of pedipalps.
Attercopus fimbriunguis, from in the Devonian period, bears the earliest known silk-producing spigots, and was therefore hailed as a spider at the time of its discovery.
However, these spigots may have been mounted on the underside of the abdomen rather than on spinnerets, which are modified appendages and whose mobility is important in the building of webs.
Hence Attercopus and the similar Permian arachnid Permarachne may not have been true spiders, and probably used silk for lining nests or producing egg-cases rather than for building webs.
The largest known fossil spider as of 2011 is the araneid Nephila jurassica, from about , recorded from Daohuogo, Inner Mongolia in China.
Its body length is almost 25 mm, (i.e., almost one inch).
Several Carboniferous spiders were members of the Mesothelae, a primitive group now represented only by the Liphistiidae.
Although the Permian period saw rapid diversification of flying insects, there are very few fossil spiders from this period.
There has been debate about what their closest evolutionary relatives are, and how all of these evolved from the ancestral chelicerates, which were marine animals.
The cladogram on the right is based on J. W. Shultz' analysis (2007).
Other views include proposals that: scorpions are more closely related to the extinct marine scorpion-like eurypterids than to spiders; spiders and Amblypygi are a monophyletic group.
The appearance of several multi-way branchings in the tree on the right shows that there are still uncertainties about relationships between the groups involved.
Instead, they have mouths that point forwards and downwards, and all have some means of breathing air.
Taxonomy
Spiders are divided into two suborders, Mesothelae and Opisthothelae, of which the latter contains two infraorders, Mygalomorphae and Araneomorphae.
Over 48,000 living species of spiders (order Araneae) have been identified and as of 2019 grouped into 120 families and about 4,100 genera by arachnologists.
The only living members of the primitive Mesothelae are the family Liphistiidae, found only in Southeast Asia, China, and Japan.
Spiders of the genus Heptathela have no venom glands although they do have venom gland outlets on the fang tip.
The extinct families Arthrolycosidae, found in Carboniferous and Permian rocks, and Arthromygalidae, so far found only in Carboniferous rocks, have been classified as members of the Mesothelae.
Mygalomorphae
The Mygalomorphae, which first appeared in the Triassic period,
Araneomorphae
In addition to accounting for over 90% of spider species, the Araneomorphae, also known as the "true spiders", include orb-web spiders, the cursorial wolf spiders, and jumping spiders,
Human interaction
Bites
Although spiders are widely feared, only a few species are dangerous to people.
Spiders will only bite humans in self-defense, and few produce worse effects than a mosquito bite or bee-sting.
Most of those with medically serious bites, such as recluse spiders (genus Loxosceles) and widow spiders (genus Latrodectus), would rather flee and bite only when trapped, although this can easily arise by accident.
The defensive tactics of Australian funnel-web spiders (family Atracidae) include fang display.
Their venom, although they rarely inject much, has resulted in 13 attributed human deaths over 50 years.
They have been deemed to be the world's most dangerous spiders on clinical and venom toxicity grounds,
There were about 100 reliably reported deaths from spider bites in the 20th century, compared to about 1,500 from jellyfish stings.
Many alleged cases of spider bites may represent incorrect diagnoses, which would make it more difficult to check the effectiveness of treatments for genuine bites.
A review published in 2016 agreed with this conclusion, showing that 78% of 134 published medical case studies of supposed spider bites did not meet the necessary criteria for a spider bite to be verified.
In the case of the two genera with the highest reported number of bites, Loxosceles and Latrodectus, spider bites were not verified in over 90% of the reports.
Even when verification had occurred, details of the treatment and its effects were often lacking.
Chemical benefits
Spider venoms may be a less polluting alternative to conventional pesticides, as they are deadly to insects but the great majority are harmless to vertebrates.
Australian funnel web spiders are a promising source, as most of the world's insect pests have had no opportunity to develop any immunity to their venom, and funnel web spiders thrive in captivity and are easy to "milk".
It may be possible to target specific pests by engineering genes for the production of spider toxins into viruses that infect species such as cotton bollworms.
The Ch'ol Maya use a beverage created from the tarantula species Brachypelma vagans for the treatment of a condition they term 'tarantula wind', the symptoms of which include chest pain, asthma and coughing.
Possible medical uses for spider venoms are being investigated, for the treatment of cardiac arrhythmia, Alzheimer's disease, strokes, and erectile dysfunction.
The peptide GsMtx-4, found in the venom of Brachypelma vagans, is being researched to determine whether or not it could effectively be used for the treatment of cardiac arrhythmia, muscular dystrophy or glioma.
Spiders can also be used as food.
Cooked tarantula spiders are considered a delicacy in Cambodia, and by the Piaroa Indians of southern Venezuela - provided the highly irritant hairs, the spiders' main defense system, are removed first.
Arachnophobia
Arachnophobia is a specific phobia-it is the abnormal fear of spiders or anything reminiscent of spiders, such as webs or spider-like shapes.
It is one of the most common specific phobias, and some statistics show that 50% of women and 10% of men show symptoms.
It may be an exaggerated form of an instinctive response that helped early humans to survive, or a cultural phenomenon that is most common in predominantly European societies.
Spiders in culture
Spiders have been the focus of stories and mythologies of various cultures for centuries.
Uttu, the ancient Sumerian goddess of weaving, was envisioned as a spider spinning her web.
According to her main myth, she resisted her father Enki's sexual advances by ensconcing herself in her web, Arachne won, but Athena destroyed her tapestry out of jealousy, causing Arachne to hang herself.
In some cultures, spiders have symbolized patience due to their hunting technique of setting webs and waiting for prey, as well as mischief and malice due to their venomous bites.
The Italian tarantella is a dance to rid the young woman of the lustful effects of a spider bite.
Web-spinning also caused the association of the spider with creation myths, as they seem to have the ability to produce their own worlds.
Dreamcatchers are depictions of spiderwebs.
The Moche people of ancient Peru worshipped nature.
They placed emphasis on animals and often depicted spiders in their art.
Footnotes
Bibliography
Further reading
