Ballet () is a type of performance dance that originated during the Italian Renaissance in the fifteenth century and later developed into a concert dance form in France and Russia.
It has since become a widespread, highly technical form of dance with its own vocabulary based on French terminology.
It has been globally influential and has defined the foundational techniques used in many other dance genres and cultures.
Ballet has been taught in various schools around the world, which have historically incorporated their own cultures and as a result, the art has evolved in a number of distinct ways.
See glossary of ballet.
A ballet, a work, consists of the choreography and music for a ballet production.
Ballets are choreographed and performed by trained ballet dancers.
Traditional classical ballets are usually performed with classical music accompaniment and use elaborate costumes and staging, whereas modern ballets, such as the neoclassical works of American choreographer George Balanchine, often are performed in simple costumes (e.g., leotards and tights) and without the use of elaborate sets or scenery.
Etymology
Ballet is a French word which had its origin in Italian balletto, a diminutive of ballo (dance) which comes from Latin ballo, ballare, meaning "to dance", The dancers in these early court ballets were mostly noble amateurs.
Ornamented costumes were meant to impress viewers, but they restricted performers' freedom of movement.
The ballets were performed in large chambers with viewers on three sides.
The implementation of the proscenium arch from 1618 on distanced performers from audience members, who could then better view and appreciate the technical feats of the professional dancers in the productions.
French court ballet reached its height under the reign of King Louis XIV.
Louis founded the Académie Royale de Danse (Royal Dance Academy) in 1661 to establish standards and certify dance instructors.
In 1672, Louis XIV made Jean-Baptiste Lully the director of the Académie Royale de Musique (Paris Opera) from which the first professional ballet company, the Paris Opera Ballet, arose.
In the twentieth century, ballet had a wide influence on other dance genres, Also in the twentieth century, ballet took a turn dividing it from classical ballet to the introduction of modern dance, leading to modernist movements in several countries.
Styles
Stylistic variations and subgenres have evolved over time.
Early, classical variations are primarily associated with geographic origin.
Examples of this are Russian ballet, French ballet, and Italian ballet.
Later variations, such as contemporary ballet and neoclassical ballet, incorporate both classical ballet and non-traditional technique and movement.
Perhaps the most widely known and performed ballet style is late Romantic ballet (or Ballet blanc).
Classical ballet
Classical ballet is based on traditional ballet technique and vocabulary.
Different styles have emerged in different countries, such as French ballet, Italian ballet, English ballet, and Russian ballet.
Several of the classical ballet styles are associated with specific training methods, typically named after their creators (see below).
The Royal Academy of Dance method is a ballet technique and training system that was founded by a diverse group of ballet dancers.
They merged their respective dance methods (Italian, French, Danish and Russian) to create a new style of ballet that is unique to the organization and is recognized internationally as the English style of ballet.
While Balanchine is widely considered the face of neoclassical ballet, there were others who made significant contributions.
Frederick Ashton’s Symphonic Variations (1946) is a seminal work for the choreographer.
Set to César Franck’s score of the same title, it is a pure-dance interpretation of the score.
Technical methods of ballet instruction
There are six widely used, internationally recognized methods to teach or study ballet.
These methods are the French School, the Vaganova Method, the Cecchetti Method, the Bournonville method, the Royal Academy of Dance method (English style), and the Balanchine method (American style).
Many more schools of technique exist in various countries.
French method
The French method is the basis of all ballet training.
When Louis XIV created the Académie Royale de Danse in 1661, he helped to create the codified technique still used today by those in the profession, regardless of what method of training they adhere to.
The French school was particularly revitalized under Rudolf Nureyev, in the 1980s.
His influence revitalized and renewed appreciation for this style, and has drastically shaped ballet as a whole.
In fact, the French school is now sometimes referred to as Nureyev school.
The French method is often characterized by technical precision, fluidity and gracefulness, and elegant, clean lines.
For this style, fast footwork is often utilized in order to give the impression that the performers are drifting lightly across the stage.
Two important trademarks of this technique are the specific way in which the port de bras and the épaulement are performed, more rounded than when dancing in a Russian style, but not as rounded as the Danish style.
Vaganova method
The Vaganova method is a style of ballet training that emerged from Russian ballet, created by Agrippina Vaganova.
After retiring from dance in 1916, Vaganova turned to teaching at the Leningrad Choreographic School in 1921.
Her training method is now internationally recognized and her book, The Fundamentals of Classical Dance (1934), is a classic reference.
This method is marked by the fusion of the classical French style, specifically elements from the Romantic era, with the athleticism of the Italian method, and the soulful passion of Russian ballet.
Cecchetti method
Developed by Enrico Cecchetti (1850-1928), this method is one known internationally for its intense reliance of the understanding of anatomy as it relates to classical ballet.
The goal of this method is to instill important characteristics for the performance of ballet into students so that they do not need to rely on imitations of teachers.
Important components for this method is the emphasis of balance, elevations, ballon, poise, and strength.
This method espouses the importance of recognizing that all parts of the body move together to create beautiful, graceful lines, and as such cautions against thinking of ballet in terms of the arms, legs, and neck and torso as separate parts.
This method is well known for eight port de bras that are utilized.
A key component is the use of diagonal épaulements, with the upper body turning towards the working foot typically.
This method also incorporates very basic use of arms, pirouettes from a low développé position into seconde, and use of fifth position bras en bas for the beginning and end of movements.
The Bournonville method produces dancers who have beautiful ballon ("the illusion of imponderable lightness").
The Royal Academy of Dance method (RAD)
The Royal Academy of Dance method, also referred to as the English style of ballet, was established in 1920 by Genee, Karsavina, Bedells, E Espinosa, and Richardson.
The goal of this method is to promote academic training in classical ballet throughout Great Britain.
This style also spread to the United States, and is widely utilized still today.
There are specific grade levels which a student must move through in order to complete training in this method.
The key principle behind this method of instruction is that basic ballet technique must be taught at a slow pace, with difficulty progression often much slower than the rest of the methods.
The idea behind this is if a student is to put in a large amount of effort into perfecting the basic steps, the technique learned in these steps allow a student to utilize harder ones at a much easier rate.
Costumes
Ballet costumes play an important role in the ballet community.
They are often the only survival of a production, representing a living imaginary picture of the scene.
Renaissance and Baroque
The roots of ballet go back to the Renaissance in France and Italy when court wear was the beginning of ballet costumes.
Ballet costumes have been around since the early fifteenth century.
Cotton and silk were mixed with flax, woven into semitransparent gauze
The job outlook is not strong, and the competition to get a job is intense, with the number of applicants vastly exceeding the number of job openings.
Eating disorders are common from ballet.
In addition, some researchers have noted that intensive training in ballet results in lower bone mineral density in the arms.
Cultural issues
In the twenty-first century, ballet has been criticized for being anti-woman and ageist.
The complaint about ageism is because most choreography is written so that it can only be performed by a relatively young dancer.
The structure of ballet-in which a (usually) male choreographer or director uses (mostly) women's bodies to express his artistic vision, while ignoring, objectifying, or silencing the women involved - has been criticized for not respecting women.
