The oat (Avena sativa), sometimes called the common oat, is a species of cereal grain grown for its seed, which is known by the same name (usually in the plural, unlike other cereals and pseudocereals).
While oats are suitable for human consumption as oatmeal and rolled oats, one of the most common uses is as livestock feed.
Oats are a nutrient-rich food associated with lower blood cholesterol when consumed regularly.
Origin
The wild ancestor of Avena sativa and the closely related minor crop, A. byzantina, is the hexaploid wild oat, A. sterilis.
Genetic evidence shows the ancestral forms of A. sterilis grew in the Fertile Crescent of the Near East.
Oats are usually considered a secondary crop, i.e., derived from a weed of the primary cereal domesticates, then spreading westward into cooler, wetter areas favorable for oats, eventually leading to their domestication in regions of the Middle East and Europe.
Oats are also widely used there as a thickener in soups, as barley or rice might be used in other countries.
Oats are also commonly used as feed for horses when extra carbohydrates and the subsequent boost in energy are required.
The oat hull may be crushed ("rolled" or "crimped") for the horse to more easily digest the grain, or may be fed whole.
They may be given alone or as part of a blended food pellet.
Cattle are also fed oats, either whole or ground into a coarse flour using a roller mill, burr mill, or hammermill.
Oat forage is commonly used to feed all kinds of ruminants, as pasture, straw, hay or silage.
Winter oats may be grown as an off-season groundcover and ploughed under in the spring as a green fertilizer, or harvested in early summer.
They also can be used for pasture; they can be grazed a while, then allowed to head out for grain production, or grazed continuously until other pastures are ready.
Oat straw is prized by cattle and horse producers as bedding, due to its soft, relatively dust-free, and absorbent nature.
The straw can also be used for making corn dollies.
Tied in a muslin bag, oat straw was used to soften bath water.
Oats are also occasionally used in several different drinks.
In Britain, they are sometimes used for brewing beer.
Oatmeal stout is one variety brewed using a percentage of oats for the wort.
The more rarely used oat malt is produced by the Thomas Fawcett & Sons Maltings and was used in the Maclay Oat Malt Stout before Maclays Brewery ceased independent brewing operations.
A cold, sweet drink called avena made of ground oats and milk is a popular refreshment throughout Latin America.
Oatmeal caudle, made of ale and oatmeal with spices, was a traditional British drink and a favourite of Oliver Cromwell.
Oat extracts can also be used to soothe skin conditions, and are popular for their emollient properties in cosmetics.
Oat grass has been used traditionally for medicinal purposes, including to help balance the menstrual cycle, treat dysmenorrhoea and for osteoporosis and urinary tract infections.
In China, particularly in western Inner Mongolia and Shanxi province, oat (Avena nuda) flour called youmian is processed into noodles or thin-walled rolls, and is consumed as a staple food.
Health
Nutrient profile
Oats contain diverse essential nutrients (table).
In a 100 gram serving, oats provide and are a rich source (20% or more of the Daily Value, DV) of protein (34% DV), dietary fiber (44% DV), several B vitamins and numerous dietary minerals, especially manganese (233% DV) (table).
Oats are 66% carbohydrates, including 11% dietary fiber and 4% beta-glucans, 7% fat and 17% protein (table).
The established property of their cholesterol-lowering effects has led to acceptance of oats as a health food.
Soluble fiber
Oat bran is the outer casing of the oat.
Its daily consumption over weeks lowers LDL and total cholesterol, possibly reducing the risk of heart disease.
One type of soluble fiber, beta-glucans, has been proven to lower cholesterol.
that allows food companies to make health claims on food labels of foods that contain soluble fiber from whole oats (oat bran, oat flour and rolled oats), noting that 3.0 grams of soluble fiber daily from these foods may reduce the risk of heart disease.
To qualify for the health claim, the food that contains the oats must provide at least 0.75 grams of soluble fiber per serving.
Globulins are characterised by solubility in dilute saline as opposed to the more typical cereal proteins, such as gluten and zein, the prolamines (prolamins).
The minor protein of oat is a prolamine, avenin.
Oat protein is nearly equivalent in quality to soy protein, which World Health Organization research has shown to be equal to meat, milk and egg protein.
The protein content of the hull-less oat kernel (groat) ranges from 12 to 24%, the highest among cereals.
Celiac disease
Celiac disease (coeliac disease) is a permanent intolerance to certain gluten proteins in genetically predisposed people, having a prevalence of about 1% in the developed world.
and contains hundreds of proteins, with high contents of prolamins.
Oat prolamins, named avenins, are similar to gliadins found in wheat, hordeins in barley, and secalins in rye, which are collectively named gluten.
Also, oat products are frequently cross-contaminated with other gluten-containing cereals during grain harvesting, transport, storage or processing.
Pure oats contain less than 20 parts per million of gluten from wheat, barley, rye, or any of their hybrids.
but remains controversial because a small proportion of people with celiac disease react to pure oats.
Some cultivars of pure oat could be a safe part of a gluten-free diet, requiring knowledge of the oat variety used in food products for a gluten-free diet.
Screening with serum antibodies for celiac disease is not sensitive enough to detect people who react to pure oats and the absence of digestive symptoms is not an accurate indicator of intestinal recovery because up to 50% of people with active celiac disease have no digestive symptoms.
The lifelong follow-up of celiac people who choose to consume oats may require periodic performance of intestinal biopsies.
The long-term effects of pure oats consumption are still unclear and further well-designed studies identifying the cultivars used are needed before making final recommendations for a gluten-free diet.
A few lepidopteran caterpillars feed on the plants-e.g. rustic shoulder-knot and setaceous Hebrew character moths, but these rarely become a major pest.
See also List of oat diseases.
Harvesting
Harvest techniques are a matter of available equipment, local tradition, and priorities.
Farmers seeking the highest yield from their crops time their harvest so the kernels have reached 35% moisture, or when the greenest kernels are just turning cream-colour.
They then harvest by swathing, cutting the plants at about above ground, and putting the swathed plants into windrows with the grain all oriented the same way.
They leave the windrows to dry in the sun for several days before combining them using a pickup header.
Finally, they bale the straw.
Oats can also be left standing until completely ripe and then combined with a grain head.
This causes greater field losses as the grain falls from the heads, and to harvesting losses, as the grain is threshed out by the reel.
Without a draper head, there is also more damage to the straw, since it is not properly oriented as it enters the combine's throat.
Overall yield loss is 10-15% compared to proper swathing.
Historical harvest methods involved cutting with a scythe or sickle, and threshing under the feet of cattle.
Late 19th- and early 20th-century harvesting was performed using a binder.
Oats were gathered into shocks, and then collected and run through a stationary threshing machine.
Storage
After combining, the oats are transported to the farmyard using a grain truck, semi, or road train, where they are augered or conveyed into a bin for storage.
Sometimes, when there is not enough bin space, they are augered into portable grain rings, or piled on the ground.
Oats can be safely stored at 12-14% moisture; at higher moisture levels, they must be aerated or dried.
Yield and quality
In the United States, No.1 oats weigh ; No. 2 oats must weigh 33 lb/US bu.
No.3 oats must weigh at least .
If , they are graded as No.4, and oats under are graded as "light weight".
In Canada, No.1 oats weigh ; No.2 oats must weigh ; No.3 oats must weigh at least and if oats are lighter than they do not make No.4 oats and have no grade.
Oats are bought and sold and yields on the basis of a bushel equal to or ) in the United States, and a bushel equal to or ) in Canada.
"Bright oats" were sold on the basis of a bushel equal to or ) in the United States.
Yields range from on marginal land, to on high-producing land.
The average production is 100 bushels per acre, or 3.5 tonnes per hectare.
Straw yields are variable, ranging from one to three tonnes per hectare, mainly due to available nutrients and the variety used (some are short-strawed, meant specifically for straight combining).
Processing
Oats processing is a relatively simple process:
Cleaning and sizing
Upon delivery to the milling plant, chaff, rocks, metal, oversized materials and foreign grains are removed from the oats.
As different sized oats de-hull at differing velocities, once the raw oats have been removed of impurities, they are then separated by width and length into different classifications before de-hulling.
Dehulling
Centrifugal acceleration is used to separate the outer hull from the inner oat groat.
Oats are fed by gravity onto the centre of a horizontally spinning impeller, which accelerates them towards an outer mill ring.
Groats and hulls are separated on impact.
The lighter oat hulls are then aspirated away, while the denser oat groats are taken to the next step of processing.
Oat hulls can be used as feed or as a biomass fuel and are often used within the oat processing line to power solid fuel boilers for steam and power generation.
Excess oat hulls are generally pelletised before being provided as feed.
Kilning
The unsized oat groats pass through a heat and moisture treatment to balance moisture for optimal storage conditions and to deactivate self catalysing enzyme activity.
Oat groats are high in fat (lipids) and once removed from their protective hulls and exposed to air, enzymatic (lipase) activity begins to break down the fat into free fatty acids, ultimately causing an off-flavour or rancidity.
Depending on temperature, humidity and moisture content, de-hulled oats can begin to show signs of enzymatic rancidity rapidly if not stabilized.
This process is primarily done in food-grade plants, not in feed-grade plants.
Groats are not considered raw if they have gone through this process; the heat disrupts the germ and they cannot sprout.
Sizing of groats
Many whole oat groats break during the dehulling process, leaving the following types of groats to be sized and separated for further processing: whole oat groats, coarse steel cut groats, steel cut groats, and fine steel cut groats.
Groats are sized and separated using screens, shakers and indent screens.
After the whole oat groats are separated, the remaining broken groats get sized again into the three groups (coarse, regular, fine), and then stored.
"Steel cut" refers to all sized or cut groats.
When not enough broken groats are available to size for further processing, whole oat groats are sent to a cutting unit with steel blades that evenly cut groats into the three sizes above.
Final processing
Three methods are used to make the finished product:
Flaking
This process uses two large smooth or corrugated rolls spinning at the same speed in opposite directions at a controlled distance, before which the cut groats are conditioned for flaking via steam injection.
After flaking, the oats are then dried to a sufficient moisture for storage and transport.
Oat flake thickness is a key control point dependant of the type of oat flakes to be produced.
Typically, the flakes produced are either instant, quick or traditional whole rolled oats and range in size from 0.4mm to 1mm.
Oat bran milling
This process takes the oat groats through several roll stands to flatten and separate the bran from the flour (endosperm).
The two separate products (flour and bran) get sifted through a gyrating sifter screen to further separate them.
The final products are oat bran and debranned oat flour.
Whole flour milling
This process takes oat groats straight to a grinding unit (stone or hammer mill) and then over sifter screens to separate the coarse flour and final whole oat flour.
The coarser flour is sent back to the grinding unit until it is ground fine enough to be whole oat flour.
This method is used often in India and other countries.
In India, whole grain oat flour (jai) is used to make Indian bread known as jarobra in Himachal Pradesh.
Preparation at home
Oat flour can be ground for small scale use by pulsing rolled oats or old-fashioned (not quick) oats in a food processor or spice mill.
Naming
In Scottish English, oats may be referred to as corn.
(In the English language, the major staple grain of the local area is often referred to as "corn".
In the US, "corn" originates from "Indian corn" and refers to what others call "maize" or "sweetcorn".)
