Jesus{{Efn|{{lang-grc|.
Virtually all modern scholars of antiquity agree that Jesus existed historically, although the quest for the historical Jesus has produced little agreement on the historical reliability of the Gospels and on how closely the Jesus portrayed in the Bible reflects the historical Jesus.
Jesus was a Galilean Jew and was often referred to as "rabbi".
Jesus debated with fellow Jews on how to best follow God, engaged in healings, taught in parables and gathered followers.
He was arrested and tried by the Jewish authorities, turned over to the Roman government, and crucified on the order of Pontius Pilate, the Roman prefect.
After his death, his followers believed he rose from the dead, and the community they formed eventually became the early Church.
Christian doctrines include the beliefs that Jesus was conceived by the Holy Spirit, was born of a virgin named Mary, performed miracles, founded the Christian Church, died by crucifixion as a sacrifice to achieve atonement for sin, rose from the dead, and ascended into Heaven, from where he will return.
Most Christians believe Jesus enables people to be reconciled to God.
The Nicene Creed asserts that Jesus will judge the living and the dead either before or after their bodily resurrection, an event tied to the Second Coming of Jesus in Christian eschatology.
The great majority of Christians worship Jesus as the incarnation of God the Son, the second of three persons of the Trinity.
A minority of Christian denominations reject Trinitarianism, wholly or partly, as non-scriptural.
The birth of Jesus is celebrated annually on December 25 (or various dates in January by some eastern churches) as Christmas.
His crucifixion is honored on Good Friday and his resurrection on Easter.
The widely used calendar era "AD", from the Latin anno Domini ("in the year of the Lord"), and the equivalent alternative "CE", are based on the approximate birthdate of Jesus.
Jesus is also revered outside of Christianity.
In Islam, Jesus (commonly transliterated as ) is considered one of God's important prophets and the Messiah.
Muslims believe Jesus was a bringer of scripture and was born of a virgin, but was neither God nor the son of God.
The Quran states that Jesus never claimed divinity.
Etymology
A typical Jew in Jesus' time had only one name, sometimes followed by the phrase "son of ", or the individual's hometown.
Jesus' neighbors in Nazareth refer to him as "the carpenter, the son of Mary and brother of James and Joses and Judas and Simon" (Mark 6:3), "the carpenter's son" (Matthew 13:55), or "Joseph's son" (Luke 4:22).
In John, the disciple Philip refers to him as "Jesus son of Joseph from Nazareth" (John 1:45).
The name Jesus is derived from the Latin Iesus, a transliteration of the Greek ().
The Greek form is a rendering of the Hebrew (Yeshua), a variant of the earlier name (Yehoshua), or in English, "Joshua", meaning "Yah saves".
This was also the name of Moses' successor and of a Jewish high priest in the Old Testament.
The name Yeshua appears to have been in use in Judea at the time of the birth of Jesus.
The 1st-century works of historian Flavius Josephus, who wrote in Koine Greek, the same language as that of the New Testament, refer to at least twenty different people with the name Jesus (i.e. Ἰησοῦς).
The etymology of Jesus' name in the context of the New Testament is generally given as "Yahweh is salvation".
Since early Christianity, Christians have commonly referred to Jesus as "Jesus Christ".
"Jesus Christ" is the name that the author of the Gospel of John claims Jesus gave to himself during his high priestly prayer.
The word Christ was a title or office ("the Christ"), not a given name.
It derives from the Greek {{lang|grc|:29).
Christians of the time designated Jesus as "the Christ" because they believed him to be the Messiah, whose arrival is prophesied in the Hebrew Bible and Old Testament.
In postbiblical usage, Christ became viewed as a name-one part of "Jesus Christ".
The term "Christian" (meaning a follower of Christ) has been in use since the 1st century.
Life and teachings in the New Testament
Canonical gospels
The four canonical gospels (Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John) are the foremost sources for the life and message of Jesus.
Acts 1:1-11 says more about the Ascension of Jesus (also mentioned in 1 Timothy 3:16) than the canonical gospels do.
In the undisputed Pauline letters, which were written earlier than the gospels, the words or instructions of Jesus are cited several times (1 Corinthians 7:10-11, 9:14, 11:23-25, 2 Corinthians 12:9).
Some early Christian groups had separate descriptions of the life and teachings of Jesus that are not included in the New Testament.
These include the Gospel of Thomas, Gospel of Peter, and Gospel of Judas, the Apocryphon of James, and many other apocryphal writings.
Most scholars conclude that these are written much later and are less reliable accounts than the canonical gospels.
The canonical gospels are four accounts, each written by a different author.
The authors of the gospels are all anonymous, attributed by tradition to the four evangelists, each with close ties to Jesus: Mark by John Mark, an associate of Peter; Whether the gospel authors set out to write novels, myths, histories, or biographies has a tremendous impact on how they ought to be interpreted.
Some recent studies suggest that the genre of the gospels ought to be situated within the realm of ancient biography.
Although not without critics, the position that the gospels are a type of ancient biography is the consensus among scholars today.
Not everything contained in the New Testament gospels is considered to be historically reliable.
Views range from their being inerrant descriptions of the life of Jesus to their providing little historical information about his life beyond the basics.
According to a broad scholarly consensus, the Synoptic Gospels (Matthew, Mark, and Luke), and not John, are the most reliable sources of information about Jesus.
Furthermore, most scholars agree that the authors of Matthew and Luke used Mark as a source when writing their gospels.
Matthew and Luke also share some content not found in Mark.
To explain this, many scholars believe that in addition to Mark, another source (commonly called the "Q source") was used by the two authors.
Matthew, Mark, and Luke are known as the Synoptic Gospels, from the Greek σύν (syn "together") and ὄψις (opsis "view").
They are similar in content, narrative arrangement, language and paragraph structure.
Scholars generally agree that it is impossible to find any direct literary relationship between the Synoptic Gospels and the Gospel of John.
While the flow of some events (such as Jesus' baptism, transfiguration, crucifixion and interactions with the apostles) are shared among the Synoptic Gospels, incidents such as the transfiguration do not appear in John, which also differs on other matters, such as the Cleansing of the Temple.
The Synoptics emphasize different aspects of Jesus.
In Mark, Jesus is the Son of God whose mighty works demonstrate the presence of God's Kingdom.
This short gospel records few of Jesus' words or teachings.
He is the "Son of David", a "king", and the Messiah.
He is the friend of sinners and outcasts, come to seek and save the lost.
As the Word, Jesus was eternally present with God, active in all creation, and the source of humanity's moral and spiritual nature.
Although the gospels do not provide enough details to satisfy the demands of modern historians regarding exact dates, it is possible to draw from them a general picture of the life story of Jesus.
The lists are identical between Abraham and David, but differ radically from that point.
Matthew has twenty-seven generations from David to Joseph, whereas Luke has forty-two, with almost no overlap between the names on the two lists.
Various theories have been put forward seeking to explain why the two genealogies are so different.
Matthew and Luke each describe Jesus' birth, especially that Jesus was born to a virgin named Mary in Bethlehem in fulfillment of prophecy.
Luke's account emphasizes events before the birth of Jesus and centers on Mary, while Matthew's mostly covers those after the birth and centers on Joseph.
Both accounts state that Jesus was born to Joseph and Mary, his betrothed, in Bethlehem, and both support the doctrine of the virgin birth of Jesus, according to which Jesus was miraculously conceived by the Holy Spirit in Mary's womb when she was still a virgin.
At the same time, there is evidence, at least in the Lukan Acts of the Apostles, that Jesus was thought to have had, like many figures in antiquity, a dual paternity, since there it is stated he descended from the seed or loins of David.
By taking him as his own, Joseph will give him the necessary Davidic descent.
In Matthew, Joseph is troubled because Mary, his betrothed, is pregnant (Matthew 1:19-20), but in the first of Joseph's three dreams an angel assures him not to be afraid to take Mary as his wife, because her child was conceived by the Holy Spirit.
In Matthew 2:1-12, wise men or Magi from the East bring gifts to the young Jesus as the King of the Jews.
They find Jesus in a house in Bethlehem and not a barn and Jesus is now a child and not an infant.
Matthew focuses on an event after the Luke Nativity where Jesus was an infant.
In Matthew Herod the Great hears of Jesus' birth and, wanting him killed, orders the murders of male infants in Bethlehem under age of 2.
But an angel warns Joseph in his second dream, and the family flees to Egypt-later to return and settle in Nazareth.
In , Mary learns from the angel Gabriel that she will conceive and bear a child called Jesus through the action of the Holy Spirit.
His other family members-his mother, Mary, his brothers James, Joses (or Joseph), Judas and Simon and his unnamed sisters-are mentioned in the gospels and other sources.
The Gospel of Mark reports that Jesus comes into conflict with his neighbors and family.
Jesus' mother and brothers come to get him () because people are saying that he is crazy ().
Jesus responds that his followers are his true family.
In John, Mary follows Jesus to his crucifixion, and he expresses concern over her well-being ().
Jesus is called a τέκτων (tektōn) in but could cover makers of objects in various materials, including builders.
The gospels indicate that Jesus could read, paraphrase, and debate scripture, but this does not necessarily mean that he received formal scribal training.
When Jesus is presented as a baby in the temple per Jewish Law, a man named Simeon says to Mary and Joseph that Jesus "shall stand as a sign of contradiction, while a sword will pierce your own soul.
Then the secret thoughts of many will come to light" ( sitting among the teachers, listening to them and asking questions, and the people are amazed at his understanding and answers; Mary scolds Jesus for going missing, to which Jesus replies that he must "be in his father's house" ().
Baptism and temptation
The Synoptic accounts of Jesus' baptism are all preceded by information about John the Baptist.
They show John preaching penance and repentance for the remission of sins and encouraging the giving of alms to the poor () as he baptizes people in the area of the Jordan River around Perea and foretells () the arrival of someone "more powerful" than he.
Later, Jesus identifies John as "the Elijah who was to come" (, ), the prophet who was expected to arrive before the "great and terrible day of the Lord" ( ().
In Mark, John baptizes Jesus, and as he comes out of the water he sees the Holy Spirit descending to him like a dove and he hears a voice from heaven declaring him to be God's Son ().
This is one of two events described in the gospels where a voice from Heaven calls Jesus "Son", the other being the Transfiguration.
The Gospel of John leaves out Jesus' baptism and temptation.
Here, John the Baptist testifies that he saw the Spirit descend on Jesus ().
As Jesus travels towards Jerusalem, in the Perean ministry, he returns to the area where he was baptized, about a third of the way down from the Sea of Galilee along the Jordan River (.
Disciples and followers
Near the beginning of his ministry, Jesus appoints twelve apostles.
In Matthew and Mark, despite Jesus only briefly requesting that they join him, Jesus' first four apostles, who were fishermen, are described as immediately consenting, and abandoning their nets and boats to do so ( is coming.
In Mark, the disciples are notably obtuse.
They fail to understand Jesus' miracles (, ), his parables (), or what "rising from the dead" would mean ().
When Jesus is later arrested, they desert him.
Teachings and miracles
In the Synoptics, Jesus teaches extensively, often in parables, about the Kingdom of God (or, in Matthew, the Kingdom of Heaven).
The Kingdom is described as both imminent ( figure who would come to gather the chosen.
Jesus tells his followers to adhere to Jewish law, although he is perceived by some to have broken the law himself, for example regarding the Sabbath.
John's Gospel presents the teachings of Jesus not merely as his own preaching, but as divine revelation.
John the Baptist, for example, states in : "Do you not believe that I am in the Father and the Father is in me?
The words that I say to you I do not speak on my own; but the Father who dwells in me does his works."
Approximately thirty parables form about one third of Jesus' recorded teachings.
The parables appear within longer sermons and at other places in the narrative.
They often contain symbolism, and usually relate the physical world to the spiritual.
Common themes in these tales include the kindness and generosity of God and the perils of transgression.
Some of his parables, such as the Prodigal Son ().
In the gospel accounts, Jesus devotes a large portion of his ministry performing miracles, especially healings.
The miracles can be classified into two main categories: healing miracles and nature miracles.
The healing miracles include cures for physical ailments, exorcisms, and resurrections of the dead.
The nature miracles show Jesus' power over nature, and include turning water into wine, walking on water, and calming a storm, among others.
Jesus states that his miracles are from a divine source.
When Jesus' opponents suddenly accuse him of performing exorcisms by the power of Beelzebul, the prince of demons, Jesus counters that he performs them by the "Spirit of God" (") shall never be forgiven; he her sin forever.
In John, Jesus' miracles are described as "signs", performed to prove his mission and divinity.
However, in the Synoptics, when asked by some teachers of the Law and some Pharisees to give miraculous signs to prove his authority, Jesus refuses, saying that no sign shall come to corrupt and evil people except the sign of the prophet Jonah.
Also, in the Synoptic Gospels, the crowds regularly respond to Jesus' miracles with awe and press on him to heal their sick.
In John's Gospel, Jesus is presented as unpressured by the crowds, who often respond to his miracles with trust and faith.
One characteristic shared among all miracles of Jesus in the gospel accounts is that he performed them freely and never requested or accepted any form of payment.
The gospel episodes that include descriptions of the miracles of Jesus also often include teachings, and the miracles themselves involve an element of teaching.
Many of the miracles teach the importance of faith.
In the cleansing of ten lepers and the raising of Jairus' daughter, for instance, the beneficiaries are told that their healing was due to their faith.
Proclamation as Christ and Transfiguration
At about the middle of each of the three Synoptic Gospels are two significant events: the Confession of Peter and the Transfiguration of Jesus.
Jesus affirms that Peter's confession is divinely revealed truth.
After the confession, Jesus tells his disciples about his upcoming death and resurrection (Matthew 16:21, Mark 8:31, Luke 9:22)
In the Transfiguration ().
Passion Week
The description of the last week of the life of Jesus (often called Passion Week) occupies about one third of the narrative in the canonical gospels,
The Gospel of John recounts of two other feasts in which Jesus taught in Jerusalem before the Passion Week ( anoints Jesus' feet, foreshadowing his entombment.
Jesus then makes his Messianic entry into Jerusalem.
The cheering crowds greeting Jesus as he enters Jerusalem add to the animosity between him and the establishment.
In John, Jesus has already cleansed the Second Temple during an earlier Passover visit to Jerusalem.
John next recounts Jesus' Last Supper with his disciples.
Last Supper
The Last Supper is the final meal that Jesus shares with his 12 apostles in Jerusalem before his crucifixion.
The Last Supper is mentioned in all four canonical gospels; Paul's First Epistle to the Corinthians ( specifically identify Judas as the traitor.
In Luke and John, the prediction is made during the Supper ( content.
Agony in the Garden, betrayal, and arrest
In the Synoptics, Jesus and his disciples go to the garden Gethsemane, where Jesus prays to be spared his coming ordeal.
Then Judas comes with an armed mob, sent by the chief priests, scribes and elders.
He kisses Jesus to identify him to the crowd, which then arrests Jesus.
In an attempt to stop them, an unnamed disciple of Jesus uses a sword to cut off the ear of a man in the crowd.
After Jesus' arrest, his disciples go into hiding, and Peter, when questioned, thrice denies knowing Jesus.
After the third denial, Peter hears the rooster crow and recalls Jesus' prediction about his denial.
Peter then weeps bitterly.
Instead of being betrayed by a kiss, Jesus proclaims his identity, and when he does, the soldiers and officers fall to the ground.
The gospel identifies Peter as the disciple who used the sword, and Jesus rebukes him for it.
Trials by the Sanhedrin, Herod, and Pilate
After his arrest, Jesus is taken to the Sanhedrin, a Jewish judicial body.
The gospel accounts differ on the details of the trials.
In , Caiaphas' father-in-law, and then to the high priest.
The Jewish elders take Jesus to Pilate's Court and ask the Roman governor, Pontius Pilate, to judge and condemn Jesus for various allegations, accusing him of blasphemy, perverting the nation, forbidding the payment of tribute, inciting sedition against Rome, sorcery, claiming to be the King of the Jews, the Son of God, and a savior to the world.
also called Golgotha, for crucifixion.
Jesus tells the latter: "today you will be with me in Paradise" (Luke 23:43).
In John, Mary, the mother of Jesus, and the beloved disciple were at the crucifixion.
Jesus tells the beloved disciple to take care of his mother (John 19:26-27).
The Roman soldiers break the two thieves' legs (a procedure designed to hasten death in a crucifixion), but they do not break those of Jesus, as he is already dead (John 19:33).
In .
On the same day, Joseph of Arimathea, with Pilate's permission and with Nicodemus' help, removes Jesus' body from the cross, wraps him in a clean cloth, and buries him in his new rock-hewn tomb.
In , on the following day the chief Jewish priests ask Pilate for the tomb to be secured, and with Pilate's permission the priests place seals on the large stone covering the entrance.
Resurrection and Ascension
Mary Magdalene (alone in the Gospel of John, but accompanied by other women in the Synoptics) goes to Jesus' tomb on Sunday morning and is surprised to find it empty.
Despite Jesus' teaching, the disciples had not understood that Jesus would rise again.
In Matthew, there are guards at the tomb.
An angel descends from heaven, and opens the tomb.
The guards faint from fear.
Jesus appears to Mary Magdalene and "the other Mary" after they visited the tomb.
Jesus then appears to the eleven remaining disciples in Galilee and commissions them to baptize all nations in the name of the Father, Son and Holy Spirit.
In Mark, Salome and Mary, mother of James are with Mary Magdalene (Mark 16:1).
In the tomb, a young man in a white robe (an angel) tells them that Jesus will meet his disciples in Galilee, as he had told them (referring to Mark 14:28).
In Luke, Mary and various other women meet two angels at the tomb, but the eleven disciples do not believe their story (Luke 25:1-12).
Jesus appears to two of his followers in Emmaus.
He also makes an appearance to Peter.
Jesus then appears that same day to his disciples in Jerusalem (Luke 24:13-43).
Although he appears and vanishes mysteriously, he also eats and lets them touch him to prove that he is not a spirit.
He repeats his command to bring his teaching to all nations ().
* In John, Mary is alone at first, but Peter and the beloved disciple come and see the tomb as well.
Jesus then appears to Mary at the tomb.
He later appears to the disciples, breathes on them, and gives them the power to forgive and retain sins.
In a second visit to disciples, he proves to a doubting disciple ("Doubting Thomas") that he is flesh and blood.
The disciples return to Galilee, where Jesus makes another appearance.
He performs a miracle known as the catch of 153 fish at the Sea of Galilee, after which Jesus encourages Peter to serve his followers.
Jesus' ascension into Heaven is described in states that Jesus has "gone into heaven and is at the right hand of God".
The Acts of the Apostles describes several appearances of Jesus after his Ascension.
In .
Early Christianity
After Jesus' life, his followers, as described in the first chapters of the Acts of the Apostles, were all Jews either by birth or conversion, for which the biblical term "proselyte" is used, and referred to by historians as Jewish Christians.
The early Gospel message was spread orally, probably in Aramaic, but almost immediately also in Greek.
The New Testament's Acts of the Apostles and Epistle to the Galatians record that the first Christian community was centered in Jerusalem and its leaders included Peter, James, the brother of Jesus, and John the Apostle.
After the conversion of Paul the Apostle, he claimed the title of "Apostle to the Gentiles".
Paul's influence on Christian thinking is said to be more significant than that of any other New Testament author.
By the end of the 1st century, Christianity began to be recognized internally and externally as a separate religion from Judaism which itself was refined and developed further in the centuries after the destruction of the Second Temple.
Numerous quotations in the New Testament and other Christian writings of the first centuries, indicate that early Christians generally used and revered the Hebrew Bible (the Tanakh) as religious text, mostly in the Greek (Septuagint) or Aramaic (Targum) translations.
Early Christians wrote many religious works, including the ones included in the canon of the New Testament.
The canonical texts, which have become the main sources used by historians to try to understand the historical Jesus and sacred texts within Christianity, were probably written between 50 and 120 AD.
Historical views
Prior to the Enlightenment, the gospels were usually regarded as accurate historical accounts, but since then scholars have emerged who question the reliability of the gospels and draw a distinction between the Jesus described in the gospels and the Jesus of history.
Since the 18th century, three separate scholarly quests for the historical Jesus have taken place, each with distinct characteristics and based on different research criteria, which were often developed during the quest that applied them.
While there is widespread scholarly agreement on the existence of Jesus, and a basic consensus on the general outline of his life, the portraits of Jesus constructed by various scholars often differ from each other, and from the image portrayed in the gospel accounts.
Approaches to the historical reconstruction of the life of Jesus have varied from the "maximalist" approaches of the 19th century, in which the gospel accounts were accepted as reliable evidence wherever it is possible, to the "minimalist" approaches of the early 20th century, where hardly anything about Jesus was accepted as historical.
In the 1950s, as the second quest for the historical Jesus gathered pace, the minimalist approaches faded away, and in the 21st century, minimalists such as Price are a very small minority.
Although a belief in the inerrancy of the gospels cannot be supported historically, many scholars since the 1980s have held that, beyond the few facts considered to be historically certain, certain other elements of Jesus' life are "historically probable".
Modern scholarly research on the historical Jesus thus focuses on identifying the most probable elements.
Judea and Galilee in the 1st century
In AD 6, Judea, Idumea, and Samaria were transformed from a client kingdom of the Roman Empire into an imperial province, also called Judea.
A Roman prefect, rather than a client king, ruled the land.
The prefect ruled from Caesarea Maritima, leaving Jerusalem to be run by the High Priest of Israel.
As an exception, the prefect came to Jerusalem during religious festivals, when religious and patriotic enthusiasm sometimes inspired unrest or uprisings.
Gentile lands surrounded the Jewish territories of Judea and Galilee, but Roman law and practice allowed Jews to remain separate legally and culturally.
Galilee was evidently prosperous, and poverty was limited enough that it did not threaten the social order.
Jews based their faith and religious practice on the Torah, five books said to have been given by God to Moses.
The three prominent religious parties were the Pharisees, the Essenes, and the Sadducees.
Together these parties represented only a small fraction of the population.
Most Jews looked forward to a time that God would deliver them from their pagan rulers, possibly through war against the Romans.
John, the latest written gospel, differs considerably from the Synoptic Gospels, and thus is generally considered less reliable, although more and more scholars now also recognize that it may contain a core of older material as historically valuable as the Synoptic tradition or even more so.
The non-canonical Gospel of Thomas might be an independent witness to many of Jesus' parables and aphorisms.
For example, Thomas confirms that Jesus blessed the poor and that this saying circulated independently before being combined with similar sayings in the Q source.
Other select non-canonical Christian texts may also have value for historical Jesus research.
Early non-Christian sources that attest to the historical existence of Jesus include the works of the historians Josephus and Tacitus.
Josephus scholar Louis Feldman has stated that "few have doubted the genuineness" of Josephus' reference to Jesus in .
Scholars generally consider Tacitus' reference to the execution of Jesus to be both authentic and of historical value as an independent Roman source.
Non-Christian sources are valuable in two ways.
First, they show that even neutral or hostile parties never evince any doubt that Jesus actually existed.
Second, they present a rough picture of Jesus that is compatible with that found in the Christian sources: that Jesus was a teacher, had a reputation as a miracle worker, had a brother James, and died a violent death.
Archeology helps scholars better understand Jesus' social world.
Recent archeological work, for example, indicates that Capernaum, a city important in Jesus' ministry, was poor and small, without even a forum or an agora.
This archaeological discovery resonates well with the scholarly view that Jesus advocated reciprocal sharing among the destitute in that area of Galilee.
born around the beginning of the 1st century, who died in 30 or 33 AD in Judea.
The general scholarly consensus is that Jesus was a contemporary of John the Baptist and was crucified by the Roman governor Pontius Pilate, who held office from 26 to 36 AD.
The gospels offer several clues concerning the year of Jesus' birth. '
reign (28 or 29 AD).
By collating the gospel accounts with historical data and using various other methods, most scholars arrive at a date of birth from 6 to 4 BC for Jesus, Given that most scholars date the marriage of Herod and Herodias as AD 28-35, this yields a date about 28-29 AD.
A number of approaches have been used to estimate the year of the crucifixion of Jesus.
Most scholars agree that he died in 30 or 33 AD.
The date for the conversion of Paul (estimated to be 33-36 AD) acts as an upper bound for the date of Crucifixion.
The dates for Paul's conversion and ministry can be determined by analyzing the Pauline epistles and the Acts of the Apostles.
Astronomers have tried to estimate the precise date of the Crucifixion by analyzing lunar motion and calculating historic dates of Passover, a festival based on the lunisolar Hebrew calendar.
The most widely accepted dates derived from this method are April 7, 30 AD, and April 3, 33 AD (both Julian).
Historicity of events
Scholars have reached a limited consensus on the basics of Jesus' life.
Family
Many scholars agree that Joseph, Jesus' father, died by the time Jesus began his ministry.
Joseph is not mentioned at all in the gospels during Jesus' ministry.
Joseph's death would explain why in Mark 6:3, Jesus' neighbors refer to Jesus as the "son of Mary" (sons were usually identified by their fathers).
According to Theissen and Merz, it is common for extraordinary charismatic leaders, such as Jesus, to come into conflict with their ordinary families.
In Mark, Jesus' family comes to get him, fearing that he is mad (Mark 3:20-34), and this account is likely historical because early Christians would not have invented it.
After Jesus' death, many members of his family joined the Christian movement.
Jesus' brother James became a leader of the Jerusalem Church.
Géza Vermes says that the doctrine of the virgin birth of Jesus arose from theological development rather than from historical events.
Despite the widely held view that the authors of the Synoptic Gospels drew upon each other (the so-called synoptic problem), other scholars take it as significant that the virgin birth is attested by two separate gospels, Matthew and Luke.
According to E. P. Sanders, the birth narratives in Matthew and Luke are the clearest case of invention in the Gospel narratives of Jesus' life.
Both accounts have Jesus born in Bethlehem, in accordance with Jewish salvation history, and both have him growing up in Nazareth.
But Sanders points that the two Gospels report completely different and irreconcilable explanations for how that happened.
Luke's account of a census in which everyone returned to their ancestral cities is not plausible.
Matthew's account is more plausible, but the story reads as though it was invented to identify Jesus as like a new Moses, and the historian Josephus reports Herod the Great's brutality without ever mentioning that he massacred little boys.
Sanders says that the genealogies of Jesus are based not on historical information but on the authors' desire to show that Jesus was the universal Jewish savior.
In any event, once the doctrine of the virgin birth of Jesus became established, that tradition superseded the earlier tradition that he was descended from David through Joseph.
Luke reports that Jesus was a blood relation of John the Baptist, but scholars generally consider this connection to be invented.
Baptism
Most modern scholars consider Jesus' baptism to be a definite historical fact, along with his crucifixion.
Theologian James D. G. Dunn states that they "command almost universal assent" and "rank so high on the 'almost impossible to doubt or deny' scale of historical facts" that they are often the starting points for the study of the historical Jesus.
Scholars adduce the criterion of embarrassment, saying that early Christians would not have invented a baptism that might imply that Jesus committed sins and wanted to repent.
According to Theissen and Merz, Jesus was inspired by John the Baptist and took over from him many elements of his teaching.
Ministry in Galilee
Most scholars hold that Jesus lived in Galilee and Judea and did not preach or study elsewhere.
They agree that Jesus debated with Jewish authorities on the subject of God, performed some healings, taught in parables and gathered followers.
Jesus' Jewish critics considered his ministry to be scandalous because he feasted with sinners, fraternized with women, and allowed his followers to pluck grain on the Sabbath.
The Gospels portray Jesus teaching in well-defined sessions, such as the Sermon on the Mount in the Gospel of Matthew or the parallel Sermon on the Plain in Luke.
According to Gerd Theissen and Annette Merz, these teaching sessions include authentic teachings of Jesus, but the scenes were invented by the respective evangelists to frame these teachings, which had originally been recorded without context.
While Jesus' miracles fit within the social context of antiquity, he defined them differently.
First, he attributed them to the faith of those healed.
Second, he connected them to end times prophecy.
Jesus chose twelve disciples (the "Twelve"), evidently as an apocalyptic message.
All three Synoptics mention the Twelve, although the names on Luke's list vary from those in Mark and Matthew, suggesting that Christians were not certain who all the disciples were.
The 12 disciples might have represented the twelve original tribes of Israel, which would be restored once God's rule was instituted.
The disciples were reportedly meant to be the rulers of the tribes in the coming Kingdom (Matthew 19:28, Luke 22:30).
According to Bart Ehrman, Jesus' promise that the Twelve would rule is historical, because the Twelve included Judas Iscariot.
In Ehrman's view, no Christians would have invented a line from Jesus, promising rulership to the disciple who betrayed him.
In Mark, the disciples play hardly any role other than a negative one.
While others sometimes respond to Jesus with complete faith, his disciples are puzzled and doubtful.
They serve as a foil to Jesus and to other characters.
The failings of the disciples are probably exaggerated in Mark, and the disciples make a better showing in Matthew and Luke.
Sanders says that Jesus' mission was not about repentance, although he acknowledges that this opinion is unpopular.
He argues that repentance appears as a strong theme only in Luke, that repentance was John the Baptist's message, and that Jesus' ministry would not have been scandalous if the sinners he ate with had been repentant.
According to Theissen and Merz, Jesus taught that God was generously giving people an opportunity to repent.
Role
Jesus taught that an apocalyptic figure, the "Son of Man", would soon come on clouds of glory to gather the elect, or chosen ones (Mark 13:24-27, Matthew 24:29-31, Luke 21:25-28).
He referred to himself as a "son of man" in the colloquial sense of "a person", but scholars do not know whether he also meant himself when he referred to the heavenly "Son of Man".
Paul the Apostle and other early Christians interpreted the "Son of Man" as the risen Jesus.
not in the sense that most people today think of the term.
Passover and crucifixion in Jerusalem
Around AD 30, Jesus and his followers traveled from Galilee to Jerusalem to observe Passover.
Jesus caused a disturbance in the Second Temple, which was the center of Jewish religious and civil authority.
Sanders associates it with Jesus' prophecy that the Temple would be totally demolished.
Jesus held a last meal with his disciples, which is the origin of the Christian sacrament of bread and wine.
His words as recorded in the Synoptic gospels and Paul's First Letter to the Corinthians do not entirely agree, but this symbolic meal appears to have pointed to Jesus' place in the coming Kingdom of God when very probable Jesus knew he was about to be killed, although he may have still hoped that God might yet intervene.
The Gospels say that Jesus was betrayed to the authorities by a disciple, and many scholars consider this report to be highly reliable.
He was executed on the orders of Pontius Pilate, the Roman prefect of Judaea.
Pilate most likely saw Jesus' reference to the Kingdom of God as a threat to Roman authority and worked with the Temple elites to have Jesus executed.
The Sadducean high-priestly leaders of the Temple more plausibly had Jesus executed for political reasons than for his teaching.
They may have regarded him as a threat to stability, especially after he caused a disturbance at the Second Temple.
However, the attributes described in the portraits sometimes overlap, and scholars who differ on some attributes sometimes agree on others.
Since the 18th century, scholars have occasionally put forth that Jesus was a political national messiah, but the evidence for this portrait is negligible.
Likewise, the proposal that Jesus was a Zealot does not fit with the earliest strata of the Synoptic tradition.
Language, ethnicity, and appearance
Jesus grew up in Galilee and much of his ministry took place there.
The languages spoken in Galilee and Judea during the 1st century AD include Jewish Palestinian Aramaic, Hebrew, and Greek, with Aramaic being predominant.
There is substantial consensus that Jesus gave most of his teachings in Aramaic in the Galilean dialect.
Modern scholars agree that Jesus was a Jew of 1st-century Palestine.
Ioudaios in New Testament Greek is a term which in the contemporary context may refer to religion (Second Temple Judaism), ethnicity (of Judea), or both.
In a review of the state of modern scholarship, Amy-Jill Levine writes that the entire question of ethnicity is "fraught with difficulty", and that "beyond recognizing that 'Jesus was Jewish', rarely does the scholarship address what being 'Jewish' means".
The New Testament gives no description of the physical appearance of Jesus before his death-it is generally indifferent to racial appearances and does not refer to the features of the people it mentions.
Jesus probably looked like a typical Jew of his time and according to some scholars was likely to have had a sinewy appearance due to his ascetic and itinerant lifestyle.
Christ myth theory
The Christ myth theory is the hypothesis that Jesus of Nazareth never existed; or if he did, that he had virtually nothing to do with the founding of Christianity and the accounts in the gospels.
Stories of Jesus' birth, along with other key events, have so many mythic elements that some scholars have suggested that Jesus himself was a myth.
Bruno Bauer (1809-1882) taught that the first Gospel was a work of literature that produced history rather than described it.
According to Albert Kalthoff (1850-1906) a social movement produced Jesus when it encountered Jewish messianic expectations.
Arthur Drews (1865-1935) saw Jesus as the concrete form of a myth that predated Christianity.
Despite arguments put forward by authors who have questioned the existence of a historical Jesus, there remains a strong consensus in historical-critical biblical scholarship that a historical Jesus did live in that area and in that time period.
Perspectives
Apart from his own disciples and followers, the Jews of Jesus' day generally rejected him as the Messiah, as do the great majority of Jews today.
Christian theologians, ecumenical councils, reformers and others have written extensively about Jesus over the centuries.
Christian sects and schisms have often been defined or characterized by their descriptions of Jesus.
Meanwhile, Manichaeans, Gnostics, Muslims, Baha'is, and others have found prominent places for Jesus in their religions.
Christian
Jesus is the central figure of Christianity.
Although Christian views of Jesus vary, it is possible to summarize the key beliefs shared among major denominations, as stated in their catechetical or confessional texts.
Christian views of Jesus are derived from various sources, including the canonical gospels and New Testament letters such as the Pauline epistles and the Johannine writings.
These documents outline the key beliefs held by Christians about Jesus, including his divinity, humanity, and earthly life, and that he is the Christ and the Son of God.
Despite their many shared beliefs, not all Christian denominations agree on all doctrines, and both major and minor differences on teachings and beliefs have persisted throughout Christianity for centuries.
The New Testament states that the resurrection of Jesus is the foundation of the Christian faith , gather Jews back to Israel (), bring world peace (), and unite humanity under the God of Israel ().
Furthermore, according to Jewish tradition, there were no prophets after Malachi, who delivered his prophesies in the 5th century BC.
Judaic criticism of Jesus is long-standing.
The Talmud, written and compiled from the 3rd to the 5th century AD, includes stories that since medieval times have been considered to be defamatory accounts of Jesus.
In one such story, Yeshu HaNozri ("Jesus the Nazarene"), a lewd apostate, is executed by the Jewish high court for spreading idolatry and practicing magic.
The majority of contemporary scholars consider that this material provides no information on the historical Jesus.
The Mishneh Torah, a late 12th-century work of Jewish law written by Moses Maimonides, states that Jesus is a "stumbling block" who makes "the majority of the world to err and serve a god other than the Lord".
Medieval Hebrew literature contains the anecdotal "Episode of Jesus" (known also as Toledot Yeshu), in which Jesus is described as being the son of Joseph, the son of Pandera (see: ).
The account portrays Jesus as an impostor.
Islamic
A major figure in Islam, Muslims regard the gospels of the New Testament as inauthentic, and believe that Jesus' original message was lost or altered and that Muhammad came later to restore it.
Belief in Jesus (and all other messengers of God) is a requirement for being a Muslim.
The Quran mentions Jesus by name 25 times-more often than Muhammad-and emphasizes that Jesus was a mortal human who, like all other prophets, had been divinely chosen to spread God's message.
Like all prophets in Islam, Jesus is considered a Muslim.
The Quran describes the annunciation to Mary (Maryam) by an angel that she is to give birth to Jesus while remaining a virgin.
It calls the virgin birth a miracle that occurred by the will of God.
Jesus is called the "Spirit of God" because he was born through the action of the Spirit, but that belief does not imply his pre-existence.
To aid in his ministry to the Jewish people, Jesus was given the ability to perform miracles, by permission of God rather than by his own power.
Some of the earliest depictions of Jesus at the Dura-Europos church are firmly dated to before 256.
Thereafter, despite the lack of biblical references or historical records, a wide range of depictions of Jesus appeared during the last two millennia, often influenced by cultural settings, political circumstances and theological contexts.
The depiction of Christ in pictorial form was highly controversial in the early church.
From the 5th century onward, flat painted icons became popular in the Eastern Church.
The Byzantine Iconoclasm acted as a barrier to developments in the East, but by the ninth century, art was permitted again.
The Protestant Reformation brought renewed resistance to imagery, but total prohibition was atypical, and Protestant objections to images have tended to reduce since the 16th century.
Although large images are generally avoided, few Protestants now object to book illustrations depicting Jesus.
The use of depictions of Jesus is advocated by the leaders of denominations such as Anglicans and Catholics and is a key element of the Eastern Orthodox tradition.
The Transfiguration was a major theme in Eastern Christian art, and every Eastern Orthodox monk who had trained in icon painting had to prove his craft by painting an icon depicting it.
Icons receive the external marks of veneration, such as kisses and prostration, and they are thought to be powerful channels of divine grace.
The Renaissance brought forth a number of artists who focused on depictions of Jesus; Fra Angelico and others followed Giotto in the systematic development of uncluttered images.
Before the Protestant Reformation, the crucifix was common in Western Christianity.
It is a model of the cross with Jesus crucified on it.
The crucifix became the central ornament of the altar in the 13th century, a use that has been nearly universal in Roman Catholic churches since then.
Jesus appears as an infant in a manger (feed trough) in Christmas creches, which depict the Nativity scene.
Associated relics
The total destruction that ensued with the siege of Jerusalem by the Romans in AD 70 made the survival of items from 1st-century Judea very rare and almost no direct records survive about the history of Judaism from the last part of the 1st century through the 2nd century.
Margaret M. Mitchell writes that although Eusebius reports (Ecclesiastical History III 5.3) that the early Christians left Jerusalem for Pella just before Jerusalem was subjected to the final lock down, we must accept that no first hand Christian items from the early Jerusalem Church have reached us.
Joe Nickell writes, "as investigation after investigation has shown, not a single, reliably authenticated relic of Jesus exists."
However, throughout the history of Christianity a number of relics attributed to Jesus have been claimed, although doubt has been cast on them.
The 16th-century Catholic theologian Erasmus wrote sarcastically about the proliferation of relics and the number of buildings that could have been constructed from the wood claimed to be from the cross used in the Crucifixion.
Similarly, while experts debate whether Jesus was crucified with three nails or with four, at least thirty holy nails continue to be venerated as relics across Europe.
Some relics, such as purported remnants of the Crown of Thorns, receive only a modest number of pilgrims, while the Shroud of Turin (which is associated with an approved Catholic devotion to the Holy Face of Jesus), has received millions, including popes John Paul II and Benedict XVI.
