The Papal Basilica of St. Peter in the Vatican (), or simply St. Peter's Basilica (), is an Italian Renaissance church in Vatican City, the papal enclave within the city of Rome.
Designed principally by Donato Bramante, Michelangelo, Carlo Maderno and Gian Lorenzo Bernini, St. Peter's is the most renowned work of Renaissance architecture and as "the greatest of all churches of Christendom".
Catholic tradition holds that the basilica is the burial site of Saint Peter, chief among Jesus's apostles and also the first Bishop of Rome (Pope).
Saint Peter's tomb is supposedly directly below the high altar of the basilica.
For this reason, many popes have been interred at St. Peter's since the Early Christian period, and there has been a church on this site since the time of the Roman emperor Constantine the Great.
Construction of the present basilica, which would replace Old St. Peter's Basilica from the 4th century AD, began on 18 April 1506 and was completed on 18 November 1626.
St. Peter's is famous as a place of pilgrimage and for its liturgical functions.
The pope presides at a number of liturgies throughout the year, drawing audiences of 15,000 to over 80,000 people, either within the basilica or the adjoining St. Peter's Square.
St. Peter's has many historical associations, with the Early Christian Church, the Papacy, the Protestant Reformation and Catholic Counter-reformation and numerous artists, especially Michelangelo.
As a work of architecture, it is regarded as the greatest building of its age.
Overview
St. Peter's is a church built in the Renaissance style located in the Vatican City west of the River Tiber and near the Janiculum Hill and Hadrian's Mausoleum.
Its central dome dominates the skyline of Rome.
The basilica is approached via St. Peter's Square, a forecourt in two sections, both surrounded by tall colonnades.
The first space is oval and the second trapezoid.
The façade of the basilica, with a giant order of columns, stretches across the end of the square and is approached by steps on which stand two statues of the 1st-century apostles to Rome, Saints Peter and Paul.
The basilica is cruciform in shape, with an elongated nave in the Latin cross form but the early designs were for a centrally planned structure and this is still in evidence in the architecture.
The central space is dominated both externally and internally by one of the largest domes in the world.
The entrance is through a narthex, or entrance hall, which stretches across the building.
One of the decorated bronze doors leading from the narthex is the Holy Door, only opened during jubilees.
The nave which leads to the central dome is in three bays, with piers supporting a barrel-vault, the highest of any church.
The nave is framed by wide aisles which have a number of chapels off them.
There are also chapels surrounding the dome.
Moving around the basilica in a clockwise direction they are: The Baptistery, the Chapel of the Presentation of the Virgin, the larger Choir Chapel, the altar of the Transfiguration, the Clementine Chapel with the altar of Saint Gregory, the Sacristy Entrance, the Altar of the Lie, the left transept with altars to the Crucifixion of Saint Peter, Saint Joseph and Saint Thomas, the altar of the Sacred Heart, the Chapel of the Madonna of Column, the altar of Saint Peter and the Paralytic, the apse with the Chair of Saint Peter, the altar of Saint Peter raising Tabitha, the altar of St. Petronilla, the altar of the Archangel Michael, the altar of the Navicella, the right transept with altars of Saint Erasmus, Saints Processo and Martiniano, and Saint Wenceslas, the altar of St. Jerome, the altar of Saint Basil, the Gregorian Chapel with the altar of the Madonna of Succour, the larger Chapel of the Holy Sacrament, the Chapel of Saint Sebastian and the Chapel of the Pietà.
The Monuments, in a clockwise direction, are to: Maria Clementina Sobieski, The Stuarts, Benedict XV, John XXIII, St. Pius X, Innocent VIII, Leo XI, Innocent XI, Pius VII, Pius VIII, Alexander VII, Alexander VIII, Paul III, Urban VIII, Clement X, Clement XIII, Benedict XIV, St Peter (Bronze Statue), Gregory XVI, Gregory XIV, Gregory XIII, Matilda of Canossa, Innocent XII, Pius XII, Pius XI, Christina of Sweden, Leo XII.
At the heart of the basilica, beneath the high altar, is the Confessio or Chapel of the Confession, in reference to the confession of faith by St. Peter, which led to his martyrdom.
Two curving marble staircases lead to this underground chapel at the level of the Constantinian church and immediately above the purported burial place of Saint Peter.
The entire interior of St. Peter's is lavishly decorated with marble, reliefs, architectural sculpture and gilding.
The basilica contains a large number of tombs of popes and other notable people, many of which are considered outstanding artworks.
There are also a number of sculptures in niches and chapels, including Michelangelo's Pietà.
The central feature is a baldachin, or canopy over the Papal Altar, designed by Gian Lorenzo Bernini.
The apse culminates in a sculptural ensemble, also by Bernini, and containing the symbolic Chair of Saint Peter.
One observer wrote: "St Peter's Basilica is the reason why Rome is still the center of the civilized world.
For religious, historical, and architectural reasons it by itself justifies a journey to Rome, and its interior offers a palimpsest of artistic styles at their best ..."
The American philosopher Ralph Waldo Emerson described St. Peter's as "an ornament of the earth ... the sublime of the beautiful."
Status
St. Peter's Basilica is one of the papal basilicas (previously styled "patriarchal basilicas") and one of the four Major Basilicas of Rome, the other Major Basilicas (all of which are also Papal Basilicas) being the Basilicas of St. John Lateran, St. Mary Major, and St. Paul outside the Walls.
The rank of major basilica confers on St. Peter's Basilica precedence before all minor basilicas worldwide.
However, unlike all the other Papal Major Basilicas, it is wholly within the territory, and thus the sovereign jurisdiction, of the Vatican City State, and not that of Italy.
This is in contrast to the other three Papal Major Basilicas, which are within Italian territory and not the territory of the Vatican City State. )
However, the Holy See fully owns these three basilicas, and Italy is legally obligated to recognize its full ownership thereof ) and to concede to all of them "the immunity granted by International Law to the headquarters of the diplomatic agents of foreign States" ).
It is the most prominent building in the Vatican City.
Its dome is a dominant feature of the skyline of Rome.
Probably the largest church in Christendom, it covers an area of .
One of the holiest sites of Christianity and Catholic Tradition, it is traditionally the burial site of its titular, St. Peter, who was the head of the twelve Apostles of Jesus and, according to tradition, the first Bishop of Antioch and later the first Bishop of Rome, rendering him the first Pope.
Although the New Testament does not mention St. Peter's martyrdom in Rome, tradition, based on the writings of the Fathers of the Church, holds that his tomb is below the baldachin and altar of the Basilica in the "Confession".
For this reason, many Popes have, from the early years of the Church, been buried near Pope St. Peter in the necropolis beneath the Basilica.
Construction of the current basilica, over the old Constantinian basilica, began on 18 April 1506 and finished in 1615.
At length, on 18 November 1626 Pope Urban VIII solemnly dedicated the Basilica.
As one of the constituent structures of the historically and architecturally significant Vatican City, St. Peter's Basilica was inscribed as a UNESCO World Heritage Site in 1984 under criteria (i), (ii), (iv), and (vi).
With an exterior area of , an interior area of , St. Peter's Basilica is the largest Christian church building in the world by the two latter metrics and the second largest by the first .
The top of its dome, at , also places it as the second tallest building in Rome .
The dome's soaring height placed it among the tallest buildings of the Old World, and it continues to hold the title of tallest dome in the world.
Though the largest dome in the world by diameter at the time of its completion, it no longer holds this distinction.
History
Saint Peter's burial site
After the crucifixion of Jesus, it is recorded in the Biblical book of the Acts of the Apostles that one of his twelve disciples, Simon known as Saint Peter, a fisherman from Galilee, took a leadership position among Jesus' followers and was of great importance in the founding of the Christian Church.
The name Peter is "Petrus" in Latin and "Petros" in Greek, deriving from "petra" which means "stone" or "rock" in Greek, and is the literal translation of the Aramaic "Kepa", the name given to Simon by Jesus.
Catholic tradition holds that Peter, after a ministry of thirty-four years, traveled to Rome and met his martyrdom there along with Paul on 13 October, 64 AD during the reign of the Roman Emperor Nero.
His execution was one of the many martyrdoms of Christians following the Great Fire of Rome.
According to Origen, Peter was crucified head downwards, by his own request because he considered himself unworthy to die in the same manner as Jesus.
The crucifixion took place near an ancient Egyptian obelisk in the Circus of Nero.
According to tradition, Peter's remains were buried just outside the Circus, on the Mons Vaticanus across the Via Cornelia from the Circus, less than from his place of death.
The Via Cornelia was a road which ran east-to-west along the north wall of the Circus on land now covered by the southern portions of the Basilica and St. Peter's Square.
A shrine was built on this site some years later.
Almost three hundred years later, Old St. Peter's Basilica was constructed over this site.
Old St. Peter's Basilica
Old St. Peter's Basilica was the 4th-century church begun by the Emperor Constantine the Great between 319 and 333 AD.
It was of typical basilical form, a wide nave and two aisles on each side and an apsidal end, with the addition of a transept or bema, giving the building the shape of a tau cross.
It was over long, and the entrance was preceded by a large colonnaded atrium.
This church had been built over the small shrine believed to mark the burial place of St. Peter, though the tomb was "smashed" in 846 AD.
It contained a very large number of burials and memorials, including those of most of the popes from St. Peter to the 15th century.
Like all of the earliest churches in Rome, both this church and its successor had the entrance to the east and the apse at the west end of the building.
Since the construction of the current basilica, the name Old St. Peter's Basilica has been used for its predecessor to distinguish the two buildings.
The plan to rebuild
By the end of the 15th century, having been neglected during the period of the Avignon Papacy, the old basilica had fallen into disrepair.
It appears that the first pope to consider rebuilding, or at least making radical changes was Pope Nicholas V (1447-55).
He commissioned work on the old building from Leone Battista Alberti and Bernardo Rossellino and also had Rossellino design a plan for an entirely new basilica, or an extreme modification of the old.
His reign was frustrated by political problems and when he died, little had been achieved.
The foundations were completed for a new transept and choir to form a domed Latin cross with the preserved nave and side aisles of the old basilica.
Some walls for the choir had also been built.
Pope Julius II planned far more for St Peter's than Nicholas V's program of repair or modification.
Julius was at that time planning his own tomb, which was to be designed and adorned with sculpture by Michelangelo and placed within St Peter's.
In 1505 Julius made a decision to demolish the ancient basilica and replace it with a monumental structure to house his enormous tomb and "aggrandize himself in the popular imagination".
A German Augustinian priest, Martin Luther, wrote to Archbishop Albrecht arguing against this "selling of indulgences".
He also included his "Disputation of Martin Luther on the Power and Efficacy of Indulgences", which came to be known as The 95 Theses.
This became a factor in starting the Reformation, the birth of Protestantism.
Architecture
Successive plans
Pope Julius' scheme for the grandest building in Christendom was the subject of a competition for which a number of entries remain intact in the Uffizi Gallery, Florence.
It was the design of Donato Bramante that was selected, and for which the foundation stone was laid in 1506.
This plan was in the form of an enormous Greek Cross with a dome inspired by that of the huge circular Roman temple, the Pantheon.
When Pope Julius died in 1513, Bramante was replaced with Giuliano da Sangallo and Fra Giocondo, who both died in 1515 (Bramante himself having died the previous year).
Raphael was confirmed as architect of St. Peter's on August 1, 1514.The main change in his plan is the nave of five bays, with a row of complex apsidal chapels off the aisles on either side.
Raphael's plan for the chancel and transepts made the squareness of the exterior walls more definite by reducing the size of the towers, and the semi-circular apses more clearly defined by encircling each with an ambulatory.
In 1520 Raphael also died, aged 37, and his successor Baldassare Peruzzi maintained changes that Raphael had proposed to the internal arrangement of the three main apses, but otherwise reverted to the Greek Cross plan and other features of Bramante.
This plan did not go ahead because of various difficulties of both Church and state.
In 1527 Rome was sacked and plundered by Emperor Charles V. Peruzzi died in 1536 without his plan being realized.
Sangallo's main practical contribution was to strengthen Bramante's piers which had begun to crack.
He is to be regarded as the principal designer of a large part of the building as it stands today, and as bringing the construction to a point where it could be carried through.
He did not take on the job with pleasure; it was forced upon him by Pope Paul, frustrated at the death of his chosen candidate, Giulio Romano and the refusal of Jacopo Sansovino to leave Venice.
Michelangelo wrote "I undertake this only for the love of God and in honour of the Apostle."
He insisted that he should be given a free hand to achieve the ultimate aim by whatever means he saw fit.
Michelangelo's contribution
Michelangelo took over a building site at which four piers, enormous beyond any constructed since ancient Roman times, were rising behind the remaining nave of the old basilica.
He also inherited the numerous schemes designed and redesigned by some of the greatest architectural and engineering minds of the 16th century.
There were certain common elements in these schemes.
They all called for a dome to equal that engineered by Brunelleschi a century earlier and which has since dominated the skyline of Renaissance Florence, and they all called for a strongly symmetrical plan of either Greek Cross form, like the iconic St. Mark's Basilica in Venice, or of a Latin Cross with the transepts of identical form to the chancel, as at Florence Cathedral.
Even though the work had progressed only a little in 40 years, Michelangelo did not simply dismiss the ideas of the previous architects.
He drew on them in developing a grand vision.
Above all, Michelangelo recognized the essential quality of Bramante's original design.
He reverted to the Greek Cross and, as Helen Gardner expresses it: "Without destroying the centralising features of Bramante's plan, Michelangelo, with a few strokes of the pen converted its snowflake complexity into massive, cohesive unity."
As it stands today, St. Peter's has been extended with a nave by Carlo Maderno.
It is the chancel end (the ecclesiastical "Eastern end") with its huge centrally placed dome that is the work of Michelangelo.
Because of its location within the Vatican State and because the projection of the nave screens the dome from sight when the building is approached from the square in front of it, the work of Michelangelo is best appreciated from a distance.
What becomes apparent is that the architect has greatly reduced the clearly defined geometric forms of Bramante's plan of a square with square projections, and also of Raphael's plan of a square with semi-circular projections.
Michelangelo has blurred the definition of the geometry by making the external masonry of massive proportions and filling in every corner with a small vestry or stairwell.
The effect created is of a continuous wall-surface that is folded or fractured at different angles, but lacks the right-angles which usually define change of direction at the corners of a building.
This exterior is surrounded by a giant order of Corinthian pilasters all set at slightly different angles to each other, in keeping with the ever-changing angles of the wall's surface.
Above them the huge cornice ripples in a continuous band, giving the appearance of keeping the whole building in a state of compression.
Dome: successive and final designs
The dome of St. Peter's rises to a total height of from the floor of the basilica to the top of the external cross.
It is the tallest dome in the world.
Its internal diameter is , slightly smaller than two of the three other huge domes that preceded it, those of the Pantheon of Ancient Rome, , and Florence Cathedral of the Early Renaissance, .
It has a greater diameter by approximately than Constantinople's Hagia Sophia church, completed in 537.
It was to the domes of the Pantheon and Florence duomo that the architects of St. Peter's looked for solutions as to how to go about building what was conceived, from the outset, as the greatest dome of Christendom.
Bramante and Sangallo, 1506 and 1513
The dome of the Pantheon stands on a circular wall with no entrances or windows except a single door.
The whole building is as high as it is wide.
Its dome is constructed in a single shell of concrete, made light by the inclusion of a large amount of the volcanic stones tuff and pumice.
The inner surface of the dome is deeply coffered which has the effect of creating both vertical and horizontal ribs, while lightening the overall load.
At the summit is an ocular opening across which provides light to the interior.
Its double-shell construction of bricks locked together in herringbone pattern (re-introduced from Byzantine architecture), and the gentle upward slope of its eight stone ribs made it possible for the construction to take place without the massive wooden formwork necessary to construct hemispherical arches.
While its appearance, with the exception of the details of the lantern, is entirely Gothic, its engineering was highly innovative, and the product of a mind that had studied the huge vaults and remaining dome of Ancient Rome.
Sangallo's plan (1513), of which a large wooden model still exists, looks to both these predecessors.
He realised the value of both the coffering at the Pantheon and the outer stone ribs at Florence Cathedral.
He strengthened and extended the peristyle of Bramante into a series of arched and ordered openings around the base, with a second such arcade set back in a tier above the first.
In his hands, the rather delicate form of the lantern, based closely on that in Florence, became a massive structure, surrounded by a projecting base, a peristyle and surmounted by a spire of conic form.
Stefan du Pérac's engraving (1569) shows a hemispherical dome, but this was perhaps an inaccuracy of the engraver.
The profile of the wooden model is more ovoid than that of the engravings, but less so than the finished product.
It has been suggested that Michelangelo on his death bed reverted to the more pointed shape.
However Lees-Milne cites Giacomo della Porta as taking full responsibility for the change and as indicating to Pope Sixtus that Michelangelo was lacking in the scientific understanding of which he himself was capable.
The rare survival of this example is probably due to its fragmentary state and the fact that detailed mathematical calculations had been made over the top of the drawing.
Changes of plan
On 18 February 1606, under Pope Paul V, the dismantling of the remaining parts of the Constantinian basilica began.
Another influence on the thinking of both the Fabbrica and the Curia was a certain guilt at the demolition of the ancient building.
The ground on which it and its various associated chapels, vestries and sacristies had stood for so long was hallowed.
The only solution was to build a nave that encompassed the whole space.
In 1607 a committee of ten architects was called together, and a decision was made to extend Michelangelo's building into a nave.
Maderno's plans for both the nave and the facade were accepted.
The building began on 7 May 1607, and proceeded at a great rate, with an army of 700 labourers being employed.
The following year, the façade was begun, in December 1614 the final touches were added to the stucco decoration of the vault and early in 1615 the partition wall between the two sections was pulled down.
All the rubble was carted away, and the nave was ready for use by Palm Sunday.
The inscription below the cornice on the tall frieze reads:
QTEMPLATE |
(Paul V (Camillo Borghese), born in Rome but of a Sienese family, liked to emphasize his "Romanness.")
The facade is often cited as the least satisfactory part of the design of St. Peter's.
The reasons for this, according to James Lees-Milne, are that it was not given enough consideration by the Pope and committee because of the desire to get the building completed quickly, coupled with the fact that Maderno was hesitant to deviate from the pattern set by Michelangelo at the other end of the building.
Lees-Milne describes the problems of the façade as being too broad for its height, too cramped in its details and too heavy in the attic story.
The breadth is caused by modifying the plan to have towers on either side.
These towers were never executed above the line of the facade because it was discovered that the ground was not sufficiently stable to bear the weight.
One effect of the facade and lengthened nave is to screen the view of the dome, so that the building, from the front, has no vertical feature, except from a distance.
and somewhat enlarged to fit the new space.
Maderno's nave
To the single bay of Michelangelo's Greek Cross, Maderno added a further three bays.
He made the dimensions slightly different from Michelangelo's bay, thus defining where the two architectural works meet.
Maderno also tilted the axis of the nave slightly.
This was not by accident, as suggested by his critics.
An ancient Egyptian obelisk had been erected in the square outside, but had not been quite aligned with Michelangelo's building, so Maderno compensated, in order that it should, at least, align with the Basilica's façade.
The four cherubs who flutter against the first piers of the nave, carrying between them two holy water basins, appear of quite normal cherubic size, until approached.
Then it becomes apparent that each one is over 2 metres high and that real children cannot reach the basins unless they scramble up the marble draperies.
The aisles each have two smaller chapels and a larger rectangular chapel, the Chapel of the Sacrament and the Choir Chapel.
These are lavishly decorated with marble, stucco, gilt, sculpture and mosaic.
Remarkably, all of the large altarpieces, with the exception of the Holy Trinity by Pietro da Cortona in the Blessed Sacrament Chapel, have been reproduced in mosaic.
Two precious paintings from the old basilica, Our Lady of Perpetual Help and Our Lady of the Column are still being used as altarpieces.
Maderno's last work at St. Peter's was to design a crypt-like space or "Confessio" under the dome, where the cardinals and other privileged persons could descend in order to be nearer to the burial place of the apostle.
Its marble steps are remnants of the old basilica and around its balustrade are 95 bronze lamps.
Influence on church architecture
The design of St. Peter's Basilica, and in particular its dome, has greatly influenced church architecture in Western Christendom.
Within Rome, the huge domed church of Sant'Andrea della Valle was designed by Giacomo della Porta before the completion of St Peter's Basilica, and subsequently worked on by Carlo Maderno.
This was followed by the domes of San Carlo ai Catinari, Sant'Agnese in Agone, and many others.
Christopher Wren's dome at St Paul's Cathedral (London, England), the domes of Karlskirche (Vienna, Austria), St. Nicholas Church (Prague, Czech Republic), and the Pantheon (Paris, France) all pay homage to St Peter's Basilica.
The 19th and early-20th-century architectural revivals brought about the building of a great number of churches that imitate elements of St Peter's to a greater or lesser degree, including St. Mary of the Angels in Chicago, St. Josaphat's Basilica in Milwaukee, Immaculate Heart of Mary in Pittsburgh and Mary, Queen of the World Cathedral in Montreal, which replicates many aspects of St Peter's on a smaller scale.
Post-Modernism has seen free adaptations of St Peter's in the Basilica of Our Lady of Licheń, and the Basilica of Our Lady of Peace of Yamoussoukro.
Bernini's furnishings
Pope Urban VIII and Bernini
As a young boy Gian Lorenzo Bernini (1598-1680) visited St. Peter's with the painter Annibale Carracci and stated his wish to build "a mighty throne for the apostle".
His wish came true.
As a young man, in 1626, he received the patronage of Pope Urban VIII and worked on the embellishment of the Basilica for 50 years.
Appointed as Maderno's successor in 1629, he was to become regarded as the greatest architect and sculptor of the Baroque period.
Bernini's works at St. Peter's include the baldachin (baldaquin, from Italian: baldacchino), the Chapel of the Sacrament, the plan for the niches and loggias in the piers of the dome and the chair of St. Peter.
To hold the sacramental Host, he designed a miniature version in gilt bronze of Bramante's Tempietto, the little chapel that marks the place of the death of St. Peter.
On either side is an angel, one gazing in rapt adoration and the other looking towards the viewer in welcome.
Bernini died in 1680 in his 82nd year.
The obelisk, known as "The Witness", at and a total height, including base and the cross on top, of , is the second largest standing obelisk, and the only one to remain standing since its removal from Egypt and re-erection at the Circus of Nero in 37 AD, where it is thought to have stood witness to the crucifixion of Saint Peter.
Its removal to its present location by order of Pope Sixtus V and engineered by Domenico Fontana on 28 September 1586, was an operation fraught with difficulties and nearly ending in disaster when the ropes holding the obelisk began to smoke from the friction.
Fortunately this problem was noticed by Benedetto Bresca, a sailor of Sanremo, and for his swift intervention, his town was granted the privilege of providing the palms that are used at the basilica each Palm Sunday.
* On the first pier in the right aisle is the monument of Queen Christina of Sweden, who abdicated in 1654 in order to convert to Catholicism.
The second chapel, dedicated to Saint Sebastian, contains the statues of popes Pius XI and Pius XII.
The space below the altar used to be the resting place of Pope Innocent XI but his remains were moved to the Altar of the Transfiguration on 8 April 2011.
This was done to make way for the body of Pope John Paul II.
His remains were placed beneath the altar on 2 May 2011.
The large chapel on the right aisle is the Chapel of the Blessed Sacrament which contains the tabernacle by Bernini (1664) resembling Bramante's Tempietto at San Pietro in Montorio supported by two kneeling angels and with behind it a painting of the Holy Trinity by Pietro da Cortona.
* Near the altar of Our Lady of Succour are the monuments of popes Gregory XIII by Camillo Rusconi (1723) and Gregory XIV.
* At the end of the aisle is an altar containing the relics of Saint Petronilla and with an altarpiece The Burial of St Petronilla by Guercino (Giovanni Francesco Barbieri), 1623.
South aisle
The first chapel in the south aisle is the baptistry, commissioned by Pope Innocent XII and designed by Carlo Fontana, (great nephew of Domenico Fontana).
The font, which was previously located in the opposite chapel, is the red porphyry sarcophagus of Probus, the 4th-century Prefect of Rome.
The lid came from a different sarcophagus, which had once held the remains of the Emperor Hadrian and in removing it from the Vatican Grotto where it had been stored, the workmen broke it into ten pieces.
Fontana restored it expertly and surmounted it with a gilt-bronze figure of the "Lamb of God".
* Against the first pier of the aisle is the Monument to the Royal Stuarts, James and his sons, Charles Edward, known as "Bonnie Prince Charlie" and Henry, Cardinal and Duke of York.
The tomb is a Neo-Classical design by Canova unveiled in 1819.
Opposite it is the memorial of James Francis Edward Stuart's wife, Maria Clementina Sobieska.
The second chapel is that of the Presentation of the Virgin and contains the memorials of Pope Benedict XV and Pope John XXIII.
* Against the piers are the tombs of Pope Pius X and Pope Innocent VIII.
The large chapel off the south aisle is the Choir Chapel which contains the altar of the Immaculate Conception.
* At the entrance to the Sacristy is the tomb of Pope Pius VIII
The south transept contains the altars of Saint Thomas, Saint Joseph and the Crucifixion of Saint Peter.
* The tomb of Fabio Chigi, Pope Alexander VII, towards the end of the aisle, is the work of Bernini and called by Lees-Milne "one of the greatest tombs of the Baroque Age".
It occupies an awkward position, being set in a niche above a doorway into a small vestry, but Bernini has utilized the doorway in a symbolic manner.
Pope Alexander kneels upon his tomb, facing outward.
The tomb is supported on a large draped shroud in patterned red marble, and is supported by four female figures, of whom only the two at the front are fully visible.
They represent Charity and Truth.
The foot of Truth rests upon a globe of the world, her toe being pierced symbolically by the thorn of Protestant England.
Coming forth, seemingly, from the doorway as if it were the entrance to a tomb, is the skeletal winged figure of Death, its head hidden beneath the shroud, but its right hand carrying an hourglass stretched upward towards the kneeling figure of the pope.
File:Rome basilica st peter 011c adjusted.jpg|alt=
Peter is shown as a bearded man in draped garment like a toga.
He is seated on a chair made of marble, and has his right hand raised in a gesture of blessing while in his left hand he holds two large keys.
Behind the statue, the wall is patterned in mosaic to resemble red and gold brocade cloth.|The bronze statue of Saint Peter holding the keys of heaven, attributed to Arnolfo di Cambio.
File:Michelangelo's Pietà, St Peter's Basilica (1498-99).jpg|alt= This marble statue shows the Virgin Mary seated, mourning over the lifeless body of Jesus which is supported across her knees.|The Pietà by Michelangelo is in the north aisle.
Archpriests since 1053
List of archpriests of the Vatican Basilica:
Specifications
Bibliography
