The Berlin Wall (, ) was a guarded concrete barrier that physically and ideologically divided Berlin from 1961 to 1989.
Construction of the Wall was commenced by the German Democratic Republic (GDR, East Germany) on 13 August 1961.
The Wall cut off West Berlin from surrounding East Germany, including East Berlin.
The barrier included guard towers placed along large concrete walls, accompanied by a wide area (later known as the "death strip") that contained anti-vehicle trenches, "fakir beds" and other defenses.
The Eastern Bloc portrayed the Wall as protecting its population from fascist elements conspiring to prevent the "will of the people" in building a socialist state in East Germany.
GDR authorities officially referred to the Berlin Wall as the Anti-Fascist Protection Rampart ().
The West Berlin city government sometimes referred to it as the "Wall of Shame", a term coined by mayor Willy Brandt in reference to the Wall's restriction on freedom of movement.
Along with the separate and much longer Inner German border (IGB), which demarcated the border between East and West Germany, it came to symbolize physically the "Iron Curtain" that separated Western Europe and the Eastern Bloc during the Cold War.
Before the Wall's erection, 3.5 million East Germans circumvented Eastern Bloc emigration restrictions and defected from the GDR, many by crossing over the border from East Berlin into West Berlin; from there they could then travel to West Germany and to other Western European countries.
Between 1961 and 1989 the Wall prevented almost all such emigration.
During this period over 100,000 After several weeks of civil unrest, the East German government announced on 9 November 1989 that all GDR citizens could visit West Germany and West Berlin.
Crowds of East Germans crossed and climbed onto the Wall, joined by West Germans on the other side in a celebratory atmosphere.
Over the next few weeks, euphoric people and souvenir hunters chipped away parts of the Wall.
Within two years, political divisions increased between the Soviets and the other occupying powers.
These included the Soviets' refusal to agree to reconstruction plans making post-war Germany self-sufficient, and to a detailed accounting of industrial plants, goods and infrastructure some of which was already removed by the Soviets.
France, the United Kingdom, the United States, and the Benelux countries later met to combine the non-Soviet zones of Germany into one zone for reconstruction, and to approve the extension of the Marshall Plan.
As early as 1945, Stalin revealed to German communist leaders that he expected to slowly undermine the British position within the British occupation zone, that the United States would withdraw within a year or two, and that nothing would then stand in the way of a united communist Germany within the bloc.
The major task of the ruling communist party in the Soviet zone was to channel Soviet orders down to both the administrative apparatus and the other bloc parties, which in turn would be presented as internal measures.
Property and industry was nationalized in the East German zone.
If statements or decisions deviated from the described line, reprimands and (for persons outside public attention) punishment would ensue, such as imprisonment, torture and even death.
including Soviet SMERSH secret police.
In 1948, following disagreements regarding reconstruction and a new German currency, Stalin instituted the Berlin Blockade, preventing food, materials and supplies from arriving in West Berlin.
The United States, the United Kingdom, France, Canada, Australia, New Zealand and several other countries began a massive "airlift", supplying West Berlin with food and other supplies.
The Soviets mounted a public relations campaign against the Western policy change.
Communists attempted to disrupt the elections of 1948, preceding large losses therein, while 300,000 Berliners demonstrated for the international airlift to continue.
In May 1949, Stalin lifted the blockade, permitting the resumption of Western shipments to Berlin.
The German Democratic Republic (East Germany) was declared on 7 October 1949.
By a secret treaty, the Soviet Ministry of Foreign Affairs accorded the East German state administrative authority, but not autonomy.
The Soviets permeated East German administrative, military, and secret police structures and had full control.
East Germany differed from West Germany (Federal Republic of Germany), which developed into a Western capitalist country with a social market economy and a democratic parliamentary government.
Continual economic growth starting in the 1950s fueled a 20-year "economic miracle" ().
As West Germany's economy grew, and its standard of living steadily improved, many East Germans wanted to move to West Germany.
Emigration westward in the early 1950s
After the Soviet occupation of Eastern Europe at the end of World War II, the majority of those living in the newly acquired areas of the Eastern Bloc aspired to independence and wanted the Soviets to leave.
Taking advantage of the zonal border between occupied zones in Germany, the number of GDR citizens moving to West Germany totaled 187,000 in 1950; 165,000 in 1951; 182,000 in 1952; and 331,000 in 1953.
One reason for the sharp 1953 increase was fear of potential further Sovietization, given the increasingly paranoid actions of Joseph Stalin in late 1952 and early 1953.
226,000 had fled in just the first six months of 1953.
Erection of the inner German border
By the early 1950s, the Soviet approach to controlling national movement, restricting emigration, was emulated by most of the rest of the Eastern Bloc, including East Germany.
The restrictions presented a quandary for some Eastern Bloc states, which had been more economically advanced and open than the Soviet Union, such that crossing borders seemed more natural-especially where no prior border existed between East and West Germany.
Up until 1952, the demarcation lines between East Germany and the western occupied zones could be easily crossed in most places.
On 1 April 1952, East German leaders met the Soviet leader Joseph Stalin in Moscow; during the discussions Stalin's foreign minister Vyacheslav Molotov proposed that the East Germans should "introduce a system of passes for visits of West Berlin residents to the territory of East Berlin so as to stop free movement of Western agents" in the GDR.
Stalin agreed, calling the situation "intolerable".
He advised the East Germans to build up their border defenses, telling them that "The demarcation line between East and West Germany should be considered a border-and not just any border, but a dangerous one ...
The Germans will guard the line of defence with their lives."
Consequently, the inner German border between the two German states was closed, and a barbed-wire fence erected.
The border between the Western and Eastern sectors of Berlin, however, remained open, although traffic between the Soviet and the Western sectors was somewhat restricted.
This resulted in Berlin becoming a magnet for East Germans desperate to escape life in the GDR, and also a flashpoint for tension between the United States and the Soviet Union.
Initially, East Germany granted "visits" to allow its residents access to West Germany.
However, following the defection of large numbers of East Germans (known as Republikflucht) under this regime, the new East German state legally restricted virtually all travel to the West in 1956.
the border in Berlin remained considerably more accessible because it was administered by all four occupying powers.
On 11 December 1957, East Germany introduced a new passport law that reduced the overall number of refugees leaving Eastern Germany.
The Berlin sector border was essentially a "loophole" through which Eastern Bloc citizens could still escape.
Andropov reported that, while the East German leadership stated that they were leaving for economic reasons, testimony from refugees indicated that the reasons were more political than material.
The brain drain of professionals had become so damaging to the political credibility and economic viability of East Germany that the re-securing of the German communist frontier was imperative.
The exodus of emigrants from East Germany presented two minor potential benefits: an easy opportunity to smuggle East German secret agents to West Germany, and a reduction in the number of citizens hostile to the communist regime.
Neither of these advantages, however, proved particularly useful.
Construction begins, 1961
On 15 June 1961, First Secretary of the Socialist Unity Party and GDR State Council chairman Walter Ulbricht stated in an international press conference, (No one has the intention of erecting a wall!).
It was the first time the colloquial term (wall) had been used in this context.
The transcript of a telephone call between Nikita Khrushchev and Ulbricht, on 1 August in the same year, suggests that the initiative for the construction of the Wall came from Khrushchev.
However, other sources suggest that Khrushchev had initially been wary about building a wall, fearing negative Western reaction.
Nevertheless, Ulbricht had pushed for a border closure for quite some time, arguing that East Germany's very existence was at stake.
A feeling of miscalculation and failure was admitted by Kennedy, immediately afterwards, in a candid interview with New York Times columnist James "Scotty" Reston.
On Saturday, 12 August 1961, the leaders of the GDR attended a garden party at a government guesthouse in , in a wooded area to the north of East Berlin.
There, Ulbricht signed the order to close the border and erect a wall.
The date of 13 August became commonly referred to as Barbed Wire Sunday in Germany.
and the Lenné Triangle that is now much of the Potsdamer Platz development.
Later, the initial barrier was built up into the Wall proper, the first concrete elements and large blocks being put in place on 17 August.
During the construction of the Wall, National People's Army (NVA) and Combat Groups of the Working Class (KdA) soldiers stood in front of it with orders to shoot anyone who attempted to defect.
Additionally, chain fences, walls, minefields and other obstacles were installed along the length of East Germany's western border with West Germany proper.
A huge no man's land was cleared to provide a clear line of fire at fleeing refugees.
Immediate effects
With the closing of the East-West sector boundary in Berlin, the vast majority of East Germans could no longer travel or emigrate to West Germany.
Berlin soon went from being the easiest place to make an unauthorized crossing between East and West Germany to being the most difficult.
Many families were split, while East Berliners employed in the West were cut off from their jobs.
West Berlin became an isolated exclave in a hostile land.
West Berliners demonstrated against the Wall, led by their Mayor () Willy Brandt, who strongly criticized the United States for failing to respond.
Allied intelligence agencies had hypothesized about a wall to stop the flood of refugees, but the main candidate for its location was around the perimeter of the city.
In 1961, Secretary of State Dean Rusk proclaimed, "The Wall certainly ought not to be a permanent feature of the European landscape.
I see no reason why the Soviet Union should think it is-it is to their advantage in any way to leave there that monument to communist failure."
The East German government claimed that the Wall was an "anti-fascist protective rampart" () intended to dissuade aggression from the West.
Another official justification was the activities of Western agents in Eastern Europe.
The Eastern German government also claimed that West Berliners were buying out state-subsidized goods in East Berlin.
East Germans and others greeted such statements with skepticism, as most of the time, the border was only closed for citizens of East Germany traveling to the West, but not for residents of West Berlin travelling to the East.
The construction of the Wall had caused considerable hardship to families divided by it.
Most people believed that the Wall was mainly a means of preventing the citizens of East Germany from entering or fleeing to West Berlin.
Secondary response
The National Security Agency was the only American intelligence agency that was aware that East Germany was to take action to deal with the brain drain problem.
On 9 August 1961, the NSA intercepted an advance warning information of the Socialist Unity Party's plan to close the intra-Berlin border between East and West Berlin completely for foot traffic.
The interagency intelligence Berlin Watch Committee assessed that this intercept "might be the first step in a plan to close the border."
In response to the erection of the Berlin Wall, a retired general, Lucius D. Clay, was appointed by Kennedy as his special advisor and sent to Berlin with ambassadorial rank.
Clay had been the Military Governor of the US Zone of Occupation in Germany during the period of the Berlin Blockade and had ordered the first measures in what became the Berlin Airlift.
He was immensely popular with the residents of West Berlin, and his appointment was an unambiguous sign that Kennedy would not compromise on the status of West Berlin.
Clay and Vice President Lyndon B. Johnson arrived at Tempelhof Airport on the afternoon of Saturday, 19 August 1961.
On Sunday morning, U.S. troops marched from West Germany through East Germany, bound for West Berlin.
Lead elements-arranged in a column of 491 vehicles and trailers carrying 1,500 men, divided into five march units-left the Helmstedt-Marienborn checkpoint at 06:34.
At Marienborn, the Soviet checkpoint next to Helmstedt on the West German-East German border, US personnel were counted by guards.
The column was long, and covered from Marienborn to Berlin in full battle gear.
East German police watched from beside trees next to the autobahn all the way along.
The creation of the Wall had important implications for both German states.
By stemming the exodus of people from East Germany, the East German government was able to reassert its control over the country: in spite of discontent with the Wall, economic problems caused by dual currency and the black market were largely eliminated.
The economy in the GDR began to grow.
But, the Wall proved a public relations disaster for the communist bloc as a whole.
Western powers portrayed it as a symbol of communist tyranny, particularly after East German border guards shot and killed would-be defectors.
Such fatalities were later treated as acts of murder by the reunified Germany.
Structure and adjacent areas
Layout and modifications
The Berlin Wall was more than long.
In June 1962, a second, parallel fence was built some farther into East German territory.
The houses contained between the fences were razed and the inhabitants relocated, thus establishing what later became known as the death strip.
The death strip was covered with raked sand or gravel, rendering footprints easy to notice, easing the detection of trespassers and also enabling officers to see which guards had neglected their task;
The "fourth-generation Wall", known officially as "" (retaining wall element UL 12.11), was the final and most sophisticated version of the Wall.
Begun in 1975 and completed about 1980, it was constructed from 45,000 separate sections of reinforced concrete, each high and wide, and cost DDM16,155,000 or about US$3,638,000.
The concrete provisions added to this version of the Wall were done to prevent escapees from driving their cars through the barricades.
At strategic points, the Wall was constructed to a somewhat weaker standard, so that East German and Soviet armored vehicles could easily break through in the event of war.
and 20 bunkers with hundreds of guards.
This version of the Wall is the one most commonly seen in photographs, and surviving fragments of the Wall in Berlin and elsewhere around the world are generally pieces of the fourth-generation Wall.
The layout came to resemble the inner German border in most technical aspects, except that the Berlin Wall had no landmines nor spring-guns.
Maintenance was performed on the outside of the wall by personnel who accessed the area outside it either via ladders or via hidden doors within the wall.
These doors could not be opened by a single person, needing two separate keys in two separate keyholes to unlock.
As was the case with the inner German border, an unfortified strip of Eastern territory was left outside the wall.
This outer strip was used by workers to paint over graffiti and perform other maintenance on the outside of the wall Graffiti artist Thierry Noir has reported having often been pursued there by East German soldiers.
While some graffiti artists were chased off the outer strip, others, such as Keith Haring, were seemingly tolerated.
Surrounding municipalities
Besides the sector-sector boundary within Berlin itself, the Wall also separated West Berlin from the present-day state of Brandenburg.
The following present-day municipalities, listed in counter-clockwise direction, share a border with former West Berlin:
* Oberhavel : Mühlenbecker Land , Glienicke/Nordbahn, Hohen Neuendorf, Hennigsdorf
* Havelland :
Schönwalde-Glien, Falkensee, Dallgow-Döberitz
* Potsdam-Mittelmark : Stahnsdorf, Kleinmachnow, Teltow
Official crossings and usage
There were nine border crossings between East and West Berlin.
These allowed visits by West Berliners, other West Germans, Western foreigners and Allied personnel into East Berlin, as well as visits by GDR citizens and citizens of other socialist countries into West Berlin, provided that they held the necessary permits.
These crossings were restricted according to which nationality was allowed to use it (East Germans, West Germans, West Berliners, other countries).
The most famous was the vehicle and pedestrian checkpoint at the corner of Friedrichstraße and Zimmerstraße, also known as Checkpoint Charlie, which was restricted to Allied personnel and foreigners.
Several other border crossings existed between West Berlin and surrounding East Germany.
These could be used for transit between West Germany and West Berlin, for visits by West Berliners into East Germany, for transit into countries neighbouring East Germany (Poland, Czechoslovakia, Denmark), and for visits by East Germans into West Berlin carrying a permit.
After the 1972 agreements, new crossings were opened to allow West Berlin waste to be transported into East German dumps, as well as some crossings for access to West Berlin's exclaves (see Steinstücken).
Four autobahns connected West Berlin to West Germany, the most famous being the Berlin-Helmstedt autobahn, which entered East German territory between the towns of Helmstedt and Marienborn (Checkpoint Alpha), and which entered West Berlin at Dreilinden (Checkpoint Bravo for the Allied forces) in southwestern Berlin.
Access to West Berlin was also possible by railway (four routes) and by boat for commercial shipping via canals and rivers.
Non-German Westerners could cross the border at Friedrichstraße station in East Berlin and at Checkpoint Charlie.
When the Wall was erected, Berlin's complex public transit networks, the S-Bahn and U-Bahn, were divided with it.
Crossing
West Germans and citizens of other Western countries could generally visit East Germany, often after applying for a visa at an East German embassy several weeks in advance.
Visas for day trips restricted to East Berlin were issued without previous application in a simplified procedure at the border crossing.
However, East German authorities could refuse entry permits without stating a reason.
In the 1980s, visitors from the western part of the city who wanted to visit the eastern part had to exchange at least DM 25 into East German currency at the poor exchange rate of 1:1.
It was forbidden to export East German currency from the East, but money not spent could be left at the border for possible future visits.
Tourists crossing from the west had to also pay for a visa, which cost DM 5; West Berliners did not have to pay this.
Prior official figures listed 98 as being killed.
The East German government issued shooting orders (Schießbefehl) to border guards dealing with defectors, though such orders are not the same as "shoot to kill" orders.
GDR officials denied issuing the latter.
In an October 1973 order later discovered by researchers, guards were instructed that people attempting to cross the Wall were criminals and needed to be shot: "Do not hesitate to use your firearm, not even when the border is breached in the company of women and children, which is a tactic the traitors have often used".
Early successful escapes involved people jumping the initial barbed wire or leaping out of apartment windows along the line, but these ended as the Wall was fortified.
East German authorities no longer permitted apartments near the Wall to be occupied, and any building near the Wall had its windows boarded and later bricked up.
On 15 August 1961, Conrad Schumann was the first East German border guard to escape by jumping the barbed wire to West Berlin.
On 22 August 1961, Ida Siekmann was the first casualty at the Berlin Wall: she died after she jumped out of her third floor apartment at 48 Bernauer Strasse.
The first person to be shot and killed while trying to cross to West Berlin was Günter Litfin, a twenty-four-year-old tailor.
He attempted to swim across the Spree to West Berlin on 24 August 1961, the same day that East German police had received shoot-to-kill orders to prevent anyone from escaping.
Another dramatic escape was carried out on April 1963 by Wolfgang Engels, a 19-year-old civilian employee of the Nationale Volksarmee (NVA).
Engels stole a Soviet armored personnel carrier from a base where he was deployed and drove it right into the Wall.
He was fired at and seriously wounded by border guards.
But a West German policeman intervened, firing his weapon at the East German border guards.
The policeman removed Engels from the vehicle, which had become entangled in the barbed wire.
East Germans successfully defected by a variety of methods: digging long tunnels under the Wall, waiting for favorable winds and taking a hot air balloon, sliding along aerial wires, flying ultralights and, in one instance, simply driving a sports car at full speed through the basic, initial fortifications.
When a metal beam was placed at checkpoints to prevent this kind of defection, up to four people (two in the front seats and possibly two in the boot) drove under the bar in a sports car that had been modified to allow the roof and windscreen to come away when it made contact with the beam.
They lay flat and kept driving forward.
The East Germans then built zig-zagging roads at checkpoints.
The sewer system predated the Wall, and some people escaped through the sewers, in a number of cases with assistance from the Unternehmen Reisebüro.
An airborne escape was made by Thomas Krüger, who landed a Zlin Z 42M light aircraft of the Gesellschaft für Sport und Technik, an East German youth military training organization, at RAF Gatow.
His aircraft, registration DDR-WOH, was dismantled and returned to the East Germans by road, complete with humorous slogans painted on it by airmen of the Royal Air Force, such as "Wish you were here" and "Come back soon".
DDR-WOH is still flying today, but under the registration D-EWOH.
If an escapee was wounded in a crossing attempt and lay on the death strip, no matter how close they were to the Western wall, Westerners could not intervene for fear of triggering engaging fire from the 'Grepos', the East Berlin border guards.
The guards often let fugitives bleed to death in the middle of this ground, as in the most notorious failed attempt, that of Peter Fechter (aged 18).
He was shot and bled to death, in full view of the Western media, on 17 August 1962.
Fechter's death created negative publicity worldwide that led the leaders of East Berlin to place more restrictions on shooting in public places, and provide medical care for possible "would-be escapers".
The last person to be shot and killed while trying to cross the border was Chris Gueffroy on 6 February 1989, while the final person to die in an escape attempt was Winfried Freudenberg who was killed when his homemade natural gas-filled balloon crashed on 8 March 1989.
The Wall gave rise to a widespread sense of desperation and oppression in East Berlin, as expressed in the private thoughts of one resident, who confided to her diary "Our lives have lost their spirit...we can do nothing to stop them."
Concerts by Western artists and growing anti-Wall sentiment
QTEMPLATE |text=Every stone bears witness to the moral bankruptcy of the society it encloses
- Margaret Thatcher commenting about the wall, West Berlin, 1982
David Bowie, 1987
On 6 June 1987, David Bowie, who earlier for several years lived and recorded in West Berlin, played a concert close to the Wall.
This was attended by thousands of Eastern concertgoers across the Wall, followed by violent rioting in East Berlin.
According to Tobias Ruther, these protests in East Berlin were the first in the sequence of riots that led to those of November 1989.
Although other factors were probably more influential in the fall of the Wall,
Bruce Springsteen, 1988
On 19 July 1988, 16 months before the Wall came down, Bruce Springsteen and the E-Street Band, played Rocking the Wall, a live concert in East Berlin, which was attended by 300,000 in person and broadcast delayed on television.
Springsteen spoke to the crowd in German, saying: "I'm not here for or against any government.
I've come to play rock 'n' roll for you in the hope that one day all the barriers will be torn down".
East Germany and its FDJ youth organization were worried they were losing an entire generation.
They hoped that by letting Springsteen in, they could improve their sentiment among East Germans.
However, this strategy of "one step backwards, two steps forwards" backfired and the concert only made East Germans hungrier for more of the freedoms that Springsteen epitomized.
While John F. Kennedy and Ronald Reagan delivered their famous speeches from the safety of West Berlin, Springsteen's speaking out against the Wall in the middle of East Berlin added to the euphoria.
"Ich bin ein Berliner" and "Mr. Gorbachev, tear down this Wall."
On 26 June 1963, 22 months after the erection of the Berlin Wall, U.S. President John F. Kennedy visited West Berlin.
Speaking from a platform erected on the steps of Rathaus Schöneberg for an audience of 450,000 he declared in his Ich bin ein Berliner speech the support of the United States for West Germany and the people of West Berlin in particular:
QTEMPLATE |Two thousand years ago, the proudest boast was civis romanus sum "I am a Roman citizen".
Today, in the world of freedom, the proudest boast is "Ich bin ein Berliner!"... All free men, wherever they may live, are citizens of Berlin, and therefore, as a free man, I take pride in the words "Ich bin ein Berliner!"
The message was aimed as much at the Soviets as it was at Berliners and was a clear statement of U.S. policy in the wake of the construction of the Berlin Wall.
The speech is considered one of Kennedy's best, both a notable moment of the Cold War and a high point of the New Frontier.
It was a great morale boost for West Berliners, who lived in an exclave deep inside East Germany and feared a possible East German occupation.
In a speech at the Brandenburg Gate commemorating the 750th anniversary of Berlin on 12 June 1987, U.S. President Ronald Reagan challenged Mikhail Gorbachev, then the General Secretary of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, to tear down the Wall as a symbol of increasing freedom in the Eastern Bloc:
QTEMPLATE |We welcome change and openness; for we believe that freedom and security go together, that the advance of human liberty can only strengthen the cause of world peace.
There is one sign the Soviets can make that would be unmistakable, that would advance dramatically the cause of freedom and peace.
General Secretary Gorbachev, if you seek peace, if you seek prosperity for the Soviet Union and eastern Europe, if you seek liberalization, come here to this gate.
Mr. Gorbachev, open this gate.
Mr. Gorbachev, tear down this Wall!
Fall of the Berlin Wall
The fall of the communist government in neighboring Poland's 1989 Polish legislative election in June played a role in the fall of the Berlin Wall.
Also in June 1989 the Hungarian government began dismantling the electrified fence along its border with Austria (with Western TV crews present), and then, in September, more than 13,000 East German tourists escaped through Hungary to Austria.
This set up a chain of events.
The Hungarians prevented many more East Germans from crossing the border and returned them to Budapest.
These East Germans flooded the West German embassy and refused to return to East Germany.
The East German government responded by disallowing any further travel to Hungary, but allowed those already there to return to East Germany.
The protest demonstrations grew considerably by early November.
The movement neared its height on 4 November, when half a million people gathered to demand political change, at the Alexanderplatz demonstration, East Berlin's large public square and transportation hub.
On 9 October 1989, the police and army units were given permission to use force against those assembled, but this did not deter the church service and march from taking place, which gathered 70,000 people.
Many of those people started to cross into West Berlin, without a shot being fired.
The longtime leader of East Germany, Erich Honecker, resigned on 18 October 1989 and was replaced by Egon Krenz that day.
Honecker had predicted in January of that year that the Wall would stand for 50 or 100 more years
Günter Schabowski, the party boss in East Berlin and the spokesman for the SED Politburo, had the task of announcing the new regulations.
However, he had not been involved in the discussions about the new regulations and had not been fully updated.
Shortly before a press conference on 9 November, he was handed a note announcing the changes, but given no further instructions on how to handle the information.
These regulations had only been completed a few hours earlier and were to take effect the following day, so as to allow time to inform the border guards.
But this starting time delay was not communicated to Schabowski.
At the end of the press conference, Schabowski read out loud the note he had been given.
A reporter, ANSA's Riccardo Ehrman, asked when the regulations would take effect.
After a few seconds' hesitation, Schabowski replied, "As far as I know, it takes effect immediately, without delay".
He repeated that it was immediate in an interview with American journalist Tom Brokaw.
(In 2009 Ehrman said that a GDR official who was a personal friend had actually specifically requested that Ehrman ask about the travel law during the press conference, but Schabowski called that absurd.
As the Ossis swarmed through, they were greeted by Wessis waiting with flowers and champagne amid wild rejoicing.
Soon afterward, a crowd of West Berliners jumped on top of the Wall, and were soon joined by East German youngsters.
The evening of 9 November 1989 is known as the night the Wall came down.
Another border crossing to the south may have been opened earlier.
An account by Heinz Schäfer indicates that he also acted independently and ordered the opening of the gate at Waltersdorf-Rudow a couple of hours earlier.
This may explain reports of East Berliners appearing in West Berlin earlier than the opening of the Bornholmer Straße border crossing.
Legacy
File:Berlin Wall (13-8-2006).jpg|Remaining stretch of the Wall near Ostbahnhof in Friedrichshain called East Side Gallery, August 2006
File:Berlin wall 1.jpg|Remains of the Wall adjacent to the Topography of Terror, August 2007
File:Checkpoint Charlie Memorial.
JPG|A memorial of over a thousand crosses and a segment of the Wall for those who died trying to cross.
The memorial stood for ten months in 2004 and 2005 before it was removed.
File:BERLINER MAUER 1961-1989 plaque.jpg|A
"BERLINER MAUER 1961-1989" plaque near Checkpoint Charlie signifying where the Wall stood
File:Fort Gordon's Berlin Wall Display.
JPG|Display of two sections of the Wall and a "You are leaving" sign at Fort Gordon, Georgia
File:Berlin Wall from the East.jpg|The Berlin Wall from the East Berlin side, 1967
File:Berlin wall-1.jpg|A sign reading "Until we see each other again in the capital of the GDR"
File:Berlin wall-3.jpg|Czech hedgehog antitank obstacles and the Wall
File:Berlin Wall Exhibition 2014-1.jpg|An exhibition dedicated to the 25th anniversary to the Berlin Wall destruction was located at Potsdamer Platz Arkaden
File:Tracé du Mur de Berlin près de Potsdamer Platz, 2015.JPG|Line indicating where the Wall once stood, just off Potsdamer Platz, in 2015
Little is left of the Wall at its original site, which was destroyed almost in its entirety.
Three long sections are still standing: an piece of the first (westernmost) wall at the Topography of Terror, site of the former Gestapo headquarters, halfway between Checkpoint Charlie and Potsdamer Platz; a longer section of the second (easternmost) wall along the Spree River near the Oberbaumbrücke, nicknamed East Side Gallery; and a third section that is partly reconstructed, in the north at Bernauer Straße, which was turned into a memorial in 1999.
Other isolated fragments, lampposts, other elements, and a few watchtowers also remain in various parts of the city.
The former leadership in the Schlesischen Busch in the vicinity of the Puschkinallee-the listed, twelve-meter high watchtower stands in a piece of the wall strip, which has been turned into a park, near the Lohmühleninsel
The former "Kieler Eck" (Kiel Corner) on Kieler Strasse in Mitte, close to the Berlin-Spandau Schifffahrtskanal-the tower is protected as a historic monument and now surrounded on three sides by new buildings.
It houses a memorial site named after the Wallopfer Günter Litfin, who was shot at Humboldthafen in August 1961.
The memorial site, which is run by the initiative of his brother Jürgen Liftin, can be viewed after registration.
The former management office at Nieder Neuendorf, in the district of Hennigsdorf of the same name-here is the permanent exhibition on the history of the border installations between the two German states.
The former management station at Bergfelde, today the district of Hohen Neuendorf-The tower is located in an already reforested area of the border strip and is used together with surrounding terrain as a nature protection tower by the Deutschen Waldjugend.
* The only one of the much slimmer observation towers (BT-11) in the Erna-Berger-Strasse also in Mitte-however, was moved by a few meters for construction work and is no longer in the original location; There is an exhibition about the wall in the area of the Potsdamer Platz in planning.
Nothing still accurately represents the Wall's original appearance better than a very short stretch at Bernauer Straße associated with the Berlin Wall Documentation Center.
Other remnants are badly damaged by souvenir seekers.
Fragments of the Wall were taken and some were sold around the world.
Appearing both with and without certificates of authenticity, these fragments are now a staple on the online auction service eBay as well as German souvenir shops.
Today, the eastern side is covered in graffiti that did not exist while the Wall was guarded by the armed soldiers of East Germany.
Previously, graffiti appeared only on the western side.
Along some tourist areas of the city centre, the city government has marked the location of the former Wall by a row of cobblestones in the street.
In most places only the "first" wall is marked, except near Potsdamer Platz where the stretch of both walls is marked, giving visitors an impression of the dimension of the barrier system.
After the fall of Berlin Wall, there were initiatives that they want to preserve the death strip walkways and redevelop it into a hiking and cycling area, known as Berliner Mauerweg.
It is part of the initiative by Berlin Senate since 2005.
Cultural differences
For many years after reunification, people in Germany talked about cultural differences between East and West Germans (colloquially Ossis and Wessis), sometimes described as Mauer im Kopf (The wall in the head).
A September 2004 poll found that 25 percent of West Germans and 12 percent of East Germans wished that East and West should be separated again by a "Wall".
A poll taken in October 2009 on the occasion of the 20th anniversary of the fall of the Wall indicated, however, that only about a tenth of the population was still unhappy with the unification (8 percent in the East; 12 percent in the West).
Although differences are still perceived between East and West, Germans make similar distinctions between North and South.
A 2011 poll conducted by Russia's VTsIOM, found that more than half of all Russians do not know who built the Berlin Wall.
Ten percent of people surveyed thought Berlin residents built it themselves.
Six percent said Western powers built it and four percent thought it was a "bilateral initiative" of the Soviet Union and the West.
Fifty-eight percent said they did not know who built it, with just 24 percent correctly naming the Soviet Union and its then-communist ally East Germany.
Wall segments around the world
Not all segments of the Wall were ground up as the Wall was being torn down.
Many segments have been given to various institutions in the world.
They can be found, for instance, in presidential and historical museums, lobbies of hotels and corporations, at universities and government buildings, and in public spaces in different countries of the world.
50th anniversary commemoration
On 13 August 2011, Germany marked the 50th anniversary of East Germany beginning the erection of the Berlin Wall.
Chancellor Angela Merkel joined with President Christian Wulff and Berlin Mayor Klaus Wowereit at the Bernauer Straße memorial park to remember lives and liberty.
Speeches extolled freedom and a minute of silence at noon honored those who died trying to flee to the West.
"It is our shared responsibility to keep the memory alive and to pass it on to the coming generations as a reminder to stand up for freedom and democracy to ensure that such injustice may never happen again," entreated Mayor Wowereit.
"It has been shown once again: Freedom is invincible at the end.
No wall can permanently withstand the desire for freedom", proclaimed President Wulff."
Related media
* Documentary films specifically about the Berlin Wall:
** The Tunnel, a NBC News Special documentary film broadcast in December 1962
** Something to Do with the Wall, 1991 documentary about the fall of the Berlin Wall by Ross McElwee and Marilyn Levine, originally conceived as a commemoration of the 25th anniversary of its construction.
** Rabbit à la Berlin, a 2009 documentary film, directed by Bartek Konopka, told from point of view of a group of wild rabbits that inhabited the zone between the two walls
* Fictional films featuring the Berlin Wall have included:
The Spy Who Came in from the Cold, 1965 - Cold War classic set on both sides of The Wall, from the book by John le Carré, directed by Martin Ritt
The Boy and the Ball and the Hole in the Wall, Spanish-Mexican co-production, 1965
** Funeral in Berlin, 1966 - Spy movie starring Michael Caine, directed by Guy Hamilton
** Casino Royale, 1967 - featuring a segment centred on a house apparently bisected by the Wall.
The Wicked Dreams of Paula Schultz, 1968 - Cold War spy farce about an Olympic athlete who defects.
Director George Marshall
** Berlin Tunnel 21, 1981 - A made-for-TV movie about a former American officer leading an attempt to build a tunnel underneath The Wall as a rescue route.
The Soldier, 1982 - A renegade KGB team put nuclear weapons in Saudi Arabia to force America to make the Israelis pull out of the West Bank or the bomb will make 50% of the world's oil radioactive for decades.
The title character of the movie has a team break into a missile silo in Smith Center, Kansas to obtain independent launch capability, then he and an Israeli security agent drive an automobile from West Germany over the Berlin Wall into East Germany where he informs the KGB agents that if the nuke goes off in Saudi Arabia, his team in Kansas will nuke Moscow.
The Innocent, 1993 - About the joint CIA/MI6 operation to build a tunnel under East Berlin in the 1950s.
Directed by John Schlesinger
** The Tunnel, 2001 - Dramatization of a collaborative tunnel under the Wall.
Film by Roland Suso Richter
In the 2015 film Bridge of Spies, Frederic Pryor, an American economics graduate student, visits his German girlfriend in East Berlin just as the Berlin Wall is being built.
He tries to bring her back into West Berlin, but is stopped by Stasi agents and arrested as a spy.
** John le Carré, The Spy Who Came in from the Cold, 1963 - Classic Cold War spy fiction
** Len Deighton, Berlin Game, 1983 - Classic Cold War spy fiction
** T.H.E. Hill, The Day Before the Berlin Wall: Could We Have Stopped It? -
An Alternate History of Cold War Espionage, 2010 - based on a legend told in Berlin in the 1970s
** John Marks, The Wall, 1999 NYT Review - an American spy defects to the East just hours before the Wall falls
** Marcia Preston, West of the Wall (published as Trudy's Promise in North America), 2008 - Left behind in East Berlin, the heroine waits for news of her husband after he makes his escape over the Berlin Wall
** Peter Schneider, The Wall Jumper, 1984 (German: Der Mauerspringer, 1982) - the Wall plays a central role in this novel set in Berlin of the 1980s
** "West of the Wall, a 1962 top 40 hit by Toni Fisher, told the tale of two lovers separated by the newly-built Berlin Wall.
** "Holidays in the Sun", a song by the English punk rock band The Sex Pistols prominently mentions the Wall, specifically singer Johnny Rotten's fantasy of digging a tunnel under it.
** David Bowie's "Heroes" was inspired by the image of a couple kissing at the Berlin Wall (in reality, the couple was his producer Tony Visconti and backup singer Antonia Maaß).
The song (which, along with the album of the same name, were recorded in Berlin), makes lyrical references to the kissing couple, and to the "Wall of Shame" ("the shame was on the other side").
Upon his death, the German Foreign Office paid homage to Bowie on Twitter,: see also above
** , a 1984 song by Dutch pop band , about the differences between East and West Berlin during the period of the Berlin Wall.
** "Chippin' Away", a song by Tom Fedora, as performed by Crosby, Stills & Nash on the Berlin Wall appeared on Graham Nash's 1986 solo album Innocent Eyes.
The music video for Liza Fox's song "Free" (2013) contain video clips of the fall of the Berlin Wall.
In the year 1982 the West-German artist created about 500 artworks along the former border strip around West-Berlin as part of his work series "Border Injuries".
On one of his actions he even tore down a large part of the Wall, installed a prepared foil of 3x2m in it and finished the painting there before the border soldiers on patrol could detect him.
This performance was even recorded on video.
His actions are well-documented both in newspapers from that time and in recent scientific publications.
**The Day the Wall Came Down, 1997 and 1998 sculptures by Veryl Goodnight, depict five horses leaping over actual pieces of the Berlin Wall.
** 1999's SimCity 3000 featured a scenario taking place at the end of the Cold War, where the player must demolish the wall and re-unite East and West Berlin, being given 5 years in the game to complete the task.
The longer it takes to complete the goals results in riots in the city.
** The "First Strike" downloadable content pack for 2010s Call of Duty: Black Ops includes a multiplayer map that takes place at the Berlin Wall ("Berlin Wall")
The introductory video to the Rise and Fall expansion for Civilization VI depicts a woman striking the wall with a sledgehammer.
** In April 2018 game publisher Playway S.A. announced that Polish game studio K202 is working on http:/ component -the1berlin?Itemid=131
The Berlin Wall game, projected to be released in November 2019.
