The red fox (Vulpes vulpes) is the largest of the true foxes and one of the most widely distributed members of the order Carnivora, being present across the entire Northern Hemisphere from the Arctic Circle to North Africa, North America and Eurasia.
It is listed as least concern by the IUCN.
The red fox originated from smaller-sized ancestors from Eurasia during the Middle Villafranchian period, Among the true foxes, the red fox represents a more progressive form in the direction of carnivory.
Apart from its large size, the red fox is distinguished from other fox species by its ability to adapt quickly to new environments.
Despite its name, the species often produces individuals with other colourings, including leucistic and melanistic individuals.
The species primarily feeds on small rodents, though it may also target rabbits, game birds, reptiles, invertebrates Although the red fox tends to kill smaller predators, including other fox species, it is vulnerable to attack from larger predators, such as wolves, coyotes, golden jackals and medium- and large-sized felines.
The species has a long history of association with humans, having been extensively hunted as a pest and furbearer for many centuries, as well as being represented in human folklore and mythology.
Because of its widespread distribution and large population, the red fox is one of the most important furbearing animals harvested for the fur trade.
Too small to pose a threat to humans, it has extensively benefited from the presence of human habitation, and has successfully colonised many suburban and urban areas.
Domestication of the red fox is also underway in Russia, and has resulted in the domesticated red fox.
Terminology
Females are called vixens, and young cubs are known as kits.
Although the Arctic fox has a small native population in northern Scandinavia, while the corsac fox's range extends into European Russia, the red fox is the only fox native to Western Europe, and so is simply called "the fox" in colloquial British English.
The word "fox" comes from Old English, which derived from Proto-Germanic *fuhsaz.
Compare with West Frisian foks, Dutch vos, and German Fuchs.
This, in turn, derives from Proto-Indo-European *puḱ- 'thick-haired; tail'.
Compare to the Hindi pū̃ch 'tail', Tocharian B päkā 'tail; chowrie', and Lithuanian paustìs 'fur'.
The bushy tail also forms the basis for the fox's Welsh name, llwynog, literally 'bushy', from llwyn 'bush'.
Likewise, from rabo 'tail', Lithuanian uodẽgis from uodegà 'tail', and Ojibwa waagosh from waa, which refers to the up and down "bounce" or flickering of an animal or its tail.
The scientific term vulpes derives from the Latin word for fox, and gives the adjectives vulpine and vulpecular.
Evolution
The red fox is considered a more specialised form of Vulpes than the Afghan, corsac and Bengal foxes in the direction of size and adaptation to carnivory; the skull displays far fewer neotenous traits than in other species, and its facial area is more developed.
The earliest fossil specimens of V. vulpes were uncovered in Baranya, Hungary dating from 3.4-1.8 million years ago.
The ancestral species was likely smaller than the current one, as the earliest red fox fossils are smaller than modern populations.
Colonisation of North America
Red foxes colonised the North American continent in two waves: during or before the Illinoian glaciation, and during the Wisconsinan glaciation.
In the far north, red fox fossils have been found in Sangamonian Stage deposits in the Fairbanks District and Medicine Hat.
Fossils dating from the Wisconsinan are present in 25 sites in Arkansas, California, Colorado, Idaho, Missouri, New Mexico, Tennessee, Texas, Virginia, and Wyoming.
Although they ranged far south during the Wisconsinan, the onset of warm conditions shrank their range toward the north, and have only recently reclaimed their former American ranges because of human-induced environmental changes.
Although European foxes were introduced to portions of the United States in the 1900s recent genetic investigation indicates an absence of European fox haplotypes in any North American populations.
Also, introduced eastern red foxes have colonized southern California, the San Joaquin Valley, and San Francisco Bay Area, but appear to have mixed with the Sacramento Valley red fox (V. fulva patwin) only in a narrow hybrid zone.
In addition, no evidence is seen of interbreeding of eastern red foxes in California with the montane Sierra Nevada red fox V. v. necator or other populations in the Intermountain West (between the Rocky Mountains to the east and the Cascade and Sierra Nevada ranges to the west.
Subspecies
The 3rd edition of Mammal Species of the World listed 45 subspecies as valid.
In 2010, another distinct subspecies, which inhabits the grasslands of the Sacramento Valley, V. v. patwin, was identified through mitochondrial haplotype studies.
Castello (2018) recognized 30 subspecies of the Old World red fox and 9 subspecies of the North American red fox as valid.
Substantial gene pool mixing between different subspecies is known; British red foxes have crossbred extensively with foxes imported from Germany, France, Belgium, Sardinia, and possibly Siberia and Scandinavia.
However, genetic studies suggest very little differences between red foxes sampled across Europe.
Lack of genetic diversity is consistent with the red fox being a highly vagile species, with one red fox covering in under a year's time.
Red fox subspecies in Eurasia and North Africa are divided into two categories: is fluffy and reaches the ground when in a standing position.
Their pupils are oval and vertically oriented.
Vixens normally have four pairs of teats, However, relative to dimensions, red foxes are much lighter than similarly sized dogs of the genus Canis.
Their limb bones, for example, weigh 30 percent less per unit area of bone than expected for similarly sized dogs.
They display significant individual, sexual, age and geographical variation in size.
On average, adults measure high at the shoulder and in body length with tails measuring .
The ears measure and the hind feet .
Weights range from , with vixens typically weighing 15-20% less than males.
Adult red foxes have skulls measuring , while those of vixens measure .
The largest red fox on record in Great Britain was a , long male, killed in Aberdeenshire, Scotland, in early 2012.
Fur
The winter fur is dense, soft, silky and relatively long.
For the northern foxes, the fur is very long, dense and fluffy, but is shorter, sparser and coarser in southern forms.
The anal sacs act as fermentation chambers in which aerobic and anaerobic bacteria convert sebum into odorous compounds, including aliphatic acids.
The oval-shaped caudal gland is long and wide, and reportedly smells of violets.
A male fox raises one hind leg and his urine is sprayed forward in front of him, whereas a female fox squats down so that the urine is sprayed in the ground between the hind legs.
Urine is also used to mark empty cache sites, used to store found food, as reminders not to waste time investigating them.
The use of up to 12 different urination postures allows them to precisely control the position of the scent mark.
Red foxes live in family groups sharing a joint territory.
In favourable habitats and/or areas with low hunting pressure, subordinate foxes may be present in a range.
Subordinate foxes may number one or two, sometimes up to eight in one territory.
These subordinates could be formerly dominant animals, but are mostly young from the previous year, who act as helpers in rearing the breeding vixen's kits.
Alternatively, their presence has been explained as being in response to temporary surpluses of food unrelated to assisting reproductive success.
Non-breeding vixens will guard, play, groom, provision and retrieve kits, DNA evidence from one population indicated large levels of polygyny, incest and mixed paternity litters.
Communication
Body language
Red fox body language consists of movements of the ears, tail and postures, with their body markings emphasising certain gestures.
Postures can be divided into aggressive submissive categories.
Some postures may blend the two together.
two studies that experimentally investigated the role of olfactory, auditory, and visual cues found that visual cues are the most important ones for hunting in red foxes and coyotes.
Red foxes prefer to hunt in the early morning hours before sunrise and late evening.
When hunting mouse-like prey, they first pinpoint their prey's location by sound, then leap, sailing high above their quarry, steering in mid-air with their tails, before landing on target up to away.
Enemies and competitors
Red foxes typically dominate other fox species.
Arctic foxes generally escape competition from red foxes by living farther north, where food is too scarce to support the larger-bodied red species.
Although the red species' northern limit is linked to the availability of food, the Arctic species' southern range is limited by the presence of the former.
Red and Arctic foxes were both introduced to almost every island from the Aleutian Islands to the Alexander Archipelago during the 1830s-1930s by fur companies.
The red foxes invariably displaced the Arctic foxes, with one male red fox having been reported to have killed off all resident Arctic foxes on a small island in 1866.
In Israel, Blanford's foxes escape competition with red foxes by restricting themselves to rocky cliffs and actively avoiding the open plains inhabited by red foxes.
In areas in North America where red fox and coyote populations are sympatric, fox ranges tend to be located outside coyote territories.
The principal cause of this separation is believed to be active avoidance of coyotes by the foxes.
Interactions between the two species vary in nature, ranging from active antagonism to indifference.
The majority of aggressive encounters are initiated by coyotes, and there are few reports of red foxes acting aggressively toward coyotes except when attacked or when their kits were approached.
Foxes and coyotes have sometimes been seen feeding together.
In Israel, red foxes share their habitat with golden jackals.
Where their ranges meet, the two canids compete due to near identical diets.
Foxes ignore jackal scents or tracks in their territories, and avoid close physical proximity with jackals themselves.
In areas where jackals become very abundant, the population of foxes decreases significantly, apparently because of competitive exclusion.
Red foxes dominate raccoon dogs, sometimes killing their kits or biting adults to death.
Cases are known of foxes killing raccoon dogs entering their dens.
Both species compete for mouse-like prey.
This competition reaches a peak during early spring, when food is scarce.
In Tartaria, red fox predation accounted for 11.1% of deaths among 54 raccoon dogs, and amounted to 14.3% of 186 raccoon dog deaths in north-western Russia.
pine martens, stoats, kolonoks, polecats and young sables.
Eurasian badgers may live alongside red foxes in isolated sections of large burrows.
while golden eagles have been known to kill adults.
Range
Red foxes are wide-ranging animals, whose range covers nearly .
They are distributed across the entire Northern Hemisphere from the Arctic Circle to North Africa, Central America, and Asia.
They are absent in Iceland, the Arctic islands, some parts of Siberia, and in extreme deserts.
Red foxes are not present in New Zealand and are classed as a "prohibited new organism" under the Hazardous Substances and New Organisms Act 1996, preventing them from being imported.
Australia
In Australia, 2012 estimates indicate that there are more than 7.2 million red foxes with a range extending throughout most of the continental mainland.
On the mainland, however, the species was successful as an apex predator.
It is generally less common in areas where the dingo is more prevalent, however it has, primarily through its burrowing behaviour, achieved niche differentiation with both the feral dog and the feral cat.
As such it has become one of the continent's most invasive species.
The red fox has been implicated in the extinction and decline of several native Australian species, particularly those of the family Potoroidae including the desert rat-kangaroo.
The spread of red foxes across the southern part of the continent has coincided with the spread of rabbits in Australia and corresponds with declines in the distribution of several medium-sized ground-dwelling mammals, including brush-tailed bettongs, burrowing bettongs, rufous bettongs, bilbys, numbats, bridled nailtail wallabys and quokkas.
Most of these species are now limited to areas (such as islands) where red foxes are absent or rare.
Local eradication programs exist, although eradication has proven difficult due to the denning behaviour and nocturnal hunting, so the focus is on management with the introduction of state bounties.
According to the Tasmanian government, red foxes were introduced to the previously fox-free island of Tasmania in 1999 or 2000, posing a significant threat to native wildlife including the eastern bettong, and an eradication program conducted by the Tasmanian Department of Primary Industries and Water has been established.
Sardinia, Italy
The origin of the ichnusae subspecies in Sardinia, Italy, is uncertain, as it is absent from Pleistocene deposits in their current homeland.
It is possible it originated during the Neolithic following its introduction to the island by humans.
It is likely then that Sardinian fox populations stem from repeated introductions of animals from different localities in the Mediterranean.
This latter theory may explain the subspecies' phenotypic diversity.
and Crenosoma vulpis, the latter two infect their lungs.
Capillaria plica infect the fox's bladder.
Trichinella spiralis rarely affects them.
The most common tapeworm species in foxes are Taenia spiralis and T. pisiformis.
Others include Echinococcus granulosus and E. multilocularis.
Eleven trematode species infect red foxes,
Relationships with humans
In folklore, religion and mythology
Red foxes feature prominently in the folklore and mythology of human cultures with which they are sympatric.
In Greek mythology, the Teumessian fox or Cadmean vixen, was a gigantic fox that was destined never to be caught.
The fox was one of the children of Echidna.
In Celtic mythology, the red fox is a symbolic animal.
In the Cotswolds, witches were thought to take the shape of foxes to steal butter from their neighbours.
In later European folklore, the figure of Reynard the Fox symbolises trickery and deceit.
He originally appeared (then under the name of "Reinardus") as a secondary character in the 1150 poem "Ysengrimus".
He reappeared in 1175 in Pierre Saint Cloud's Le Roman de Renart, and made his debut in England in Geoffrey Chaucer's The Nun's Priest's Tale.
Many of Reynard's adventures may stem from actual observations on fox behaviour; he is an enemy of the wolf and has a fondness for blackberries and grapes.
In Japanese mythology, the kitsune are fox-like spirits possessing magical abilities that increase with their age and wisdom.
Foremost among these is the ability to assume human form.
While some folktales speak of kitsune employing this ability to trick others, other stories portray them as faithful guardians, friends, lovers, and wives.
In Arab folklore, the fox is considered a cowardly, weak, deceitful, and cunning animal, said to feign death by filling its abdomen with air to appear bloated, then lies on its side, awaiting the approach of unwitting prey.
The cunning Fox is commonly found in Native American mythology, where it is portrayed as an almost constant companion to Coyote.
Fox, however, is a deceitful companion that often steals Coyote's food.
In the Achomawi creation myth, Fox and Coyote are the co-creators of the world, that leave just before the arrival of humans.
The Yurok tribe believed that Fox, in anger, captured the sun, and tied him to a hill, causing him to burn a great hole in the ground.
An Inuit story tells of how Fox, portrayed as a beautiful woman, tricks a hunter into marrying her, only to resume her true form and leave after he offends her.
A Menominee story tells of how Fox is an untrustworthy friend to the Wolf.
Hunting
The earliest historical records of fox hunting come from the fourth century BC; Alexander the Great is known to have hunted foxes and a seal dated from 350 BC depicts a Persian horseman in the process of spearing a fox.
Xenophon, who viewed hunting as part of a cultured man's education, advocated the killing of foxes as pests, as they distracted hounds from hares.
The Romans were hunting foxes by 80 AD.
During the Dark Ages in Europe, foxes were considered secondary quarries, but gradually grew in importance.
Cnut the Great reclassed foxes as Beasts of the Chase, a lower category of quarry than Beasts of Venery.
Foxes were gradually hunted less as vermin and more as Beasts of the Chase, to the point that by the late 1200s, Edward I had a royal pack of foxhounds and a specialised fox huntsman.
In this period, foxes were increasingly hunted above ground with hounds, rather than underground with terriers.
Edward, Second Duke of York assisted the climb of foxes as more prestigious quarries in his The Master of Game.
By the Renaissance, fox hunting became a traditional sport of the nobility.
After the English Civil War caused a drop in deer populations, fox hunting grew in popularity.
By the mid-1600s, Britain was divided into fox hunting territories, with the first fox hunting clubs being formed (the first was the Charlton Hunt Club in 1737).
The popularity of fox hunting in Britain reached a peak during the 1700s.
These American fox hunters considered the red species more sporting than grey species.
New Mexico (US) 69 (1999-2000).
North American red foxes, particularly those of northern Alaska, are the most valued for their fur, as they have guard hairs of a silky texture, which, after dressing, allow the wearer unrestricted mobility.
Red foxes living in southern Alaska's coastal areas and the Aleutian Islands are an exception, as they have extremely coarse pelts that rarely exceed one-third of the price of their northern Alaskan cousins.
Many supposedly abandoned kits are adopted by well-meaning people during the spring period, though it is unlikely that vixens would abandon their young.
Actual orphans are rare, and the ones that are adopted are likely kits that simply strayed from their den site.
Kits require almost constant supervision; when still suckling, they require milk at four-hour intervals day and night.
Once weaned, they may become destructive to leather objects, furniture and electric cables.
Urban foxes
Distribution
Red foxes have been exceedingly successful in colonising built-up environments, especially lower-density suburbs, Urban red foxes are most common in residential suburbs consisting of privately owned, low-density housing.
They are rare in areas where industry, commerce or council-rented houses predominate.
In 2006 it was estimated that there were 10,000 foxes in London.
City-dwelling foxes may have the potential to consistently grow larger than their rural counterparts, as a result of abundant scraps and a relative dearth of predators.
In cities foxes may scavenge food from litter bins and bin bags, although much of their diet will be similar to rural foxes.
Behaviour
Urban red foxes are most active at dusk and dawn, doing most of their hunting and scavenging at these times.
It is uncommon to spot them during the day, but they can be caught sunbathing on roofs of houses or sheds.
Foxes will often make their homes in hidden and undisturbed spots in urban areas as well as on the edges of a city, visiting at night for sustenance.
While foxes will scavenge successfully in the city (and the foxes tend to eat anything that the humans eat) some urban residents will deliberately leave food out for the animals, finding them endearing.
Doing this regularly can attract foxes to one's home; they can become accustomed to human presence, warming up to their providers by allowing themselves to be approached and in some cases even played with, particularly young cubs.
However, killing foxes has little effect on the population in an urban area; those that are killed are very soon replaced, either by new cubs during the breeding season or by other foxes moving into the territory of those that were killed.
A more effective method of fox control is to deter them from the specific areas they inhabit.
Deterrents such as creosote, diesel oil, or ammonia can be used.
Cleaning up and blocking access to den locations can also discourage a fox's return.
File:Red fox crossing road.jpg|Red fox crossing a street in Portugal
File:Flickr - Duncan~ - Fox Trot.jpg|Red fox in central London
File:Fox with food bag.jpg|Eating from a bag of biscuits in Dorset, England
File:Fleet Fox AKA Rolf, Winterwatch Brighton.png|"Fleet" the urban fox from the BBC's Winterwatch
File:Red Fox eating KFC.webm|Fox with discarded KFC bag
Further reading
