Maple syrup is a syrup usually made from the xylem sap of sugar maple, red maple, or black maple trees, although it can also be made from other maple species.
In cold climates, these trees store starch in their trunks and roots before winter; the starch is then converted to sugar that rises in the sap in late winter and early spring.
Maple trees are tapped by drilling holes into their trunks and collecting the exuded sap, which is processed by heating to evaporate much of the water, leaving the concentrated syrup.
Most trees produce 5 to 15 gallons of sap per season.
Maple syrup was first made and used by the indigenous peoples of North America, and the practice was adopted by European settlers, who gradually refined production methods.
Technological improvements in the 1970s further refined syrup processing.
The Canadian province of Quebec is by far the largest producer, responsible for 70 percent of the world's output; Canadian exports of maple syrup in 2016 were C$ 487 million (about US$ 360 million), with Quebec accounting for some 90 percent of this total.
Maple syrup is graded according to the Canada, United States, or Vermont scales based on its density and translucency.
Sucrose is the most prevalent sugar in maple syrup.
In Canada, syrups must be made exclusively from maple sap to qualify as maple syrup and must also be at least 66 percent sugar.
In the United States, a syrup must be made almost entirely from maple sap to be labelled as "maple", though states such as Vermont and New York have more restrictive definitions.
Maple syrup is often used as a condiment for pancakes, waffles, French toast, oatmeal or porridge.
It is also used as an ingredient in baking and as a sweetener or flavouring agent.
Culinary experts have praised its unique flavour, although the chemistry responsible is not fully understood.
Sources
Three species of maple trees are predominantly used to produce maple syrup: the sugar maple (Acer saccharum), the black maple (A. nigrum), and the red maple (A. rubrum), because of the high sugar content (roughly two to five percent) in the sap of these species.
The black maple is included as a subspecies or variety in a more broadly viewed concept of A. saccharum, the sugar maple, by some botanists.
Of these, the red maple has a shorter season because it buds earlier than sugar and black maples, which alters the flavour of the sap.
A few other (but not all) species of maple (Acer) are also sometimes used as sources of sap for producing maple syrup, including the box elder or Manitoba maple (Acer negundo), the silver maple (A. saccharinum), Similar syrups may also be produced from walnut, birch or palm trees, among other sources.
History
Indigenous peoples
Indigenous peoples living in northeastern North America were the first groups known to have produced maple syrup and maple sugar.
According to aboriginal oral traditions, as well as archaeological evidence, maple tree sap was being processed into syrup long before Europeans arrived in the region.
Other stories credit the development of maple syrup production to Nanabozho, Glooskap, or the squirrel.
Aboriginal tribes developed rituals around sugar-making, celebrating the Sugar Moon (the first full moon of spring) with a Maple Dance.
Many aboriginal dishes replaced the salt traditional in European cuisine with maple sugar or syrup.
or by leaving them exposed to the cold temperatures overnight and disposing of the layer of ice that formed on top.
By 1680, European settlers and fur traders were involved in harvesting maple products.
However, rather than making incisions in the bark, the Europeans used the method of drilling tapholes in the trunks with augers.
During the 17th and 18th centuries, processed maple sap was used primarily as a source of concentrated sugar, in both liquid and crystallized-solid form, as cane sugar had to be imported from the West Indies.
Sap filled the buckets, and was then either transferred to larger holding vessels (barrels, large pots, or hollowed-out wooden logs), often mounted on sledges or wagons pulled by draft animals, or carried in buckets or other convenient containers.
The sap-collection buckets were returned to the spouts mounted on the trees, and the process was repeated for as long as the flow of sap remained "sweet".
The specific weather conditions of the thaw period were, and still are, critical in determining the length of the sugaring season.
The boiling process was very time-consuming.
The harvested sap was transported back to the party's base camp, where it was then poured into large vessels (usually made from metal) and boiled to achieve the desired consistency.
Since 1850
Around the time of the American Civil War (1861-1865), syrup makers started using large, flat sheet metal pans as they were more efficient for boiling than heavy, rounded iron kettles, because of a greater surface area for evaporation.
A large number of technological changes took place during the 1970s.
Plastic tubing systems that had been experimental since the early part of the century were perfected, and the sap came directly from the tree to the evaporator house.
Vacuum pumps were added to the tubing systems, and preheaters were developed to recycle heat lost in the steam.
Producers developed reverse-osmosis machines to take a portion of water out of the sap before it was boiled, increasing processing efficiency.
Experiments show that it may be possible to use saplings in a plantation instead of mature trees, dramatically boosting productivity per acre.
Processing
Open pan evaporation methods have been streamlined since colonial days, but remain basically unchanged.
Sap must first be collected and boiled down to obtain pure syrup without chemical agents or preservatives.
Maple syrup is made by boiling between 20 and 50 volumes of sap (depending on its concentration) over an open fire until 1 volume of syrup is obtained, usually at a temperature over the boiling point of water.
As the boiling point of water varies with changes in air pressure the correct value for pure water is determined at the place where the syrup is being produced, each time evaporation is begun and periodically throughout the day.
The higher the sugar content of the sap, the smaller the volume of sap is needed to obtain the same amount of syrup.
57 units of sap with 1.5 percent sugar content will yield 1 unit of syrup, but only 25 units of sap with a 3.5 percent sugar content are needed to obtain one unit of syrup.
The sap's sugar content is highly variable and will fluctuate even within the same tree.
The filtered syrup is graded and packaged while still hot, usually at a temperature of or greater.
The containers are turned over after being sealed to sterilize the cap with the hot syrup.
Packages can be made of metal, glass, or coated plastic, depending on volume and target market.
The syrup can also be heated longer and further processed to create a variety of other maple products, including maple sugar, maple butter or cream, and maple candy or taffy.
Off-flavours
Off-flavours can sometimes develop during the production of maple syrup, resulting from contaminants in the boiling apparatus (such as disinfectants), microorganisms, fermentation products, metallic can flavours, and "buddy sap", an off-flavour occurring late in the syrup season when tree budding has begun.
In some circumstances, it is possible to remove off-flavours through processing.
Production
Maple syrup production is centred in northeastern North America; however, given the correct weather conditions, it can be made wherever suitable species of maple trees grow.
A maple syrup production farm is called a "sugarbush" or "sugarwood".
Sap is often boiled in a "sugar house" (also known as a "sugar shack", "sugar shanty", or cabane à sucre), a building louvered at the top to vent the steam from the boiling sap.
Maples are usually tapped beginning at 30 to 40 years of age.
Each tree can support between one and three taps, depending on its trunk diameter.
The average maple tree will produce of sap per season, up to per day.
This is roughly equal to seven percent of its total sap.
Seasons last for four to eight weeks, depending on the weather.
During the day, starch stored in the roots for the winter rises through the trunk as sugary sap, allowing it to be tapped.
Sap is not tapped at night because the temperature drop inhibits sap flow, although taps are typically left in place overnight.
Some producers also tap in autumn, though this practice is less common than spring tapping.
Maples can continue to be tapped for sap until they are over 100 years old.
Commerce
Until the 1930s, the United States produced most of the world's maple syrup.
Today, after rapid growth in the 1990s, Canada produces more than 80 percent of the world's maple syrup, producing about in 2016.
Production in Quebec is controlled through a supply management system, with producers receiving quota allotments from the Federation of Quebec Maple Syrup Producers (Fédération des producteurs acéricoles du Québec, FPAQ), which also maintains reserves of syrup, although there is a black-market trade in Quebec product.
In 2017, the FPAQ mandated increased output of maple syrup production, attempting to establish Quebec's dominance in the world market.
Manitoba maple syrup has a slightly different flavour from sugar-maple syrup, because it contains less sugar and the tree's sap flows more slowly.
British Columbia is home to a growing maple sugar industry using sap from the bigleaf maple, which is native to the West Coast of the United States and Canada.
In 2011, there were 82 maple syrup producers in British Columbia.
As of 2003, Vermont produced about 5.5 percent of the global syrup supply.
Maple syrup has been produced on a small scale in some other countries, notably Japan and South Korea.
However, in South Korea in particular, it is traditional to consume maple sap, called gorosoe, instead of processing it into syrup.
Markings
Under Canadian Maple Product Regulations, containers of maple syrup must include the words "maple syrup", its grade name and net quantity in litres or millilitres, on the main display panel with a minimum font size of 1.6 mm.
If the maple syrup is of Canada Grade A level, the name of the colour class must appear on the label in both English and French.
As of December 31, 2014, the CFIA issued revised standards intended to harmonize Canada-United States regulations on the classification of maple syrup as follows:
As long as maple syrup does not have an off-flavour, is of a uniform colour, and is free from turbidity and sediment, it can be labelled as one of the A grades.
If it exhibits any problems, it does not meet Grade A requirements, and then must be labelled as Processing Grade maple syrup and may not be sold in containers smaller than 5 gallons.
Vermont, in an effort to "jump-start" the new grading regulations, adopted the new grading system as of January 1, 2014, after the grade changes passed the Senate and House in 2013.
Maine passed a bill to take effect as soon as both Canada and the United States adopted the new grades.
In New York, the new grade changes became law on January 1, 2015.
New Hampshire did not require legislative approval and so the new grade laws became effective as of December 16, 2014, and producer compliance was required as of January 1, 2016.
Golden and Amber grades typically have a milder flavour than Dark and Very dark, which are both dark and have an intense maple flavour.
Syrup harvested earlier in the season tends to yield a lighter colour.
With the new grading system, the classification of maple syrup depends ultimately on its internal transmittance at 560 nm wavelength through a 10 mm sample.
Golden must have 75 percent or more transmittance, Amber must have 50.0 to 74.9 percent transmittance, Dark must have 25.0 to 49.9 percent transmittance, and Very Dark is any product having less than 25.0 percent transmittance.
*As in Quebec, Ontario's producers had two "number" grades:
**Number 2, with one colour class, which was typically referred to as "Ontario Amber" when produced and sold in that province only.
A typical year's yield for a maple syrup producer will be about 25 to 30 percent of each of the #1 colours, 10 percent #2 Amber, and 2 percent #3 Dark.
The United States used different grading standards ⁠- ⁠some states still do as they await state regulation.
Maple syrup was divided into two major grades:
In Massachusetts, the Grade B was renamed as Grade A Very Dark, Strong Taste.
The Vermont Agency of Agriculture Food and Markets used a similar grading system of colour, and is roughly equivalent, especially for lighter syrups, but using letters: "AA", "A", etc.
The Vermont grading system differed from the US system in maintaining a slightly higher standard of product density (measured on the Baumé scale).
New Hampshire maintained a similar standard, but not a separate state grading scale.
The Vermont-graded product had 0.9 percent more sugar and less water in its composition than US-graded.
One grade of syrup not for table use, called commercial or Grade C, was also produced under the Vermont system.
Packing regulations
In Canada, the packing of maple syrup must follow the "Packing" conditions stated in the Maple Products Regulations, or utilize the equivalent Canadian or imported grading system.
In a 100g amount, maple syrup provides 260 calories and is composed of 32 percent water by weight, 67 percent carbohydrates (90 percent of which are sugars), and no appreciable protein or fat (table).
Maple syrup is generally low in overall micronutrient content, although manganese and riboflavin are at high levels along with moderate amounts of zinc and calcium (right table).
It also contains trace amounts of amino acids which increase in content as sap flow occurs.
Maple syrup contains a wide variety of volatile organic compounds, including vanillin, hydroxybutanone, and propionaldehyde.
It is not yet known exactly what compounds are responsible for maple syrup's distinctive flavour, however its primary flavour contributing compounds are maple furanone, strawberry furanone, and maltol.
New compounds have been identified in maple syrup, one of which is quebecol, a natural phenolic compound created when the maple sap is boiled to create syrup.
One author described maple syrup as "a unique ingredient, smooth- and silky-textured, with a sweet, distinctive flavour - hints of caramel with overtones of toffee will not do - and a rare colour, amber set alight.
Maple flavour is, well, maple flavour, uniquely different from any other."
Maple syrup and its various artificial imitations are widely used as toppings for pancakes, waffles, and French toast in North America.
They can also be used to flavour a variety of foods, including fritters, ice cream, hot cereal, fresh fruit, and sausages.
It is also used as sweetener for granola, applesauce, baked beans, candied sweet potatoes, winter squash, cakes, pies, breads, tea, coffee, and hot toddies.
Maple syrup can also be used as a replacement for honey in wine (mead).
Imitations
In Canada, maple syrup must be made entirely from maple sap, and syrup must have a density of 66° on the Brix scale to be marketed as maple syrup.
In the United States, maple syrup must be made almost entirely from maple sap, although small amounts of substances such as salt may be added.
Labeling laws prohibit imitation syrups from having "maple" in their names unless the finished product contains 10 percent or more of natural maple syrup.
Imitation syrups are generally cheaper than maple syrup, with less natural flavour.
they typically cost about $8 per gallon (), whereas authentic maple syrup costs $40 to $60 per gallon (2015 prices).
In September 2016, the FDA published a consumer advisory to carefully inspect the ingredient list of products labeled as "maple".
Cultural significance
Maple products are considered emblematic of Canada, and are frequently sold in tourist shops and airports as souvenirs from Canada.
The sugar maple's leaf has come to symbolize Canada, and is depicted on the country's flag.
Several US states, including West Virginia, New York, Vermont and Wisconsin, have the sugar maple as their state tree.
A scene of sap collection is depicted on the Vermont state quarter, issued in 2001.
Maple syrup and maple sugar were used during the American Civil War and by abolitionists in the years before the war because most cane sugar and molasses were produced by Southern slaves.
Because of food rationing during the Second World War, people in the northeastern United States were encouraged to stretch their sugar rations by sweetening foods with maple syrup and maple sugar,
References
Notes
Cited works
Further reading
