Glyptodon (from Greek for "grooved or carved tooth": γλυπτός "sculptured" and ὀδοντ-, ὀδούς "tooth") was a genus of large, heavily armored mammals of the subfamily Glyptodontinae (glyptodonts or glyptodontines) - relatives of armadillos - that lived during the Pleistocene epoch.
It was roughly the same size and weight as a Volkswagen Beetle, though flatter in shape.
With its rounded, bony shell and squat limbs, it superficially resembled a turtle, and the much earlier dinosaurian ankylosaur - providing an example of the convergent evolution of unrelated lineages into similar forms.
In 2016 an analysis of Doedicurus mtDNA found it was, in fact, nested within the modern armadillos as the sister group of a clade consisting of Chlamyphorinae and Tolypeutinae.
For this reason, glyptodonts and all armadillos but Dasypus were relocated to a new family, Chlamyphoridae, and glyptodonts were demoted from the former family Glyptodontidae to a subfamily.
Discovery
Although Darwin is said to have found the first fossils of glyptodontines (the subfamily), the first mention of the genus Glyptodon in Europe was in 1823, from the first edition of Cuvier's "Ossemens Fossiles".
It was finally given a single name when English scholar Richard Owen noticed the similarities of the genera his colleagues were describing in their publications.
Owen realized they were all the same genus from their depictions, from carapace to tooth structure.
He decided on "Glyptodon", which means "grooved or carved tooth".
The name was originally coined by Sir Woodbine Parish, the man who had sent some Glyptodon fossils to Europe.
Those fragments of carapace and bones he sent had been heavily studied at the time and had assisted in the recognition of the new genus.
Due to poor morphological and taxonomic understanding, many of the species of the genus and their ranges have not been identified.
Countries such as Bolivia, Paraguay and western Uruguay have been recently discovered to have accommodated Glyptodontidae.
Material previously assigned to Glyptodon in northeast Brazil has been reassigned to Glyptotherium, restricting the distribution of Glyptodon to the southern region of Brazil.
However, two osteoderms with characteristics similar to those of Glyptodon have been recently found in Sergipe state in the northeast, suggesting that both genera occurred in this region during the Pleistocene.
During the Great American Interchange, a set of migrations that occurred after North and South America were connected by the rising of the volcanic Isthmus of Panama, Glyptodon migrated into Central America as far as Guatemala.
A closely related genus, Glyptotherium, reached the southern region of the modern U.S. about 2.5 million years ago.
Feeding habits
Two main groups of glyptodonts can be distinguished by their feeding habits.
Smaller-sized early Miocene propalaehoplophorids had narrow muzzles, while larger post-Miocene glyptodonts developed wider muzzles.
The smaller glyptodonts were selective feeders, while the larger glyptodonts were bulk feeders.
However, because of their body form and fusion of the cervical vertebrae, all members of Glyptodon would have needed to forage near the ground.
Their craniomandibular joint limited their jaw to side-to-side movement.
The feeding habits of Glyptodon, based on their jaw morphology, were herbivorous.
Glyptodon had an "elaboration of the osteodentine ridges in their jaw that provided an effective grinding mill, causing the food particles to be pushed and sheared through constant motion of the mandible, allowing Glyptodon to consume their dietary needs."
They had a well-developed snout musculature, along with a mobile neck region that helped them secure food.
Like most other xenarthrans, glyptodonts had lower energy requirements than most other mammals.
They could survive with lower intake rates than other herbivores with similar mass.
Glyptodon grazed near water sources such as rivers and lakes.
Based on stable isotope analysis, it is evident that its diet consisted primarily of dicotyledonous trees and monocotyledonous grasses.
Behavior
Glyptodonts are believed to have taken part in intraspecific fighting.
Zoologists presume that since the tail of Glyptodon was very flexible and had rings of bony plates, it was used as a weapon in fights.
This indicates that glyptodonts fought among themselves.
They settled disputes by fighting each other, much like male-to-male fighting among deer using their antlers.
Although its tail could be used for defense against predators, evidence suggests that the tail of Glyptodon was primarily for attacks on its own kind.
A G. reticulatus fossil displays damage done on the surface of its carapace.
Using physics and mathematics, a group of zoologists calculated the amount of force required to break the carapace of Glyptodon.
The calculation showed that Glyptodon tails would be able to break the carapace, thus hinting that it practiced intraspecific fighting.
Anatomy
Glyptodon measured in length, in height and weighed up to .
Skull
The nasal passage was reduced with heavy muscle attachments for some unknown purpose.
Some have speculated that the muscle attachments were for a proboscis, or trunk, much like that of a tapir or elephant.
The lower jaws were very deep and helped support massive chewing muscles to help chew coarse fibrous plants.
Teeth resembled those of an armadillo, but were fluted on each side by deep grooves.
The anterior teeth were compressed, while the posterior teeth were cylindrical.
A distinctive bar of bone projects downwards on the cheek, extending over the lower jaw, perhaps providing an anchor for powerful snout muscles.
Another suggestion, made by A.E. Zurita and colleagues, is that the large nasal sinuses could be correlated with the cold arid climate of Pleistocene South America.
Osteoderms
Before the Pleistocene, Glyptodon’s osteoderms were attached by syntoses and were found in double or triple rows on the front and sides of the carapace's edges, as well as in the tail armor and cephalic shield.
The carapace's osteoderms were conical with a rounded point, while the ones on the tail were just conical.
The sulci between these raised structures were deep and wide with parallel lines.
In the early 2000s, the presence of osteoderms on Glyptodon’s face, hind legs, and underside was confirmed in several species.
The fossils with these characteristics were from the Pleistocene.
These small to medium-sized ossicles were actually embedded in the dermis and did not connect in a pattern.
Tail
Glyptodon clavipes had a tail covered in free bony rings of dermal structures that made for a strong, flexible, and mobile appendix.
This enabled it to use the muscles along its tail to powerfully swing it.
in North America and some latest Pleistocene-early Holocene specimens in South America, with signs of human consumption.
Extinction
Some evidence suggests that humans drove glyptodonts to extinction.
Hunters may have used the shells of dead animals as shelters in inclement weather.
Evidence from the Campo Laborde and La Moderna archaeological sites in the Argentine Pampas suggests that Glyptodons relative Doedicurus and another glyptodont survived until the Early Holocene, coexisting with humans for a minimum of 4,000 years.
This overlap provides support for models showing the South American Pleistocene extinctions resulted from a combination of climatic change and anthropogenic causes.
These sites have been interpreted as ones used for butchering of megafauna (Megatherium and Doedicurus); however, some of the chronology has been problematic and controversial, due to poor preservation of the collagen used for dating.
