Bears are carnivoran mammals of the family Ursidae.
They are classified as caniforms, or doglike carnivorans.
Although only eight species of bears are extant, they are widespread, appearing in a wide variety of habitats throughout the Northern Hemisphere and partially in the Southern Hemisphere.
Bears are found on the continents of North America, South America, Europe, and Asia.
Common characteristics of modern bears include large bodies with stocky legs, long snouts, small rounded ears, shaggy hair, plantigrade paws with five nonretractile claws, and short tails.
While the polar bear is mostly carnivorous, and the giant panda feeds almost entirely on bamboo, the remaining six species are omnivorous with varied diets.
With the exception of courting individuals and mothers with their young, bears are typically solitary animals.
They may be diurnal or nocturnal and have an excellent sense of smell.
Despite their heavy build and awkward gait, they are adept runners, climbers, and swimmers.
Bears use shelters, such as caves and logs, as their dens; most species occupy their dens during the winter for a long period of hibernation, up to 100 days.
Bears have been hunted since prehistoric times for their meat and fur; they have been used for bear-baiting and other forms of entertainment, such as being made to dance.
With their powerful physical presence, they play a prominent role in the arts, mythology, and other cultural aspects of various human societies.
In modern times, bears have come under pressure through encroachment on their habitats and illegal trade in bear parts, including the Asian bile bear market.
The IUCN lists six bear species as vulnerable or endangered, and even least concern species, such as the brown bear, are at risk of extirpation in certain countries.
The poaching and international trade of these most threatened populations are prohibited, but still ongoing.
Etymology
The English word "bear" comes from Old English and belongs to a family of names for the bear in Germanic languages, such as Swedish , also used as a first name.
This form is conventionally said to be related to a Proto-Indo-European word for "brown", so that "bear" would mean "the brown one".
However, Ringe notes that while this etymology is semantically plausible, a word meaning "brown" of this form cannot be found in Proto-Indo-European.
He suggests instead that "bear" is from the Proto-Indo-European word *ǵʰwḗr- ~ *ǵʰwér "wild animal".
This terminology for the animal originated as a taboo avoidance term: proto-Germanic tribes replaced their original word for bear-arkto-with this euphemistic expression out of fear that speaking the animal's true name might cause it to appear.
According to author Ralph Keyes, this is the oldest known euphemism.
Bear taxon names such as Arctoidea and Helarctos come from the ancient Greek word ἄρκτος (arktos), meaning bear, as do the names "arctic" and "antarctic", from the constellation Ursa Major, the "Great Bear", prominent in the northern sky.
Bear taxon names such as Ursidae and Ursus come from Latin Ursus she-bear.
The Old English name Beowulf is a kenning, "bee-wolf", for bear, in turn meaning a brave warrior.
Taxonomy
The family Ursidae is one of nine families in the suborder Caniformia, or "doglike" carnivorans, within the order Carnivora.
Bears' closest living relatives are the pinnipeds, canids, and musteloids.
Modern bears comprise eight species in three subfamilies: Ailuropodinae (monotypic with the giant panda), Tremarctinae (monotypic with the spectacled bear), and Ursinae (containing six species divided into one to three genera, depending on the authority).
Nuclear chromosome analysis show that the karyotype of the six ursine bears is nearly identical, with each having 74 chromosomes, whereas the giant panda has 42 chromosomes and the spectacled bear 52.
These smaller numbers can be explained by the fusing of some chromosomes, and the banding patterns on these match those of the ursine species, but differ from those of procyonids, which supports the inclusion of these two species in Ursidae rather than in Procyonidae, where they had been placed by some earlier authorities.
Evolution
The earliest members of Ursidae belong to the extinct subfamily Amphicynodontinae, including Parictis (late Eocene to early middle Miocene, 38-18 Mya) and the slightly younger Allocyon (early Oligocene, 34-30 Mya), both from North America.
These animals looked very different from today's bears, being small and raccoon-like in overall appearance, with diets perhaps more similar to that of a badger.
Parictis does not appear in Eurasia and Africa until the Miocene.
It is unclear whether late-Eocene ursids were also present in Eurasia, although faunal exchange across the Bering land bridge may have been possible during a major sea level low stand as early as the late Eocene (about 37 Mya) and continuing into the early Oligocene.
European genera morphologically very similar to Allocyon, and to the much younger American Kolponomos (about 18 Mya), are known from the Oligocene, including Amphicticeps and Amphicynodon.
In addition to the support of the pinniped-amphicynodontine clade, other morphological and some molecular evidence supports bears being the closet living relatives to pinnipeds.
likely via the species Ursavus elmensis.
Based on genetic and morphological data, the Ailuropodinae (pandas) were the first to diverge from other living bears about 19 Mya, although no fossils of this group have been found before about 5 Mya.
The New World short-faced bears (Tremarctinae) differentiated from Ursinae following a dispersal event into North America during the mid-Miocene (about 13 Mya).
Their earliest fossil representative is Plionarctos in North America (~ 10-2 Ma).
This genus is probably the direct ancestor to the North American short-faced bears (genus Arctodus), the South American short-faced bears (Arctotherium), and the spectacled bears, Tremarctos, represented by both an extinct North American species (T. floridanus), and the lone surviving representative of the Tremarctinae, the South American spectacled bear (T. ornatus).
The polar bear is the most recently evolved species and descended from a population of brown bears that became isolated in northern latitudes by glaciation 400,000 years ago.
Phylogeny
The bears form a clade within the Carnivora.
The cladogram is based on molecular phylogeny of six genes in Flynn, 2005.
Note that although they are called "bears" in some languages, red pandas and raccoons and their close relatives are not bears, but rather musteloids.
Below is a cladogram of the subfamilies of bears after McLellan and Reiner (1992) Amphicynodontinae under this classification were classified as stem-pinnipeds in the superfamily Phocoidea.
The giant panda, followed by the spectacled bear are clearly the oldest species.
The relationships of the other species are not very well resolved, though the polar bear and the brown bear form a close grouping.
with adult males weighing and measuring in total length.
The smallest species is the sun bear, which ranges in weight and in length.
Prehistoric North and South American short-faced bears were the largest species known to have lived.
The latter estimated to have weighed and stood tall.
Body weight varies throughout the year in bears of temperate and arctic climates, as they build up fat reserves in the summer and autumn and lose weight during the winter.
Larger species tend to show increased levels of sexual dimorphism in comparison to smaller species.
Considerable variation occurs in dental formula even within a given species.
This may indicate bears are still in the process of evolving from a mainly meat-eating diet to a predominantly herbivorous one.
Polar bears appear to have secondarily re-evolved carnassial-like cheek teeth, as their diets have switched back towards carnivory.
Sloth bears lack lower central incisors and use their protusible lips for sucking up the termites on which they feed.
Bears have a fairly simple digestive system typical for carnivorans, with a single stomach, short undifferentiated intestines and no cecum.
Bears must spend much of their time feeding in order to gain enough nutrition from foliage.
The panda, in particular, spends 12-15 hours a day feeding.
The Atlas bear, a subspecies of the brown bear was distributed in North Africa from Morocco to Libya, but it became extinct around the 1870s.
The most widespread species is the brown bear, which occurs from Western Europe eastwards through Asia to the western areas of North America.
The American black bear is restricted to North America, and the polar bear is restricted to the Arctic Sea.
All the remaining species of bear are Asian.
They occur in a range of habitats which include tropical lowland rainforest, both coniferous and broadleaf forests, prairies, steppes, montane grassland, alpine scree slopes, Arctic tundra and in the case of the polar bear, ice floes.
Other species may be nocturnal, active at night, though female sloth bears with cubs may feed more at daytime to avoid competition from conspecifics and nocturnal predators.
Bears are overwhelmingly solitary and are considered to be the most asocial of all the Carnivora.
The only times bears are encountered in small groups are mothers with young or occasional seasonal bounties of rich food (such as salmon runs).
With their acute sense of smell, bears can locate carcasses from several kilometres away.
They use olfaction to locate other foods, encounter mates, avoid rivals and recognise their cubs.
For example, Asiatic black bears in Taiwan consume large numbers of acorns when these are most common, and switch to ungulates at other times of the year.
When foraging for plants, bears choose to eat them at the stage when they are at their most nutritious and digestible, typically avoiding older grasses, sedges and leaves.
Smaller bears climb trees to obtain mast .
Such masts can be very important to the diets of these species, and mast failures may result in long-range movements by bears looking for alternative food sources.
Brown bears, with their powerful digging abilities, commonly eat roots.
of 30 different species.
Its strong jaws are adapted for crushing the tough stems of these plants, though they prefer to eat the more nutritious leaves.
Bromeliads can make up to 50% of the diet of the spectacled bear, which also has strong jaws to bite them open.
The sloth bear, though not as specialised as polar bears and the panda, has lost several front teeth usually seen in bears, and developed a long, suctioning tongue to feed on the ants, termites, and other burrowing insects they favour.
At certain times of the year, these insects can make up 90% of their diets.
Some species may raid the nests of wasps and bees for the honey and immature insects, in spite of stinging from the adults.
Sun bears use their long tongues to lick up both insects and honey.
Fish are an important source of food for some species, and brown bears in particular gather in large numbers at salmon runs.
Typically, a bear plunges into the water and seizes a fish with its jaws or front paws.
The preferred parts to eat are the brain and eggs.
Small burrowing mammals like rodents may be dug out and eaten.
These animals may be taken by a short rush and ambush, though hiding young may be stiffed out and pounced on.
The polar bear mainly preys on seals, stalking them from the ice or breaking into their dens.
They primarily eat the highly digestible blubber.
Predatory behaviour in bears is typically taught to the young by the mother.
For hibernating species, weight gain is important as it provides nourishment during winter dormancy.
A brown bear can eat of food and gain of fat a day prior to entering its den.
Communication
Bears produce a number of vocal and non-vocal sounds.
Tongue-clicking, grunting or chuffing many be made in cordial situations, such as between mothers and cubs or courting couples, while moaning, huffing, sorting or blowing air is made when an individual is stressed.
Barking is produced during times of alarm, excitement or to give away the animal's position.
Warning sounds include jaw-clicking and lip-popping, while teeth-chatters, bellows, growls, roars and pulsing sounds are made in aggressive encounters.
Cubs may squeal, bawl, bleat or scream when in distress and make motor-like humming when comfortable or nursing.
Bears sometimes communicate with visual displays such as standing upright, which exaggerates the individual's size.
The chest markings of some species may add to this intimidating display.
Staring is an aggressive act and the facial markings of spectacled bears and giant pandas may help draw attention to the eyes during agonistic encounters.
Individuals may approach each other by stiff-legged walking with the head lowered.
Dominance between bears is asserted by making a frontal orientation, showing the canine teeth, muzzle twisting and neck stretching.
A subordinate may respond with a lateral orientation, by turning away and dropping the head and by sitting or lying down.
Bears may mark territory by rubbing against trees and other objects which may serve to spread their scent.
This is usually accompanied by clawing and biting the object.
Bark may be spread around to draw attention to the marking post.
Pandas are known to mark objects with urine and a waxy substance from their anal glands.
Polar bears leave behind their scent in their tracks which allow individuals to keep track of one another in the vast Arctic wilderness.
Reproduction and development
The mating system of bears has variously been described as a form of polygyny, promiscuity and serial monogamy.
During the breeding season, males take notice of females in their vicinity and females become more tolerant of males.
A male bear may visit a female continuously over a period of several days or weeks, depending on the species, to test her reproductive state.
During this time period, males try to prevent rivals from interacting with their mate.
Courtship may be brief, although in some Asian species, courting pairs may engage in wrestling, hugging, mock fighting and vocalising.
Ovulation is induced by mating, which can last up to 30 minutes depending on the species.
Gestation typically lasts 6-9 months, including delayed implantation, and litter size numbers up to four cubs.
In northern living species, birth takes place during winter dormancy.
Cubs are born blind and helpless with at most a thin layer of hair, relying on their mother for warmth.
The milk of the female bear is rich in fat and antibodies and cubs may suckle for up to a year after they are born.
By 2-3 months, cubs can follow their mother outside the den.
They usually follow her on foot, but sloth bear cubs may ride on their mother's back.
Male bears play no role in raising young.
Infanticide, where an adult male kills the cubs of another, has been recorded in polar bears, brown bears and American black bears but not in other species.
Males kill young to bring the female into oestrus.
Cubs may flee and the mother defends them even at the cost of her life.
In some species, offspring may become independent around the next spring, through some may stay until the female successfully mates again.
Bears reach sexual maturity shortly after they disperse; at around 3-6 years depending on the species.
Male Alaskan brown bears and polar bears may continue to grow until they are 11 years old.
Hibernation
Bears of northern regions, including the American black bear and the grizzly bear, hibernate in the winter.
During hibernation, the bear's metabolism slows down, its body temperature decreases slightly, and its heart rate slows from a normal value of 55 to just 9 beats per minute.
Bears normally do not wake during their hibernation, and can go the entire period without eating, drinking, urinating, or defecating.
If they have stored enough body fat, their muscles remain in good condition, and their protein maintenance requirements are met from recycling waste urea.
Felids like the tiger may also prey on bears, particularly cubs, which may also be threatened by canids.
By contrast, polar bears have few parasites; many parasitic species need a secondary, usually terrestrial, host, and the polar bear's life style is such that few alternative hosts exist in their environment.
The protozoan Toxoplasma gondii has been found in polar bears, and the nematode Trichinella nativa can cause a serious infection and decline in older polar bears.
Bears in North America are sometimes infected by a Morbillivirus similar to the canine distemper virus.
They are susceptible to infectious canine hepatitis (CAV-1), with free-living black bears dying rapidly of encephalitis and hepatitis.
Relationship with humans
Conservation
In modern times, bears have come under pressure through encroachment on their habitats and illegal trade in bear parts, including the Asian bile bear market, though hunting is now banned, largely replaced by farming.
The IUCN lists six bear species as vulnerable; even the two least concern species, the brown bear and the American black bear,
Laws have been passed in many areas of the world to protect bears from habitat destruction.
Public perception of bears is often positive, as people identify with bears due to their omnivorous diets, their ability to stand on two legs, and their symbolic importance.
Support for bear protection is widespread, at least in more affluent societies.
The giant panda has become a worldwide symbol of conservation.
The Sichuan Giant Panda Sanctuaries, which are home to around 30% of the wild panda population, gained a UNESCO
World Heritage Site designation in 2006.
Where bears raid crops or attack livestock, they may come into conflict with humans.
In poorer rural regions, attitudes may be more shaped by the dangers posed by bears, and the economic costs they cause to farmers and ranchers.
Bears may attack humans in response to being startled, in defense of young or food, or even for predatory reasons.
Entertainment, hunting, food and folk medicine
Bears in captivity have for centuries been used for entertainment.
They have been trained to dance, and were kept for baiting in Europe at least since the 16th century.
There were five bear-baiting gardens in Southwark, London at that time; archaeological remains of three of these have survived.
Across Europe, nomadic Romani bear handlers called Ursari lived by busking with their bears from the 12th century.
Bears have been hunted for sport, food, and folk medicine.
Their meat is dark and stringy, like a tough cut of beef.
In Cantonese cuisine, bear paws are considered a delicacy.
Bear meat should be cooked thoroughly, as it can be infected with the parasite Trichinella spiralis.
The peoples of eastern Asia use bears' body parts and secretions (notably their gallbladders and bile) as part of traditional Chinese medicine.
More than 12,000 bears are thought to be kept on farms in China, Vietnam, and South Korea for the production of bile.
Trade in bear products is prohibited under CITES, but bear bile has been detected in shampoos, wine and herbal medicines sold in Canada, the United States and Australia.
Literature, art and symbolism
There is evidence of prehistoric bear worship, though this is disputed by archaeologists.
It is possible that bear worship existed in early Chinese and Ainu cultures.
The prehistoric Finns, Siberian peoples and more recently Koreans considered the bear as the spirit of their forefathers.
In many Native American cultures, the bear is a symbol of rebirth because of its hibernation and re-emergence.
The image of the mother bear was prevalent throughout societies in North America and Eurasia, based on the female's devotion and protection of her cubs.
Japanese folklore features the Onikuma, a "demon bear" that walks upright.
The Ainu of northern Japan, a different people from the Japanese, saw the bear instead as sacred; Hirasawa Byozan painted a scene in documentary style of a bear sacrifice in an Ainu temple, complete with offerings to the dead animal's spirit.
In Korean mythology, a tiger and a bear prayed to Hwanung, the son of the Lord of Heaven, that they might become human.
Upon hearing their prayers, Hwanung gave them 20 cloves of garlic and a bundle of mugwort, ordering them to eat only this sacred food and remain out of the sunlight for 100 days.
The tiger gave up after about twenty days and left the cave.
However, the bear persevered and was transformed into a woman.
The bear and the tiger are said to represent two tribes that sought the favor of the heavenly prince.
The bear-woman (Ungnyeo; 웅녀/) was grateful and made offerings to Hwanung.
However, she lacked a husband, and soon became sad and prayed beneath a "divine birch" tree () to be blessed with a child.
Hwanung, moved by her prayers, took her for his wife and soon she gave birth to a son named Dangun Wanggeom - who was the legendary founder of Gojoseon, the first ever Korean kingdom.
Artio was a Celtic bear goddess.
Evidence of her worship has notably been found at Bern, itself named for the bear.
Her name is derived from the Celtic word for "bear", artos.
In ancient Greece, archaic cult of Artemis in bear form survived into Classical times at Brauron, where young Athenian girls passed an initiation right as arktai "she bears".
For Artemis and one of her nymphs as a she-bear, see the myth of Callisto.
The constellations of Ursa Major and Ursa Minor, the great and little bears, are named for their supposed resemblance to bears, from the time of Ptolemy.
Ursa Major has been associated with a bear for as much as 13,000 years since Paleolithic times, in the widespread Cosmic Hunt myths.
These are found on both sides of the Bering land bridge, which was lost to the sea some 11,000 years ago.
Pliny the Elder's Natural History (1st century AD) claims that "when first born, bears are shapeless masses of white flesh, a little larger than mice; their claws alone being prominent.
The mother then licks them gradually into proper shape."
This belief was echoed by authors of bestiaries throughout the medieval period.
Bears are mentioned in the Bible; the Second Book of Kings relates the story of the prophet Elisha calling on them to eat the youths who taunted him.
Legends of saints taming bears are common in the Alpine zone.
In the arms of the bishopric of Freising, the bear is the dangerous totem animal tamed by St. Corbinian and made to carry his civilised baggage over the mountains.
Bears similarly feature in the legends of St. Romedius, Saint Gall and Saint Columbanus.
This recurrent motif was used by the Church as a symbol of the victory of Christianity over paganism.
In the Norse settlements of northern England during the 10th century, a type of "hogback" grave cover of a long narrow block of stone, with a shaped apex like the roof beam of a long house, is carved with a muzzled, thus Christianised, bear clasping each gable end, as in the church at Brompton, North Yorkshire and across the British Isles.
Lāčplēsis, meaning "Bear-slayer", is a Latvian legendary hero who is said to have killed a bear by ripping its jaws apart with his bare hands.
However, as revealed in the end of the long epic describing his life, Lāčplēsis' own mother had been a she-bear, and his superhuman strength resided in his bear ears.
The modern Latvian military award Order of Lāčplēsis, called for the hero, is also known as The Order of the Bear-Slayer.
Bears are popular in children's stories, including Winnie the Pooh, Paddington Bear, Gentle Ben and "The Brown Bear of Norway".
An early version of "Goldilocks and the Three Bears", was published as "The Three Bears" in 1837 by Robert Southey, many times retold, and illustrated in 1918 by Arthur Rackham.
The Hanna-Barbera character Yogi Bear has appeared in numerous comic books, animated television shows and films.
The Care Bears began as greeting cards in 1982, and were featured as toys, on clothing and in film.
Around the world, many children-and some adults-have teddy bears, stuffed toys in the form of bears, named after the American statesman Theodore Roosevelt when in 1902 he had refused to shoot an American black bear tied to a tree.
Bears, like other animals, may symbolize nations.
In 1911, the British satirical magazine Punch published a cartoon about the Anglo-Russian Entente by Leonard Raven-Hill in which the British lion watches as the Russian bear sits on the tail of the Persian cat.
The Russian Bear has been a common national personification for Russia from the 16th century onward.
Smokey Bear has become a part of American culture since his introduction in 1944, with his message "Only you can prevent forest fires".
In the United Kingdom, the bear and staff feature on the heraldic arms of the county of Warwickshire.
Bears appear in the canting arms of two cities, Bern and Berlin.
Organizations
The International Association for Bear Research & Management, also known as the International Bear Association, and the Bear Specialist Group of the Species Survival Commission, a part of the International Union for Conservation of Nature focus on the natural history, management, and conservation of bears.
Bear Trust International works for wild bears and other wildlife through four core program initiatives, namely Conservation Education, Wild Bear Research, Wild Bear Management, and Habitat Conservation.
Specialty organizations for each of the eight species of bears worldwide include:
* Black Bear Conservation Coalition, for the North American black bear
* Bornean Sun Bear Conservation Centre, for the sun bear
* Andean Bear Conservation Project, for the Andean bear
* Chengdu Research Base of Giant Panda Breeding, for the giant panda
Notes
Bibliography
Further reading
