The Indian peafowl (Pavo cristatus), also known as the common peafowl, and blue peafowl, is a large and brightly coloured bird, is a species of peafowl native to the Indian subcontinent, but introduced in many other parts of the world.
The male, or peacock, is predominantly blue with a fan-like crest of spatula-tipped wire-like feathers and is best known for the long train made up of elongated upper-tail covert feathers which bear colourful eyespots.
These stiff feathers are raised into a fan and quivered in a display during courtship.
Despite the length and size of these covert feathers, peacocks are still capable of flight.
Peahens lack the train, and have a greenish lower neck and duller brown plumage.
The Indian peafowl lives mainly on the ground in open forest or on land under cultivation where they forage for berries, grains but also prey on snakes, lizards, and small rodents.
Their loud calls make them easy to detect, and in forest areas often indicate the presence of a predator such as a tiger.
They forage on the ground in small groups and usually try to escape on foot through undergrowth and avoid flying, though they fly into tall trees to roost.
The function of the peacock's elaborate train has been debated for over a century.
In the 19th century, Charles Darwin found it a puzzle, hard to explain through ordinary natural selection.
His later explanation, sexual selection, is widely but not universally accepted.
In the 20th century, Amotz Zahavi argued that the train was a handicap, and that males were honestly signalling their fitness in proportion to the splendour of their trains.
Despite extensive study, opinions remain divided on the mechanisms involved.
The bird is celebrated in Hindu and Greek mythology and is the national bird of India.
The Indian peafowl is listed as of Least Concern by the International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN).
Taxonomy and naming
Carl Linnaeus in his work Systema Naturae in 1758 assigned to the Indian peafowl the technical name of Pavo cristatus (means "crested peafowl" in classical Latin).
The earliest usage of the word in written English is from around 1300 and spelling variants include pecok, pekok, pecokk, peacocke, peocock, pyckock, poucock, pocok, pokok, pokokke, and poocok among others.
The current spelling was established in the late 17th century.
Chaucer (1343-1400) used the word to refer to a proud and ostentatious person in his simile "proud a pekok" in Troilus and Criseyde (Book I, line 210).
The Greek word for peacock was taos and was related to the Persian "tavus" (as in Takht-i-Tâvus for the famed Peacock Throne In modern Hebrew the word for peacock is "tavas".
Description
is slightly lighter in body mass despite the male having a longer train on average than the male of the Indian species.
Their size, colour and shape of crest make them unmistakable within their native distribution range.
The male is metallic blue on the crown, the feathers of the head being short and curled.
The fan-shaped crest on the head is made of feathers with bare black shafts and tipped with bluish-green webbing.
A white stripe above the eye and a crescent shaped white patch below the eye are formed by bare white skin.
The sides of the head have iridescent greenish blue feathers.
The back has scaly bronze-green feathers with black and copper markings.
The scapular and the wings are buff and barred in black, the primaries are chestnut and the secondaries are black.
The tail is dark brown and the "train" is made up of elongated upper tail coverts (more than 200 feathers, the actual tail has only 20 feathers) and nearly all of these feathers end with an elaborate eye-spot.
A few of the outer feathers lack the spot and end in a crescent shaped black tip.
The underside is dark glossy green shading into blackish under the tail.
The thighs are buff coloured.
The male has a spur on the leg above the hind toe.
The adult peahen has a rufous-brown head with a crest as in the male but the tips are chestnut edged with green.
The upper body is brownish with pale mottling.
The primaries, secondaries and tail are dark brown.
The lower neck is metallic green and the breast feathers are dark brown glossed with green.
The remaining underparts are whitish.
Young males look like the females but the wings are chestnut coloured.
They also make many other calls such as a rapid series of ka-aan..ka-aan or a rapid kok-kok.
and was a topic of some interest during Darwin's time.
It is however only a case of genetic variation within the population.
In this mutation, the adult male is melanistic with black wings.
Young birds with the nigripennis mutation are creamy white with fulvous tipped wings.
The gene produces melanism in the male and in the peahen it produces a dilution of colour with creamy white and brown markings.
Other variations include the pied and white forms all of which are the result of allelic variation at specific loci.
Cross between a male green peafowl, Pavo muticus and a female Indian peafowl, P. cristatus, produces a stable hybrid called a "spalding", named after Mrs. Keith Spalding, a bird fancier in California.
Distribution and habitat
The Indian peafowl is a resident breeder across the Indian subcontinent and is found in the drier lowland areas of Sri Lanka.
In the Indian subcontinent, it is found mainly below an altitude of and in rare cases seen at about .
It is found in moist and dry-deciduous forests, but can adapt to live in cultivated regions and around human habitations and is usually found where water is available.
In many parts of northern India, they are protected by religious practices and will forage around villages and towns for scraps.
Some have suggested that the peacock was introduced into Europe by Alexander the Great, while others say the bird had reached Athens by 450 BCE and may have been introduced even earlier.
It has since been introduced in many other parts of the world and has become feral in some areas.
In isolated cases, the Indian peafowl has been known to be able to adapt to harsher climates, such as those of northern Canada.
The species has been spotted by hunters as far north as Huntsville, Ontario, thriving in its newly adapted northern climate.
Genome sequencing
The first whole-genome sequencing of Indian peafowl identified a total of 15,970 protein-coding sequences, along with 213 tRNAs, 236 snoRNAs, and 540 miRNAs.
The peacock genome was found to have less repetitive DNA (8.62%) than that of the chicken genome (9.45%).
PSMC analysis suggested that the peacock suffered at least two bottlenecks (around four million years ago and again 450,000 years ago), which resulted in a severe reduction in its effective population size.
Behaviour and ecology
Peafowl are best known for the male's extravagant display feathers which, despite actually growing from their back, are thought of as a tail.
The "train" is in reality made up of the enormously elongated upper tail coverts.
The tail itself is brown and short as in the peahen.
The colours result not from any green or blue pigments but from the micro-structure of the feathers and the resulting optical phenomena.
The long train feathers (and tarsal spurs) of the male develop only after the second year of life.
Fully developed trains are found in birds older than four years.
In northern India, these begin to develop each February and are moulted at the end of August.
The moult of the flight feathers may be spread out across the year.
Peafowl forage on the ground in small groups, known as musters, that usually have a cock and 3 to 5 hens.
After the breeding season, the flocks tend to be made up only of females and young.
They are found in the open early in the mornings and tend to stay in cover during the heat of the day.
They are fond of dust-bathing and at dusk, groups walk in single file to a favourite waterhole to drink.
When disturbed, they usually escape by running and rarely take to flight.
Peafowl roost in groups during the night on tall trees but may sometimes make use of rocks, buildings or pylons.
In the Gir forest, they chose tall trees in steep river banks.
Birds arrive at dusk and call frequently before taking their position on the roost trees.
Due to this habit of congregating at the roost, many population studies are made at these sites.
The population structure is not well understood.
In a study in northern India (Jodhpur), the number of males was 170-210 for 100 females but a study involving evening counts at the roost site in southern India (Injar) suggested a ratio of 47 males for 100 females.
The American artist Abbott Handerson Thayer tried to show, from his own imagination, the value of the eyespots as disruptive camouflage in a 1907 painting.
He used the painting in his 1909 book Concealing-Coloration in the Animal Kingdom, denying the possibility of sexual selection and arguing that essentially all forms of animal colouration had evolved as camouflage.
He was roundly criticised in a lengthy paper by Theodore Roosevelt, who wrote that Thayer had only managed to paint the peacock's plumage as camouflage by sleight of hand, "with the blue sky showing through the leaves in just sufficient quantity here and there to warrant the author-artists explaining that the wonderful blue hues of the peacock's neck are obliterative because they make it fade into the sky."
In the 1970s a possible resolution to the apparent contradiction between natural selection and sexual selection was proposed.
Amotz Zahavi argued that peacocks honestly signalled the handicap of having a large and costly train.
However, the mechanism may be less straightforward than it seems - the cost could arise from depression of the immune system by the hormones that enhance feather development.
The ornate train is believed to be the result of sexual selection by the females.
Males use their ornate trains in a courtship display: they raise the feathers into a fan and quiver them.
However, recent studies have failed to find a relation between the number of displayed eyespots and mating success.
Marion Petrie tested whether or not these displays signaled a male's genetic quality by studying a feral population of peafowl in Whipsnade Wildlife Park in southern England.
She showed that the number of eyespots in the train predicted a male's mating success, and this success could be manipulated by cutting the eyespots off some of the male's ornate feathers.
While train length seems to correlate positively with MHC diversity in males, females do not appear to use train length to choose males.
A study in Japan also suggests that peahens do not choose peacocks based on their ornamental plumage, including train length, number of eyespots and train symmetry.
Another study in France brings up two possible explanations for the conflicting results that exist.
The first explanation is that there might be a genetic variation of the trait of interest under different geographical areas due to a founder effect and/or a genetic drift.
The second explanation suggests that "the cost of trait expression may vary with environmental conditions," so that a trait that is indicative of a particular quality may not work in another environment.
Fisher's runaway model proposes positive feedback between female preference for elaborate trains and the elaborate train itself.
This model assumes that the male train is a relatively recent evolutionary adaptation.
However, a molecular phylogeny study on peacock-pheasants shows the opposite; the most recently evolved species is actually the least ornamented one.
This finding suggests a chase-away sexual selection, in which "females evolve resistance to male ploys".
A study in Japan goes on to conclude that the "peacocks' train is an obsolete signal for which female preference has already been lost or weakened".
They concluded that female choice might indeed vary in different ecological conditions.
A 2013 study that tracked the eye movements of peahens responding to male displays found that they looked in the direction of the upper train of feathers only when at long distances and that they looked only at the lower feathers when males displayed close to them.
The rattling of the tail and the shaking of the wings helped in keeping the attention of females.
Breeding
Peacocks are polygamous, and the breeding season is spread out but appears to be dependent on the rains.
Peafowls usually reach sexual maturity at the age of 2 to 3 years old.
Several males may congregate at a lek site and these males are often closely related.
Males at lek appear to maintain small territories next to each other and they allow females to visit them and make no attempt to guard harems.
Females do not appear to favour specific males.
The males display in courtship by raising the upper-tail coverts into an arched fan.
The wings are held half open and drooped and it periodically vibrates the long feathers producing a ruffling sound.
The cock faces the hen initially and struts and prances around and sometimes turns around to display the tail.
Males may display even in the absence of females.
When a male is displaying, females do not appear to show any interest and usually continue their foraging.
and in earlier times have been recorded using the disused nest platforms of the white-rumped vultures.
The clutch consists of 4-8 fawn to buff white eggs which are incubated only by the female.
The eggs take about 28 days to hatch.
The chicks are nidifugous and follow the mother around after hatching.
An unusual instance of a male incubating a clutch of eggs has been reported.
Feeding
Peafowl are omnivorous and eat seeds, insects, fruits, small mammals and reptiles.
They feed on small snakes but keep their distance from larger ones.
In the Gir forest of Gujarat, a large percentage of their food is made up of the fallen berries of Zizyphus.
Around cultivated areas, peafowl feed on a wide range of crops such as groundnut, tomato, paddy, chili and even bananas.
Foraging in groups provides some safety as there are more eyes to look out for predators.
They are also sometimes hunted by large birds of prey such as the changeable hawk-eagle and rock eagle-owl.
Chicks are somewhat more prone to predation than adult birds.
Adults living near human habitations are sometimes hunted by domestic dogs or by humans in some areas (southern Tamil Nadu) for folk remedies involving the use of "peacock oil".
In captivity, birds have been known to live for 23 years but it is estimated that they live for only about 15 years in the wild.
Conservation and status
Indian peafowl are widely distributed in the wild across South Asia and protected both culturally in many areas and by law in India.
Conservative estimates of the population put them at more than 100,000.
Illegal poaching for meat, however, continues and declines have been noted in parts of India.
Peafowl breed readily in captivity and as free-ranging ornamental fowl.
Zoos, parks, bird-fanciers and dealers across the world maintain breeding populations that do not need to be augmented by the capture of wild birds.
Poaching of peacocks for their meat and feathers and accidental poisoning by feeding on pesticide treated seeds are known threats to wild birds.
Methods to identify if feathers have been plucked or have been shed naturally have been developed as Indian law allows only the collection of feathers that have been shed.
In parts of India, the birds can be a nuisance to agriculture as they damage crops.
In culture
Prominent in many cultures, the peacock has been used in numerous iconic representations, including being designated the national bird of India in 1963.
A Sanskrit derivation of mayura is from the root mi for kill and said to mean "killer of snakes".
Many Hindu deities are associated with the bird, Krishna is often depicted with a feather in his headband, while worshippers of Shiva associate the bird as the steed of the God of war, Kartikeya (also known as Skanda or Murugan).
A story in the Uttara Ramayana describes the head of the Devas, Indra, who unable to defeat Ravana, sheltered under the wing of peacock and later blessed it with a "thousand eyes" and fearlessness from serpents.
In Buddhist philosophy, the peacock represents wisdom.
Peacock feathers are used in many rituals and ornamentation.
Peacock motifs are widespread in Indian temple architecture, old coinage, textiles and continue to be used in many modern items of art and utility.
Similar ideas have also been ascribed to Indian crow species.
In Greek mythology the origin of the peacock's plumage is explained in the tale of Hera and Argus.
The main figure of the Yazidi religion Yezidism, Melek Taus, is most commonly depicted as a peacock.
Peacock motifs are widely used even today such as in the logos of the US NBC and the PTV television networks and the Sri Lankan Airlines.
These birds were often kept in menageries and as ornaments in large gardens and estates.
In medieval times, knights in Europe took a "Vow of the Peacock" and decorated their helmets with its plumes.
In several Robin Hood stories, the titular archer uses arrows fletched with peacock feathers.
Feathers were buried with Viking warriors and the flesh of the bird was said to cure snake venom and many other maladies.
Numerous uses in Ayurveda have been documented.
Peafowl were said to keep an area free of snakes.
In 1526, the legal issue as to whether peacocks were wild or domestic fowl was thought sufficiently important for Cardinal Wolsey to summon all the English judges to give their opinion, which was that they are domestic fowl.
In Anglo-Indian usage of the 1850s, to peacock meant making visits to ladies and gentlemen in the morning.
In the 1890s, the term "peacocking" in Australia referred to the practice of buying up the best pieces of land ("picking the eyes") so as to render the surrounding lands valueless.
The English word "peacock" has come to be used to describe a man who is very proud or gives a lot of attention to his clothing.
A golden peacock (in Yiddish, Di Goldene Pave) is considered by some as a symbol of Ashkenazi Jewish culture, and is the subject of several folktales and songs in Yiddish.
References
Further reading
* Galusha, JG; Hill, LM (1996)
A study of the behaviour of Indian Peacocks Pavo cristatus on Protection Island, Jefferson County, Washington, USA.
Pavo 34 (1&2):23-31.
* Ganguli, U (1965)
A Peahen nests on a roof.
Newsletter for Birdwatchers .
5 (4):4-6.
* Prakash, M (1968) Mating of Peacocks Pavo cristatus.
Newsletter for Birdwatchers .
8 (6), 4-5.
