A river is a natural flowing watercourse, usually freshwater, flowing towards an ocean, sea, lake or another river.
In some cases a river flows into the ground and becomes dry at the end of its course without reaching another body of water.
Small rivers can be referred to using names such as stream, creek, brook, rivulet, and rill.
There are no official definitions for the generic term river as applied to geographic features, although in some countries or communities a stream is defined by its size.
Many names for small rivers are specific to geographic location; examples are "run" in some parts of the United States, "burn" in Scotland and northeast England, and "beck" in northern England.
Sometimes a river is defined as being larger than a creek, but not always: the language is vague.
Extensive braided rivers are now found in only a few regions worldwide, such as the South Island of New Zealand.
They also occur on peneplains and some of the larger river deltas.
Anastamosing rivers are similar to braided rivers and are quite rare.
They have multiple sinuous channels carrying large volumes of sediment.
There are rare cases of river bifurcation in which a river divides and the resultant flows ending in different seas.
An example is the bifurcation of Nerodime River in Kosovo.
A river flowing in its channel is a source of energy which acts on the river channel to change its shape and form.
In 1757, the German hydrologist Albert Brahms empirically observed that the submerged weight of objects that may be carried away by a river is proportional to the sixth power of the river flow speed.
Classification
Rivers have been classified by many criteria including their topography, their biotic status, and their relevance to white water rafting or canoeing activities.
Topographical classification
Rivers can generally be classified as either alluvial, bedrock, or some mix of the two.
Alluvial rivers have channels and floodplains that are self-formed in unconsolidated or weakly consolidated sediments.
They erode their banks and deposit material on bars and their floodplains.
Bedrock rivers form when the river downcuts through the modern sediments and into the underlying bedrock.
This occurs in regions that have experienced some kind of uplift (thereby steepening river gradients) or in which a particular hard lithology causes a river to have a steepened reach that has not been covered in modern alluvium.
Bedrock rivers very often contain alluvium on their beds; this material is important in eroding and sculpting the channel.
Rivers that go through patches of bedrock and patches of deep alluvial cover are classified as mixed bedrock-alluvial.
Alluvial rivers can be further classified by their channel pattern as meandering, braided, wandering, anastomose, or straight.
The morphology of an alluvial river reach is controlled by a combination of sediment supply, substrate composition, discharge, vegetation, and bed aggradation.
At the start of the 20th century William Morris Davis devised the "cycle of erosion" method of classifying rivers based on their "age".
Although Davis's system is still found in many books today, after the 1950s and 1960s it became increasingly criticized and rejected by geomorphologists.
His scheme did not produce testable hypotheses and was therefore deemed non-scientific.
Examples of Davis's river "ages" include:
* Youthful river: A river with a steep gradient that has very few tributaries and flows quickly.
Its channels erode deeper rather than wider.
Examples are the Brazos, Trinity and Ebro rivers.
* Mature river: A river with a gradient that is less steep than those of youthful rivers and flows more slowly.
A mature river is fed by many tributaries and has more discharge than a youthful river.
Its channels erode wider rather than deeper.
Examples are the Mississippi, Saint Lawrence, Danube, Ohio, Thames and Paraná rivers.
Old river: A river with a low gradient and low erosive energy.
Old rivers are characterized by flood plains.
Examples are the Yellow, lower Ganges, Tigris, Euphrates, Indus and lower Nile rivers.
* Rejuvenated river: A river with a gradient that is raised by tectonic uplift.
Examples are the Rio Grande and Colorado River.
The ways in which a river's characteristics vary between its upper and lower course are summarized by the Bradshaw model.
Power-law relationships between channel slope, depth, and width are given as a function of discharge by "river regime".
Biotic classification
There are several systems of classification based on biotic conditions typically assigning classes from the most oligotrophic or unpolluted through to the most eutrophic or polluted.
Other systems are based on a whole eco-system approach such as developed by the New Zealand Ministry for the Environment.
In Europe, the requirements of the Water Framework Directive has led to the development of a wide range of classification methods including classifications based on fishery status
A system of river zonation used in francophone communities They are often a rich source of fish and other edible aquatic life, and are a major source of fresh water, which can be used for drinking and irrigation.
Rivers help to determine the urban form of cities and neighbourhoods and their corridors often present opportunities for urban renewal through the development of foreshoreways such as river walks.
Rivers also provide an easy means of disposing of waste water and, in much of the less developed world, other wastes.
Rivers have been used for navigation for thousands of years.
The earliest evidence of navigation is found in the Indus Valley Civilization, which existed in northwestern India around 3300 BC.
Riverine navigation provides a cheap means of transport, and is still used extensively on most major rivers of the world like the Amazon, the Ganges, the Nile, the Mississippi, and the Indus.
Since river boats are often not regulated, they contribute a large amount to global greenhouse gas emissions, and to local cancer due to inhaling of particulates emitted by the transports.
Ecosystem
The organisms in the riparian zone respond to changes in river channel location and patterns of flow.
The ecosystem of rivers is generally described by the river continuum concept, which has some additions and refinements to allow for dams and waterfalls and temporary extensive flooding.
The concept describes the river as a system in which the physical parameters, the availability of food particles and the composition of the ecosystem are continuously changing along its length.
The food (energy) that remains from the upstream part is used downstream.
The general pattern is that the first order streams contain particulate matter (decaying leaves from the surrounding forests) which is processed there by shredders like Plecoptera larvae.
The products of these shredders are used by collectors, such as Hydropsychidae, and further downstream algae that create the primary production become the main food source of the organisms.
All changes are gradual and the distribution of each species can be described as a normal curve, with the highest density where the conditions are optimal.
In rivers succession is virtually absent and the composition of the ecosystem stays fixed in time.
Chemistry
The chemistry of rivers is complex and depends on inputs from the atmosphere, the geology through which it travels and the inputs from man's activities.
The chemical composition of the water has a large impact on the ecology of that water for both plants and animals and it also affects the uses that may be made of the river water.
Understanding and characterising river water chemistry requires a well designed and managed sampling and analysis.
Brackish water
Some rivers generate brackish water by having their river mouth in the ocean.
This, in effect creates a unique environment in which certain species are found.
Flooding
Flooding is a natural part of a river's cycle.
The majority of the erosion of river channels and the erosion and deposition on the associated floodplains occur during the flood stage.
In many developed areas, human activity has changed the form of river channels, altering magnitudes and frequencies of flooding.
Some examples of this are the building of levees, the straightening of channels, and the draining of natural wetlands.
In many cases human activities in rivers and floodplains have dramatically increased the risk of flooding.
Straightening rivers allows water to flow more rapidly downstream, increasing the risk of flooding places further downstream.
Building on flood plains removes flood storage, which again exacerbates downstream flooding.
The building of levees only protects the area behind the levees and not those further downstream.
Levees and flood-banks can also increase flooding upstream because of the back-water pressure as the river flow is impeded by the narrow channel banks.
Detention basins finally also reduce the risk of flooding significantly by being able to take up some of the flood water.
Flow
Studying the flows of rivers is one aspect of hydrology.
Sediment yield
Sediment yield is the total quantity of particulate matter (suspended or bedload) reaching the outlet of a drainage basin over a fixed time frame.
Yield is usually expressed as kilograms per square kilometre per year.
Sediment delivery processes are affected by a myriad of factors such as drainage area size, basin slope, climate, sediment type (lithology), vegetation cover, and human land use / management practices.
The theoretical concept of the 'sediment delivery ratio' (ratio between yield and total amount of sediment eroded) captures the fact that not all of the sediment is eroded within a certain catchment that reaches out to the outlet (due to, for example, deposition on floodplains).
Such storage opportunities are typically increased in catchments of larger size, thus leading to a lower yield and sediment delivery ratio.
Management
Rivers are often managed or controlled to make them more useful or less disruptive to human activity.
* Dams or weirs may be built to control the flow, store water, or extract energy.
* Levees, known as dikes in Europe, may be built to prevent river water from flowing on floodplains or floodways.
* Canals connect rivers to one another for water transfer or navigation.
* River courses may be modified to improve navigation, or straightened to increase the flow rate.
River management is a continuous activity as rivers tend to 'undo' the modifications made by people.
Dredged channels silt up, sluice mechanisms deteriorate with age, levees and dams may suffer seepage or catastrophic failure.
The benefits sought through managing rivers may often be offset by the social and economic costs of mitigating the bad effects of such management.
As an example, in parts of the developed world, rivers have been confined within channels to free up flat flood-plain land for development.
Floods can inundate such development at high financial cost and often with loss of life.
Rivers are increasingly managed for habitat conservation, as they are critical for many aquatic and riparian plants, resident and migratory fishes, waterfowl, birds of prey, migrating birds, and many mammals.
;Arts, entertainment, and media
;General
;Crossings
;Habitats
;Lists
;Transport
Further reading
* - a non-technical primer on the geomorphology and hydraulics of water.
keok80e9pkerhlqgdgmgu2ytn0faa6q
