Nero ( ; ; 15 December 37 - 9 June 68 AD) was the last Roman emperor of the Julio-Claudian dynasty.
He was adopted by his great-uncle Claudius and became Claudius' heir and successor.
Nero focused much of his attention on diplomacy, trade and the cultural life of the empire, ordering theatres built and promoting athletic games.
He made public appearances as an actor, poet, musician and charioteer.
In the eyes of traditionalists, this undermined the dignity and authority of his person, status, and office.
His extravagant, empire-wide program of public and private works was funded by a rise in taxes that was much resented by the upper classes.
In contrast, his populist style of rule remained very popular among the lower classes of Rome and the provinces until his death and beyond.
Various plots against his life were revealed; the ringleaders, most of them Nero's own courtiers, were executed.
In 68 AD Vindex, governor of the Gaulish territory Gallia Lugdunensis, rebelled.
He was supported by Galba, the governor of Hispania Tarraconensis.
Vindex's revolt failed in its immediate aim, but Nero fled Rome when Rome's discontented civil and military authorities chose Galba as emperor.
He committed suicide on June 9, 68 AD, when he learned that he had been tried in absentia and condemned to death as a public enemy, making him the first Roman Emperor to commit suicide.
His death ended the Julio-Claudian dynasty, sparking a brief period of civil wars known as the Year of the Four Emperors.
Nero's rule is usually associated with tyranny and extravagance.
Most Roman sources, such as Suetonius and Cassius Dio, offer overwhelmingly negative assessments of his personality and reign; Tacitus claims that the Roman people thought him compulsive and corrupt.
Suetonius tells that many Romans believed that the Great Fire of Rome was instigated by Nero to clear the way for his planned palatial complex, the Domus Aurea.
According to Tacitus he was said to have seized Christians as scapegoats for the fire and burned them alive, seemingly motivated not by public justice but by personal cruelty.
Some modern historians question the reliability of the ancient sources on Nero's tyrannical acts.
A few sources paint Nero in a more favorable light.
There is evidence of his popularity among the Roman commoners, especially in the eastern provinces of the Empire, where a popular legend arose that Nero had not died and would return.
At least three leaders of short-lived, failed rebellions presented themselves as "Nero reborn" to enlist popular support.
Early life
Nero was born Lucius Domitius Ahenobarbus on 15 December 37in Antium.
He was the only son of Gnaeus Domitius Ahenobarbus and Agrippina the Younger.
His maternal grandparents were Germanicus and Agrippina the Elder; his mother, Caligula's sister.
He was Augustus' great-great grandson, descended from the first Emperor's only daughter, Julia.
The ancient biographer Suetonius, who was critical of Nero's ancestors, wrote that Augustus had reproached Nero's grandfather for his unseemly enjoyment of violent gladiator games.
According to Jürgen Malitz, Suetonius tells that Nero's father was known to be "irascible and brutal", and that both "enjoyed chariot races and theater performances to a degree not befitting their position."
Caligula's reign lasted from 37 until 41.
Claudius succeeded Caligula as Emperor.
Claudius had gold coins issued to mark the adoption.
Classics professor Josiah Osgood has written that "the coins, through their distribution and imagery alike, showed that a new Leader was in the making."
David Shotter noted that, despite events in Rome, Nero's step-brother Britannicus was more prominent in provincial coinages during the early 50s.
Shotter has written that "Claudius' death in 54 has usually been regarded as an event hastened by Agrippina because of signs that Claudius was showing a renewed affection for his natural son," but he notes that among ancient sources Josephus was uniquely reserved in describing the poisoning as a rumor.
Before Claudius' death, Agrippina had maneuvered to remove Britannicus' tutors and replace them with tutors that she had selected.
She was also able to convince Claudius to replace with a single commander, Burrus, two prefects of the Praetorian guard who were suspected of supporting Brittanicus.
Nero's reign (54 AD-68 AD)
Most of what we know about Nero's reign comes from three ancient writers:
Tacitus, Suetonius, and Greek historian Cassius Dio.
According to ancient historians, Nero's construction projects were overly extravagant and the large number of expenditures under Nero left Italy "thoroughly exhausted by contributions of money" with "the provinces ruined."
Modern historians, though, note that the period was riddled with deflation and that it is likely that Nero's spending came in the form of public-works projects and charity intended to ease economic troubles.
Early reign
Nero became emperor in 54 , aged sixteen years.
This made him the youngest sole emperor until Elagabalus, who became emperor aged 14 in 218.
The first five years of Nero's reign were described as Quinquennium Neronis by Trajan; the interpretation of the phrase is a matter of dispute amongst scholars.
Nero's tutor, Seneca, prepared Nero's first speech before the Senate.
During this speech, Nero spoke about "eliminating the ills of the previous regime".
His respect of the Senatorial autonomy, which distinguished him from Caligula and Claudius, was generally well received by the Roman Senate.
Decline
Modern scholars believe that Nero's reign had been going well in the years before Agrippina's death.
For example, Nero promoted the exploration of the Nile river sources with a successful expedition.
After Agrippina's exile, Burrus and Seneca were responsible for the administration of the Empire.
In 62, Nero's adviser Burrus died.
In 64, Nero married Pythagoras, a freedman.
Great Fire of Rome
The Great Fire of Rome erupted on the night of 18 July to 19 July, AD 64.
The fire started on the slope of the Aventine overlooking the Circus Maximus.
Tacitus, the main ancient source for information about the fire, wrote that countless mansions, residences and temples were destroyed.
The fire is reported to have burned for over a week.
Tacitus wrote that some ancient accounts described the fire as an accident, while others had claimed that it was a plot of Nero's.
Tacitus is the only surviving source which does not blame Nero for starting the fire; he says he is "unsure."
Pliny the Elder, Suetonius and Cassius Dio all wrote that Nero was responsible for the fire.
These accounts give several reasons for Nero's alleged arson like Nero's envy of King Priam and a dislike for the city's ancient construction.
Suetonius wrote that Nero started the fire because he wanted the space to build his Golden House.
This Golden House or Domus Aurea included lush artificial landscapes and a 30-meter-tall statue of himself, the Colossus of Nero.
The size of this complex is debated (from 100 to 300 acres).
Tacitus wrote that Nero accused Christians of starting the fire to remove suspicion from himself.
According to this account, many Christians were arrested and brutally executed by "being thrown to the beasts, crucified, and being burned alive".
Suetonius and Cassius Dio alleged that Nero sang the "Sack of Ilium" in stage costume while the city burned.
The popular legend that Nero played the fiddle while Rome burned "is at least partly a literary construct of Flavian propaganda ... which looked askance on the abortive Neronian attempt to rewrite Augustan models of rule."
Nero's contributions to the relief extended to personally taking part in the search for and rescue of victims of the blaze, spending days searching the debris without even his bodyguards.
After the fire, Nero opened his palaces to provide shelter for the homeless, and arranged for food supplies to be delivered in order to prevent starvation among the survivors.
Later years
In 65, Gaius Calpurnius Piso, a Roman statesman, organized a conspiracy against Nero with the help of Subrius Flavus and Sulpicius Asper, a tribune and a centurion of the Praetorian Guard.
Nero was said to have kicked Poppaea to death in 65, before she could have his second child.
Modern historians, noting the probable biases of Suetonius, Tacitus, and Cassius Dio, and the likely absence of eyewitnesses to such an event, propose that Poppaea may have died after miscarriage or in childbirth.
Nero went into deep mourning; Poppaea was given a sumptuous state funeral, divine honors, and was promised a temple for her cult.
A year's importation of incense was burned at the funeral.
Her body was not cremated, as would have been strictly customary, but embalmed after the Egyptian manner and entombed; it is not known where.
Revolt of Vindex and Galba and Nero's death
In March 68, Gaius Julius Vindex, the governor of Gallia Lugdunensis, rebelled against Nero's tax policies.
Lucius Verginius Rufus, the governor of Germania Superior, was ordered to put down Vindex's rebellion.
In an attempt to gain support from outside his own province, Vindex called upon Servius Sulpicius Galba, the governor of Hispania Tarraconensis, to join the rebellion and further, to declare himself emperor in opposition to Nero.
At the Battle of Vesontio in May 68, Verginius' forces easily defeated those of Vindex and the latter committed suicide.).
The prefect of the Praetorian Guard, Gaius Nymphidius Sabinus, also abandoned his allegiance to the Emperor and came out in support of Galba.
In response, Nero fled Rome with the intention of going to the port of Ostia and, from there, to take a fleet to one of the still-loyal eastern provinces.
According to Suetonius, Nero abandoned the idea when some army officers openly refused to obey his commands, responding with a line from Virgil's ".
Suetonius reports that the text of this speech was later found in Nero's writing desk, but that he dared not give it from fear of being torn to pieces before he could reach the Forum.
Nero returned to Rome and spent the evening in the palace.
After sleeping, he awoke at about midnight to find the palace guard had left.
Dispatching messages to his friends' palace chambers for them to come, he received no answers.
Upon going to their chambers personally, he found them all abandoned.
When he called for a gladiator or anyone else adept with a sword to kill him, no one appeared.
He cried, "Have I neither friend nor foe?" and ran out as if to throw himself into the Tiber.
Nero, however, did not know this, and at the news brought by the courier, he prepared himself for suicide, pacing up and down muttering Qualis artifex pereo .
Losing his nerve, he begged one of his companions to set an example by killing himself first.
At last, the sound of approaching horsemen drove Nero to face the end.
However, he still could not bring himself to take his own life but instead he forced his private secretary, Epaphroditos, to perform the task.
When one of the horsemen entered and saw that Nero was dying, he attempted to stop the bleeding, but efforts to save Nero's life were unsuccessful.
Nero's final words were "Too late!
This is fidelity!"
He died on 9 June 68, the anniversary of the death of Octavia, and was buried in the Mausoleum of the Domitii Ahenobarbi, in what is now the Villa Borghese (Pincian Hill) area of Rome.
When news of his death reached Rome, the Senate posthumously declared Nero a public enemy to appease the coming Galba (as the Senate had initially declared Galba as a public enemy) and proclaimed Galba as the new emperor.
Chaos would ensue in the year of the Four Emperors.
After Nero
According to Suetonius and Cassius Dio, the people of Rome celebrated the death of Nero.
Tacitus, though, describes a more complicated political environment.
Tacitus mentions that Nero's death was welcomed by Senators, nobility and the upper class.
Eastern sources, namely Philostratus and Apollonius of Tyana, mention that Nero's death was mourned as he "restored the liberties of Hellas with a wisdom and moderation quite alien to his character" and that he "held our liberties in his hand and respected them."
Modern scholarship generally holds that, while the Senate and more well-off individuals welcomed Nero's death, the general populace was "loyal to the end and beyond, for Otho and Vitellius both thought it worthwhile to appeal to their nostalgia."
Nero's name was erased from some monuments, in what Edward Champlin regards as an "outburst of private zeal".
Many portraits of Nero were reworked to represent other figures; according to Eric R. Varner, over fifty such images survive.
This reworking of images is often explained as part of the way in which the memory of disgraced emperors was condemned posthumously (see damnatio memoriae).
Damaged portraits of Nero, often with hammer-blows directed to the face, have been found in many provinces of the Roman Empire, three recently having been identified from the United Kingdom (see damnatio memoriae).
Otho overthrew Galba.
Otho was said to be liked by many soldiers because he had been a friend of Nero's and resembled him somewhat in temperament.
After Nero's suicide in 68, there was a widespread belief, especially in the eastern provinces, that he was not dead and somehow would return.
At least three Nero imposters emerged leading rebellions.
The first, who sang and played the cithara or lyre and whose face was similar to that of the dead emperor, appeared in 69 during the reign of Vitellius.
and the matter almost came to war.
Julius Classicianus replaced Decianus as procurator.
Classicianus advised Nero to replace Paulinus, who continued to punish the population even after the rebellion was over.
Pursuits
Nero studied poetry, music, painting and sculpture.
He both sang and played the cithara (a type of lyre).
Many of these disciplines were standard education for the Roman elite, but Nero's devotion to music exceeded what was socially acceptable for a Roman of his class.
and artistic competitions were added to the athletic events.
Nero won every contest in which he was a competitor.
During the games Nero sang and played his lyre on stage, acted in tragedies and raced chariots.
He won a 10-horse chariot race, despite being thrown from the chariot and leaving the race.
He was crowned on the basis that he would have won if he had completed the race.
After he died a year later, his name was removed from the list of winners.
Champlin writes that though Nero's participation "effectively stifled true competition, Nero seems to have been oblivious of reality."
The bulk of what is known of Nero comes from Tacitus, Suetonius and Cassius Dio, who were all of the senatorial class.
Tacitus and Suetonius wrote their histories on Nero over fifty years after his death, while Cassius Dio wrote his history over 150 years after Nero's death.
These sources contradict one another on a number of events in Nero's life including the death of Claudius, the death of Agrippina, and the Roman fire of 64, but they are consistent in their condemnation of Nero.
A handful of other sources also add a limited and varying perspective on Nero.
Few surviving sources paint Nero in a favourable light.
Some sources, though, portray him as a competent emperor who was popular with the Roman people, especially in the east.
;Cassius Dio
Cassius Dio (c. 155-229) was the son of Cassius Apronianus, a Roman senator.
He passed the greater part of his life in public service.
He was a senator under Commodus and governor of Smyrna after the death of Septimius Severus; and afterwards suffect consul around 205, and also proconsul in Africa and Pannonia.
Books 61-63 of Dio's Roman History describe the reign of Nero.
Only fragments of these books remain and what does remain was abridged and altered by John Xiphilinus, an 11th-century monk.
;Dio Chrysostom
Dio Chrysostom (c. 40-120), a Greek philosopher and historian, wrote the Roman people were very happy with Nero and would have allowed him to rule indefinitely.
They longed for his rule once he was gone and embraced imposters when they appeared:
QTEMPLATE |Indeed the truth about this has not come out even yet; for so far as the rest of his subjects were concerned, there was nothing to prevent his continuing to be Emperor for all time, seeing that even now everybody wishes he were still alive.
And the great majority do believe that he still is, although in a certain sense he has died not once but often along with those who had been firmly convinced that he was still alive.
;Epictetus
Epictetus (c. 55-135) was the slave to Nero's scribe Epaphroditos.
He makes a few passing negative comments on Nero's character in his work, but makes no remarks on the nature of his rule.
He describes Nero as a spoiled, angry and unhappy man.
;Josephus
The historian Josephus (c. 37-100), while calling Nero a tyrant, was also the first to mention bias against Nero.
Of other historians, he said:
QTEMPLATE |But I omit any further discourse about these affairs; for there have been a great many who have composed the history of Nero; some of which have departed from the truth of facts out of favour, as having received benefits from him; while others, out of hatred to him, and the great ill-will which they bore him, have so impudently raved against him with their lies, that they justly deserve to be condemned.
Nor do I wonder at such as have told lies of Nero, since they have not in their writings preserved the truth of history as to those facts that were earlier than his time, even when the actors could have no way incurred their hatred, since those writers lived a long time after them.
;Lucan
Although more of a poet than historian, Lucanus (c. 39-65) has one of the kindest accounts of Nero's rule.
He writes of peace and prosperity under Nero in contrast to previous war and strife.
Ironically, he was later involved in a conspiracy to overthrow Nero and was executed.
;Philostratus
Philostratus II "the Athenian" (c. 172-250) spoke of Nero in the Life of Apollonius Tyana (Books 4-5).
Although he has a generally bad or dim view of Nero, he speaks of others' positive reception of Nero in the East.
;Pliny the Elder
The history of Nero by Pliny the Elder (c. 24-79) did not survive.
Still, there are several references to Nero in Pliny's Natural Histories.
Pliny has one of the worst opinions of Nero and calls him an "enemy of mankind."
;Plutarch
Plutarch (c. 46-127) mentions Nero indirectly in his account of the Life of Galba and the Life of Otho, as well as in the Vision of Thespesius in Book 7 of the Moralia, where a voice orders that Nero's soul be transferred to a more offensive species.
Nero is portrayed as a tyrant, but those that replace him are not described as better.
;Seneca the Younger
It is not surprising that Seneca (c. 4 BC-65), Nero's teacher and advisor, writes very well of Nero.
;Suetonius
Suetonius (c. 69-130) was a member of the equestrian order, and he was the head of the department of the imperial correspondence.
While in this position, Suetonius started writing biographies of the emperors, accentuating the anecdotal and sensational aspects.
;Tacitus
The Annals by Tacitus (c. 56-117) is the most detailed and comprehensive history on the rule of Nero, despite being incomplete after the year 66.
Tacitus described the rule of the Julio-Claudian emperors as generally unjust.
He also thought that existing writing on them was unbalanced:
QTEMPLATE |The histories of Tiberius, Caius, Claudius and Nero, while they were in power, were falsified through terror, and after their death were written under the irritation of a recent hatred.
Tacitus was the son of a procurator, who married into the elite family of Agricola.
He entered his political life as a senator after Nero's death and, by Tacitus' own admission, owed much to Nero's rivals.
Realising that this bias may be apparent to others, Tacitus protests that his writing is true.
; Girolamo Cardano
In 1562 Girolamo Cardano published in Basel his Encomium Neronis, which was one of the first historical references of the Modern era to portray Nero in a positive light.
Nero in Jewish and Christian tradition
Jewish tradition
At the end of 66, conflict broke out between Greeks and Jews in Jerusalem and Caesarea.
According to the Talmud, Nero went to Jerusalem and shot arrows in all four directions.
All the arrows landed in the city.
He then asked a passing child to repeat the verse he had learned that day.
The child responded, "I will lay my vengeance upon Edom by the hand of my people Israel" .
Nero became terrified, believing that God wanted the Second Temple to be destroyed, but that he would punish the one to carry it out.
Nero said, "He desires to lay waste His House and to lay the blame on me," whereupon he fled and converted to Judaism to avoid such retribution.
Vespasian was then dispatched to put down the rebellion.
The Talmud adds that the sage Reb Meir Baal HaNess lived in the time of the Mishna, and was a prominent supporter of the Bar Kokhba rebellion against Roman rule.
Rabbi Meir was considered one of the greatest of the Tannaim of the third generation (139-163).
According to the Talmud, his father was a descendant of Nero who had converted to Judaism.
His wife Bruriah is one of the few women cited in the Gemara.
He is the third-most-frequently-mentioned sage in the Mishnah.
Roman and Greek sources nowhere report Nero's alleged trip to Jerusalem or his alleged conversion to Judaism.
There is also no record of Nero having any offspring who survived infancy: his only recorded child, Claudia Augusta, died aged 4 months.
Christian tradition
Non-Christian historian Tacitus describes Nero extensively torturing and executing Christians after the fire of 64.
Christian writer Tertullian (c. 155-230) was the first to call Nero the first persecutor of Christians.
He wrote, "Examine your records.
There you will find that Nero was the first that persecuted this doctrine".
Lactantius (c. 240-320) also said that Nero "first persecuted the servants of God".
as does Sulpicius Severus.
However, Suetonius writes that, "since the Jews constantly made disturbances at the instigation of Chrestus, the emperor Claudius expelled them from Rome" ("Iudaeos impulsore Chresto assidue tumultuantis Roma expulit").
These expelled "Jews" may have been early Christians, although Suetonius is not explicit.
Nor is the Bible explicit, calling Aquila of Pontus and his wife, Priscilla, both expelled from Italy at the time, "Jews" (Acts 18:2).
Martyrdoms of Peter and Paul
The first text to suggest that Nero ordered the execution of an apostle is a letter by Clement to the Corinthians traditionally dated to around 96 A.D.
The apocryphal Ascension of Isaiah, a Christian writing from the 2nd century, says, "the slayer of his mother, who himself (even) this king, will persecute the plant which the Twelve Apostles of the Beloved have planted.
Of the Twelve one will be delivered into his hands"; this is interpreted as referring to Nero.
Bishop Eusebius of Caesarea (c. 275-339) was the first to write explicitly that Paul was beheaded in Rome during the reign of Nero.
He states that Nero's persecution led to Peter and Paul's deaths, but that Nero did not give any specific orders.
However, several other accounts going back to the 1st century have Paul surviving his two years in Rome and travelling to Hispania, before facing trial in Rome again prior to his death.
Peter is first said to have been crucified upside-down in Rome during Nero's reign (but not by Nero) in the apocryphal Acts of Peter (c. 200).
The account ends with Paul still alive and Nero abiding by God's command not to persecute any more Christians.
By the 4th century, a number of writers were stating that Nero killed Peter and Paul.
Antichrist
The Sibylline Oracles, Book 5 and 8, written in the 2nd century, speak of Nero returning and bringing destruction.
Within Christian communities, these writings, along with others, fueled the belief that Nero would return as the Antichrist.
In 310, Lactantius wrote that Nero "suddenly disappeared, and even the burial place of that noxious wild beast was nowhere to be seen.
This has led some persons of extravagant imagination to suppose that, having been conveyed to a distant region, he is still reserved alive; and to him they apply the Sibylline verses".
Lactantius maintains that it is not right to believe this.
In 422, Augustine of Hippo wrote about 2 Thessalonians 2:1-11, where he believed that Paul mentioned the coming of the Antichrist.
Although he rejects the theory, Augustine mentions that many Christians believed Nero was the Antichrist or would return as the Antichrist.
He wrote, "so that in saying, 'For the mystery of iniquity doth already work,' he alluded to Nero, whose deeds already seemed to be as the deeds of Antichrist."
such as Delbert Hillers (Johns Hopkins University) of the American Schools of Oriental Research and the editors of the Oxford Study Bible and Harper Collins Study Bible, contend that the number 666 in the Book of Revelation is a code for Nero, a view that is also supported in Roman Catholic Biblical commentaries.
Ancestry
Notes
Bibliography
Primary sources
* http:/ txt Tacitus txt Tacitus ccel works works.html Josephus, War of the Jews, Books II-VI (c. 94)
* http:/ j works Thayer Roman Cassius_Dio Thayer Roman Plutarch Galba*.html Plutarch, The Parallel Lives, The Life of Galba (c. 110)
* http:/ ap-ark life Thayer Roman Suetonius Nero*.html Suetonius, The Lives of Twelve Caesars, the Life of Nero (c. 121)
Secondary sources
* Benario, Herbert W. http:/ nero.htm
Nero at De Imperatoribus Romanis.
* Cronin, Vincent.
Nero.
London: Stacey International, 2010 ().
* Grant, Michael.
Nero.
New York: Dorset Press, 1989 ().
* Griffin, Miriam T. Nero: The End of a Dynasty.
New Haven, CT; London: Yale University Press, 1985 (hardcover, ); London; New York: Routledge, 1987 (paperback, ).
* Holland, Richard.
Nero: The Man Behind the Myth.
Stroud: Sutton Publishing, 2000 (paperback ).
* Minaud, Gérard, Les vies de 12 femmes d'empereur romain - Devoirs, Intrigues & Voluptés , Paris, L'Harmattan, 2012, ch. 4, La vie de Poppée, femme de Néron, p. 97-120 ().
* Warmington, Brian Herbert.
Nero: Reality and Legend.
London: Chatto & Windus, 1969 (hardcover, ); New York: W.W Norton & Company, 1970 (paperback, ); New York: Vintage, 1981 (paperback, ).
* (Russian) Mikhail Berman-Tsikinovsky "The Pisonian Conspiracy" (Заговор Пизона)docudrama based on Tacitus Annals 15 and other sources.
Failed conspiracy against Nero led to tragic death of 26 year old Great Roman poet Lucan and his famous uncle Seneca, executed by Nero order.
Moscow, Wagrius plus, 2008.
* https:/ web http:/ gaiusulpius iho Persns.asp?IntID
5&Ename
Nero Nero basic data & select quotes posted by http:/ Romans On Line
* https:/ web http:/ readinghall Nero ?p=tacitus Nero's depiction in Tacitus' Annals
* http:/ emperors Illustrated History of the Roman Empire.
