Surtsey ("Surtr's island" in Icelandic, ) is a volcanic island located in the Vestmannaeyjar archipelago off the southern coast of Iceland.
At , Surtsey is the southernmost point of Iceland.
It was formed in a volcanic eruption which began below sea level, and reached the surface on 14 November 1963.
The eruption lasted until 5 June 1967, when the island reached its maximum size of .
Since then, wave erosion has caused the island to steadily diminish in size: , its surface area was .
The most recent survey (2007) shows the island's maximum elevation at above sea level.
The new island was named after Surtr, a fire jötunn or giant from Norse mythology.
It was intensively studied by volcanologists during its eruption, and afterwards by botanists and other biologists as life forms gradually colonised the originally barren island.
The undersea vents that produced Surtsey are part of the Vestmannaeyjar submarine volcanic system, part of the fissure of the sea floor called the Mid-Atlantic Ridge.
Vestmannaeyjar also produced the famous eruption of Eldfell on the island of Heimaey in 1973.
The eruption that created Surtsey also created a few other small islands along this volcanic chain, such as Jólnir and other unnamed peaks.
Most of these eroded away fairly quickly.
It is estimated that Surtsey will remain above sea level for another 100 years.
Geology
Formation
The eruption was unexpected, and almost certainly began some days before it became apparent at the surface.
The sea floor at the eruption site is below sea level, and at this depth volcanic emissions and explosions would be suppressed, quenched and dissipated by the water pressure and density.
Gradually, as repeated flows built up a mound of material that approached sea level, the explosions could no longer be contained, and activity broke the surface.
The first noticeable indications of volcanic activity were recorded at the seismic station in Kirkjubæjarklaustur, Iceland from 6 to 8 November, which detected weak tremors emanating from an epicentre approximately west-south-west at a distance of , the location of Surtsey.
Another station in Reykjavík recorded even weaker tremors for ten hours on 12 November at an undetermined location, when seismic activity ceased until 21 November.
That same day, people in the coastal town of Vík away noticed a smell of hydrogen sulphide.
Eruption at the surface
At 07:15 UTC on 14 November 1963, the cook of Ísleifur II, a trawler sailing these same waters, spotted a rising column of dark smoke southwest of the boat.
The captain thought it might have been a boat on fire, and ordered his crew to investigate.
Instead, they encountered explosive eruptions giving off black columns of ash, indicating that a volcanic eruption had begun to penetrate the surface of the sea.
As the eruptions continued, they became concentrated at one vent along the fissure and began to build the island into a more circular shape.
By 24 November, the island measured about .
The violent explosions caused by the meeting of lava and sea water meant that the island consisted of a loose pile of volcanic rock (scoria), which was eroded rapidly by North Atlantic storms during the winter.
However, eruptions more than kept pace with wave erosion, and by February 1964, the island had a maximum diameter of over .
Permanent island
By early 1964, though, the continuing eruptions had built the island to such a size that sea water could no longer easily reach the vents, and the volcanic activity became much less explosive.
Instead, lava fountains and flows became the main form of activity.
These resulted in a hard cap of extremely erosion-resistant rock being laid down on top of much of the loose volcanic pile, which prevented the island from being washed away rapidly.
Effusive eruptions continued until 1965, by which time the island had a surface area of .
Subsequent volcanic activity
In 1965, the activity on the main island diminished, but at the end of May that year an eruption began at a vent off the northern shore.
By 28 May, an island had appeared, and was named Syrtlingur (Little Surtsey).
The new island was washed away during early June, but reappeared on 14 June.
Eruptions at Syrtlingur were much smaller in scale than those that had built Surtsey, with the average rate of emission of volcanic materials being about a tenth of the rate at the main vent.
Activity was short-lived, continuing until the beginning of October 1965, by which time the islet had an area of .
Once the eruptions had ceased, wave erosion rapidly wore the island away, and it disappeared beneath the waves on 24 October.
During December 1965, more submarine activity occurred southwest of Surtsey, and another island was formed.
It was named Jólnir, and over the following eight months it appeared and disappeared several times, as wave erosion and volcanic activity alternated in dominance.
Activity at Jólnir was much weaker than the activity at the main vent, and even weaker than that seen at Syrtlingur, but the island eventually grew to a maximum size of in height, covering an area of , during July and early August 1966.
Like Syrtlingur, though, after activity ceased on 8 August 1966, it was rapidly eroded, and dropped below sea level during October 1966.
Effusive eruptions on the main island returned on 19 August 1966, with fresh lava flows giving it further resistance to erosion.
The eruption rate diminished steadily, though, and on 5 June 1967, the eruption ended.
The volcano has been dormant ever since.
The total volume of lava emitted during the three-and-a-half-year eruption was about one cubic kilometre (0.24 cu mi), and the island's highest point was above sea level at that time.
Its maximum elevation has diminished to .
Volcanoes in the Vestmannaeyjar archipelago are typically monogenetic, and so the island is unlikely to be enlarged in the future by further eruptions.
The heavy seas around the island have been eroding it ever since the island appeared, and since the end of the eruption almost half of its original area has been lost.
The island currently loses about of its surface area each year.
Future
This island is unlikely to disappear entirely in the near future.
The eroded area consisted mostly of loose tephra, easily washed away.
Most of the remaining area is capped by hard lava flows, which are much more resistant to erosion.
In addition, complex chemical reactions within the loose tephra within the island have gradually formed highly erosion resistant tuff material, in a process known as palagonitization.
On Surtsey this process has happened quite rapidly, due to high temperatures not far below the surface.
Estimates of how long Surtsey will survive are based on the rate of erosion seen up to the present day.
Assuming that the current rate does not change, the island will be mostly at or below sea level by 2100.
However, the rate of erosion is likely to slow as the tougher core of the island is exposed: an assessment assuming that the rate of erosion will slow exponentially suggests that the island will survive for many centuries.
Plant life
In the spring of 1965, the first vascular plant was found growing on the northern shore of Surtsey, mosses became visible in 1967, and lichens were first found on the Surtsey lava in 1970.
Plant colonisation on Surtsey has been closely studied, the vascular plants in particular as they have been of far greater significance than mosses, lichens and fungi in the development of vegetation.
Birds
The expansion of bird life on the island has both relied on and helped to advance the spread of plant life.
Birds use the plants for nesting material, but also continue to assist in the spreading of seeds, and fertilize the soil with their guano.
Birds first began nesting on Surtsey three years after the eruptions ended, with fulmar and guillemot the first species to set up home.
Twelve species are now regularly found on the island.
A gull colony has been present since 1984, although gulls were seen briefly on the shores of the new island only weeks after it first appeared.
As well as providing a home for some species of birds, Surtsey has also been used as a stopping-off point for migrating birds, particularly those en route between Europe and Iceland.
Species that have been seen briefly on the island include whooper swans, various species of geese, and common ravens.
Although Surtsey lies to the west of the main migration routes to Iceland, it has become a more common stopping point as its vegetation has improved.
In 2008, the 14th bird species was detected with the discovery of a common raven's nest.
Marine life
Soon after the island's formation, seals were seen around the island.
They soon began basking there, particularly on the northern spit, which grew as the waves eroded the island.
Seals were found to be breeding on the island in 1983, and a group of up to 70 made the island their breeding spot.
Grey seals are more common on the island than harbour seals, but both are now well established.
The presence of seals attracts orcas, which are frequently seen in the waters around the Vestmannaeyjar archipelago and now frequent the waters around Surtsey.
On the submarine portion of the island, many marine species are found.
Starfish are abundant, as are sea urchins and limpets.
The rocks are covered in algae, and seaweed covers much of the submarine slopes of the volcano, with its densest cover between below sea level.
Other life
Insects arrived on Surtsey soon after its formation, and were first detected in 1964.
The original arrivals were flying insects, carried to the island by winds and their own power.
Some were believed to have been blown across from as far away as mainland Europe.
Later insect life arrived on floating driftwood, and both live animals and carcasses washed up on the island.
When a large, grass-covered tussock was washed ashore in 1974, scientists took half of it for analysis and discovered 663 land invertebrates, mostly mites and springtails, the great majority of which had survived the crossing.
The establishment of insect life provided some food for birds, and birds in turn helped many species to become established on the island.
The bodies of dead birds provide sustenance for carnivorous insects, while the fertilisation of the soil and resulting promotion of plant life provides a viable habitat for herbivorous insects.
Some higher forms of land life are now colonising the soil of Surtsey.
The first earthworm was found in a soil sample in 1993, probably carried over from Heimaey by a bird.
However, the next year earthworms were not found.
Slugs were found in 1998, and appeared to be similar to varieties found in the southern Icelandic mainland.
Spiders and beetles have also become established.
Human impact
The only other significant human impact is a small prefabricated hut which is used by researchers while staying on the island.
The hut includes a few bunk beds and a solar power source to drive an emergency radio and other key electronics.
All visitors check themselves and belongings to ensure no seeds are accidentally introduced by humans to this ecosystem.
It is believed that some young boys tried to introduce potatoes, which were promptly dug up once discovered.
*Nishinoshima, a Japanese volcanic island that was enlarged in recent decades by a similar process to the formation of Surtsey.
*Hunga Tonga-Hunga Ha'apai, an island that formed in the South Pacific in 2015 after a series of volcanic eruptions.
