Eid al-Adha (, ) or Eid Qurban (), also called the "Festival of the Sacrifice", is the second of two Islamic holidays celebrated worldwide each year (the other being Eid al-Fitr), and considered the holier of the two.
It honours the willingness of Ibrahim (Abraham) to sacrifice his son as an act of obedience to God's command.
But, before Abraham could sacrifice his son, God provided a goat to sacrifice instead.
In commemoration of this intervention, an animal is sacrificed ritually and divided into three parts.
One share is given to the poor and needy, another is kept for home, and the third is given to relatives.
In the Islamic lunar calendar, Eid al-Adha falls on the 10th day of Dhu al-Hijjah, and lasts for four days.
In the international (Gregorian) calendar, the dates vary from year to year shifting approximately 11 days earlier each year.
Other names
In languages other than Arabic, the name is often simply translated into the local language, such as English , German , Dutch , Romanian , and Hungarian .
In Spanish it is known as or (both meaning "festival of the lamb").
In Kurdish it is known as (Cejna Qurbanê / جەژنی قوربان).
It is also known as Eid Qurban () in Persian speaking countries such as Afghanistan and Iran, in Turkey,), and as by the Yorúbà people of Nigeria
The following names are used as other names of Eid al-Adha:
* (transliterations of the Arabic name) is used in Urdu, Hindi, Assamese, Bengali, Gujarati, and Austronesian languages such as Malay and Indonesian.
* meaning "Greater Eid" (the "Lesser Eid" being Eid al-Fitr) is used in Yemen, Syria, and North Africa (Morocco, Algeria, Tunisia, Libya, and Egypt).
Local language translations are used in Pashto, Kashmiri (), Urdu and Hindi (), in Bengali, Tamil (, "Great Day") and Malayalam (, "Great Day of Sacrifice") as well as Manding varieties in West Africa such as Bambara, Maninka, Jula etc. .
* () meaning "the Feast of Cows (also sheep or goats)" is used in Egypt, Saudi Arabia, and the Middle East.
Although the word properly means a cow, it is also semantically extended to mean all livestock, especially sheep or goats.
This extension is used in Hindi and Urdu as a very similar name (, 'the Feast of goat') is used for the occasion.
*The Hajj Feast "Ram Sallah" is also used, as it refers to the rams that are being sacrificed on that day.
Etymology
The word () means 'festival', 'celebration', 'feast day', or 'holiday'.
It itself is a triliteral root with associated root meanings of "to go back, to rescind, to accrue, to be accustomed, habits, to repeat, to be experienced; appointed time or place, anniversary, feast day."
Arthur Jeffery contests this etymology, and believes the term to have been borrowed into Arabic from Syriac, or less likely Targumic Aramaic.
The words () and () are synonymous in meaning 'sacrifice' (animal sacrifice), 'offering' or 'oblation'.
The first word comes from the triliteral root () with associated meanings of "immolate ; offer up ; sacrifice ; victimize."
No occurrence of this root with a meaning related to sacrifice occurs in the Qur'an The earliest Islamic traditions identify Isma’il (Ishmael) as the son who was sacrificed.
Upon hearing this command, Abraham prepared to submit to the will of God.
During this preparation, Shaytaan (the Devil) tempted Abraham and his family by trying to dissuade them from carrying out God's commandment, and Ibraham drove Satan away by throwing pebbles at him.
In commemoration of their rejection of Satan, stones are thrown at symbolic pillars during the Stoning of the Devil during Hajj rites.
Facing a dilemma, Prophet Ibrahim a.s. consulted his son about the commandment.
Prophet Ismail a.s. immediately told him to do what he was asked.
Both Prophet Ibrahim a.s. and Prophet Ismail a.s. believed in the divine wisdom of Allah, the Most Loving and Most Benevolent.
Eventually, by His Mercy, Allah did not allow Prophet Ismail a.s. to be sacrificed.
Acknowledging that Prophet Ibrahim a.s. was willing to sacrifice what is dear to him, an animal was sacrificed instead.
Ibraham had passed the test by his willingness to carry out God's command.
This story is known as the Akedah in Judaism (Binding of Isaac) and originates in the Torah, the first book of Moses (Genesis, Ch. 22).
The Quran refers to the Akedah as follows:
QTEMPLATE |1=100
"O my Lord!
Grant me a righteous (son)!"
So We gave him the good news of a boy ready to suffer and forbear.
102 Then, when (the son) reached (the age of) (serious) work with him, he said: "O my son!
I see in vision that I offer thee in sacrifice: Now see what is thy view!"
(The son) said: "O my father!
Do as thou art commanded: thou will find me if Allah so wills one practicing Patience and Constancy!"
103 So when they had both submitted their wills (to Allah), and he had laid him prostrate on his forehead (for sacrifice),
104 We called out to him "O Ibraham!
105 "Thou hast already fulfilled the vision!"
thus indeed do We reward those who do right.
106 For this was obviously a trial-
And We ransomed him with a momentous sacrifice:
And We left (this blessing) for him among generations (to come) in later times:
109 "Peace and salutation to Abraham!"
Thus indeed do We reward those who do right.
For he was one of our believing Servants.
And We gave him the good news of Isaac a prophet one of the Righteous.|2=Quran, sura 37 (Aṣ-Ṣāffāt), āyāt 100-112
The word "Eid" appears once in Al-Ma'ida, the fifth sura of the Quran, with the meaning "solemn festival".
Eid prayers
Devotees offer the Eid al-Adha prayers at the mosque.
The Eid al-Adha prayer is performed any time after the sun completely rises up to just before the entering of Zuhr time, on the 10th of Dhu al-Hijjah.
In the event of a force majeure (e.g. natural disaster), the prayer may be delayed to the 11th of Dhu al-Hijjah and then to the 12th of Dhu al-Hijjah.
Eid prayers must be offered in congregation.
Participation of women in the prayer congregation varies from community to community.
It consists of two rakats (units) with seven takbirs in the first Raka'ah and five Takbirs in the second Raka'ah.
For Shia Muslims, Salat al-Eid differs from the five daily canonical prayers in that no adhan (call to prayer) or iqama (call) is pronounced for the two Eid prayers.
The salat (prayer) is then followed by the khutbah, or sermon, by the Imam.
At the conclusion of the prayers and sermon, Muslims embrace and exchange greetings with one another (Eid Mubarak), give gifts and visit one another.
Many Muslims also take this opportunity to invite their non-Muslim friends, neighbours, co-workers and classmates to their Eid festivities to better acquaint them about Islam and Muslim culture.
Traditions and practices
During Eid al-Adha, distributing meat amongst the people, chanting the takbir out loud before the Eid prayers on the first day and after prayers throughout the three days of Eid, are considered essential parts of this important Islamic festival.
The takbir consists of:
Men, women, and children are expected to dress in their finest clothing to perform Eid prayer in a large congregation in an open waqf ("stopping") field called Eidgah or mosque.
Affluent Muslims who can afford it sacrifice their best halal domestic animals (usually a cow, but can also be a camel, goat, sheep, or ram depending on the region) as a symbol of Abraham's willingness to sacrifice his only son.
The sacrificed animals, called (), known also by the Perso-Arabic term qurbāni, have to meet certain age and quality standards or else the animal is considered an unacceptable sacrifice.
In Pakistan alone nearly ten million animals are slaughtered on Eid days costing over US$2.0 billion.
The meat from the sacrificed animal is preferred to be divided into three parts.
The family retains one-third of the share; another third is given to relatives, friends, and neighbors; and the remaining third is given to the poor and needy.
Each year, Eid al-Adha (like other Islamic holidays) falls on one of about two to four different Gregorian dates in different parts of the world, because the boundary of crescent visibility is different from the International Date Line.
The following list shows the official dates of Eid al-Adha for Saudi Arabia as announced by the Supreme Judicial Council.
Future dates are estimated according to the Umm al-Qura calendar of Saudi Arabia.
to announce the specific dates for both Hajj rituals and the subsequent Eid festival.
The three days after the listed date are also part of the festival.
The time before the listed date the pilgrims visit the Mount Arafat and descend from it after sunrise of the listed day.
In many countries, the start of any lunar Hijri month varies based on the observation of new moon by local religious authorities, so the exact day of celebration varies by locality.
Notes
