A primate ( ) (from Latin primat-, from primus: "prime, first rank") is a eutherian mammal constituting the taxonomic order Primates.
Primates arose 85-55 million years ago first as plesiadapiformes from small terrestrial mammals (Primatomorpha), which adapted to living in the trees of tropical forests: many primate characteristics represent adaptations to life in this challenging environment, including large brains, visual acuity, color vision, altered shoulder girdle, and dexterous hands.
Primates range in size from Madame Berthe's mouse lemur, which weighs , to the eastern gorilla, weighing over .
There are 190-448 species of living primates, depending on which classification is used.
New primate species continue to be discovered: over 25 species were described in the first decade of the 2000s, and eleven since 2010.
Primates are divided into two distinct suborders (see diagram under History of terminology).
The first is the strepsirrhines (from Greek 'wet-nosed') - lemurs, galagos, and lorisids.
The second is haplorhines - the "dry-nosed" primates (from Greek 'simple-nosed') - tarsier, monkey, and ape clades, the last of these including humans.
Simians (infraorder Simiiformes, from Greek simos 'flat-nosed') are monkeys and apes, cladistically including: the catarrhines (from Latin 'narrow nosed') consisting of the Old World monkeys and apes; and the platyrrhines (from Latin 'flat-nosed'): this division occurred about 60 million years ago.
Forty million years ago, simians from Africa migrated to South America, presumably by drifting on debris, and gave rise to the New World monkeys.
Twenty five million years ago the remaining Old World simians (catarrhines) split into apes and Old World monkeys.
Common names for the simians are the (Old World) baboons, macaques, gibbons, and great apes; and the (New World) capuchins, howlers and squirrel monkeys.
Primates have large brains (relative to body size) compared to other mammals, as well as an increased reliance on visual acuity at the expense of the sense of smell, which is the dominant sensory system in most mammals.
These features are more developed in monkeys and apes, and noticeably less so in lorises and lemurs.
Some primates are trichromats, with three independent channels for conveying color information.
Except for apes and humans, primates have tails.
Most primates also have opposable thumbs.
Many species are sexually dimorphic; differences may include muscle mass, fat distribution, pelvic width, canine tooth size, hair distribution, and coloration.
Primates have slower rates of development than other similarly sized mammals, reach maturity later, and have longer lifespans.
Depending on the species, adults may live in solitude, in mated pairs, or in groups of up to hundreds of members.
Some primates, including gorillas, humans and baboons, are primarily terrestrial rather than arboreal, but all species have adaptations for climbing trees.
Arboreal locomotion techniques used include leaping from tree to tree and swinging between branches of trees (brachiation); terrestrial locomotion techniques include walking on two limbs (bipedalism) and modified walking on four limbs (knuckle-walking).
Primates are among the most social of animals, forming pairs or family groups, uni-male harems, and multi-male/multi-female groups.
Non-human primates have at least four types of social systems, many defined by the amount of movement by adolescent females between groups.
Most primate species remain at least partly arboreal: the exceptions are some great apes, baboons, and humans, who left the trees for the ground and now inhabit every continent.
Close interactions between humans and non-human primates (NHPs) can create opportunities for the transmission of zoonotic diseases, especially virus diseases, including herpes, measles, ebola, rabies, and hepatitis.
Thousands of non-human primates are used in research around the world because of their psychological and physiological similarity to humans.
About 60% of primate species are threatened with extinction.
Common threats include deforestation, forest fragmentation, monkey drives, and primate hunting for use in medicines, as pets, and for food.
Large-scale tropical forest clearing for agriculture most threatens primates.
History of terminology
The English name "primates" is derived from Old French or French primat, from a noun use of Latin primat-, from primus ("prime, first rank").
The name was given by Carl Linnaeus because he thought this the "highest" order of animals.
The relationships among the different groups of primates were not clearly understood until relatively recently, so the commonly used terms are somewhat confused.
For example, "ape" has been used either as an alternative for "monkey" or for any tailless, relatively human-like primate.
Sir Wilfrid Le Gros Clark was one of the primatologists who developed the idea of trends in primate evolution and the methodology of arranging the living members of an order into an "ascending series" leading to humans.
Commonly used names for groups of primates such as "prosimians", "monkeys", "lesser apes", and "great apes" reflect this methodology.
According to our current understanding of the evolutionary history of the primates, several of these groups are vary; for the one used here see e.g. .
In contrast with Clark's methodology, modern classifications typically identify (or name) only those groupings that are monophyletic; that is, such a named group includes all the descendants of the group's common ancestor.
The cladogram below shows one possible classification sequence of the living primates: Other classifications are also used.
For example, an alternative classification of the living Strepsirrhini divides them into two infraorders, Lemuriformes and Lorisiformes.
** Suborder Strepsirrhini: lemurs, galagos and lorisids
***** Family Cheirogaleidae: dwarf lemurs and mouse-lemurs (34 species)
***** Family Lemuridae: ring-tailed lemur and allies (21 species)
***** Family Lepilemuridae: sportive lemurs (26 species)
***** Family Indriidae: woolly lemurs and allies (19 species)
***** Family Callitrichidae:
marmosets and tamarins (42 species)
***** Family Cebidae: capuchins and squirrel monkeys (14 species)
***** Family Aotidae: night or owl monkeys (douroucoulis) (11 species)
***** Family Pitheciidae:
titis, sakis and uakaris (43 species)
***** Family Atelidae: howler, spider, woolly spider and woolly monkeys (29 species)
Family Cercopithecidae:
Old World monkeys (138 species)
****** Family Hylobatidae: gibbons or "lesser apes" (18 species)
****** Family Hominidae: great apes, including humans (8 species)
Order Primates was established by Carl Linnaeus in 1758, in the tenth edition of his book Systema Naturae, for the genera Homo (humans), Simia (other apes and monkeys), Lemur (prosimians) and Vespertilio (bats).
In the first edition of the same book (1735), he had used the name Anthropomorpha for Homo, Simia and Bradypus (sloths).
In 1839, Henri Marie Ducrotay de Blainville, following Linnaeus and imitating his nomenclature, established the orders Secundates (including the suborders Chiroptera, Insectivora and Carnivora), Tertiates (or Glires) and Quaternates (including Gravigrada, Pachydermata and Ruminantia), but these new taxa were not accepted.
Before Anderson and Jones introduced the classification of Strepsirrhini and Haplorhini in 1984, (followed by McKenna and Bell's 1997 work Classification of Mammals: Above the species level), the Primates were divided into two superfamilies: Prosimii and Anthropoidea.
Prosimii included all of the s.
Phylogeny and genetics
Order Primates is part of the clade Euarchontoglires, which is nested within the clade Eutheria of Class Mammalia.
Recent molecular genetic research on primates, colugos, and treeshrews has shown that the two species of colugos are more closely related to primates than to treeshrews, even though treeshrews were at one time considered primates.
These three orders make up the clade Euarchonta.
The combination of this clade with the clade Glires (composed of Rodentia and Lagomorpha) forms the clade Euarchontoglires.
Variously, both Euarchonta and Euarchontoglires are ranked as superorders.
Some scientists consider Dermoptera to be a suborder of Primates and use the suborder Euprimates for the "true" primates.
Evolution
The primate lineage is thought to go back at least near the Cretaceous-Paleogene boundary or around 63-74 (mya), even though the oldest known primates from the fossil record date to the Late Paleocene of Africa (Altiatlasius) or the Paleocene-Eocene transition in the northern continents, c. 55 mya (Cantius, Donrussellia, Altanius, Plesiadapis and Teilhardina).
Other studies, including molecular clock studies, have estimated the origin of the primate branch to have been in the mid-Cretaceous period, around 85 mya.
By modern cladistic reckoning, the order Primates is monophyletic.
The suborder Strepsirrhini, the "wet-nosed" primates, is generally thought to have split off from the primitive primate line about 63 mya, although earlier dates are also supported.
The seven strepsirrhine families are the five related lemur families and the two remaining families that include the lorisids and the galagos.
Older classification schemes wrap Lepilemuridae into Lemuridae and Galagidae into Lorisidae, yielding a four-one family distribution instead of five-two as presented here.
The former are considered members of Strepsirrhini, but did not have a toothcomb like modern lemurs; recent analysis has demonstrated that Darwinius masillae fits into this grouping.
The latter was closely related to tarsiers, monkeys, and apes.
How these two groups relate to extant primates is unclear.
Omomyids perished about 30 mya,
According to genetic studies, the lemurs of Madagascar diverged from the lorisoids approximately 75 mya.
However, Madagascar split from Africa 160 mya and from India 90 mya.
To account for these facts, a founding lemur population of a few individuals is thought to have reached Madagascar from Africa via a single rafting event between 50 and 80 mya.
but none are supported by the genetic and molecular evidence.
The earliest known haplorhine skeleton, that of 55 MA old tarsier-like Archicebus, was found in central China, supporting an already suspected Asian origin for the group.
The infraorder Simiiformes (simian primates, consisting of monkeys and apes) emerged about 40 mya, There are two simian clades, both , developed in Asia, but became extinct millions of years ago.
As in the case of lemurs, the origin of New World monkeys is unclear.
Molecular studies of concatenated nuclear sequences have yielded a widely varying estimated date of divergence between platyrrhines and catarrhines, ranging from 33 to 70 mya, while studies based on mitochondrial sequences produce a narrower range of 35 to 43 mya.
The anthropoid primates possibly traversed the Atlantic Ocean from Africa to South America during the Eocene by island hopping, facilitated by Atlantic Ocean ridges and a lowered sea level.
Given estimated current and wind speeds, this would have provided enough time to make the voyage between the continents.
Apes and monkeys spread from Africa into Europe and Asia starting in the Miocene.
Soon after, the lorises and tarsiers made the same journey.
The first hominin fossils were discovered in northern Africa and date back 5-8 mya.
Molecular and fossil studies generally show that modern humans originated in Africa 100,000-200,000 years ago.
Although primates are well studied in comparison to other animal groups, several new species have been discovered recently, and genetic tests have revealed previously unrecognised species in known populations.
Primate Taxonomy listed about 350 species of primates in 2001; the author, Colin Groves, increased that number to 376 for his contribution to the third edition of Mammal Species of the World (MSW3).
but there have also been examples in the wild.
Hybridization occurs where two species' range overlap to form hybrid zones; hybrids may be created by humans when animals are placed in zoos or due to environmental pressures such as predation.
Clones
On 24 January 2018, scientists in China reported in the journal Cell the creation of two crab-eating macaque clones, named Zhong Zhong and Hua Hua, using the complex DNA transfer method that produced Dolly the sheep, for the first time.
Anatomy and physiology
Head
The primate skull has a large, domed cranium, which is particularly prominent in anthropoids.
The cranium protects the large brain, a distinguishing characteristic of this group.
The primary evolutionary trend of primates has been the elaboration of the brain, in particular the neocortex , which is involved with sensory perception, generation of motor commands, spatial reasoning, conscious thought and, in humans, language.
Primates have forward-facing eyes on the front of the skull; binocular vision allows accurate distance perception, useful for the brachiating ancestors of all great apes.
Primates show an evolutionary trend towards a reduced snout.
Technically, Old World monkeys are distinguished from New World monkeys by the structure of the nose, and from apes by the arrangement of their teeth.
The main hominid molar cusp (hypocone) evolved in early primate history, while the cusp of the corresponding primitive lower molar (paraconid) was lost.
Prosimians are distinguished by their immobilized upper lips, the moist tip of their noses and forward-facing lower front teeth.
Body
Primates generally have five digits on each limb (pentadactyly), with keratin nails on the end of each finger and toe.
The bottom sides of the hands and feet have sensitive pads on the fingertips.
Most have opposable thumbs, a characteristic primate feature most developed in humans, though not limited to this order, (opossums and koalas, for example, also have them).
The primate collar bone is a prominent element of the pectoral girdle; this allows the shoulder joint broad mobility.
Male primates have a pendulous penis and scrotal testes.
Sexual dimorphism
Sexual dimorphism is often exhibited in simians, though to a greater degree in Old World species (apes and some monkeys) than New World species.
Recent studies involve comparing DNA to examine both the variation in the expression of the dimorphism among primates and the fundamental causes of sexual dimorphism.
Primates usually have dimorphism in body mass and canine tooth size along with pelage and skin color.
The dimorphism can be attributed to and affected by different factors, including mating system, size,
Comparative analyses have generated a more complete understanding of the relationship between sexual selection, natural selection, and mating systems in primates.
Studies have shown that dimorphism is the product of changes in both male and female traits.
Ontogenetic scaling, where relative extension of a common growth trajectory occurs, may give some insight into the relationship between sexual dimorphism and growth patterns.
Some evidence from the fossil record suggests that there was convergent evolution of dimorphism, and some extinct hominids probably had greater dimorphism than any living primate.
Other prosimians are arboreal quadrupeds and climbers.
Some are also terrestrial quadrupeds, while some are leapers.
Most monkeys are both arboreal and terrestrial quadrupeds and climbers.
Gibbons, muriquis and spider monkeys all brachiate extensively,
Vision
The evolution of color vision in primates is unique among most eutherian mammals.
While the remote vertebrate ancestors of the primates possessed three color vision (trichromaticism), the nocturnal, warm-blooded, mammalian ancestors lost one of three cones in the retina during the Mesozoic era.
Fish, reptiles and birds are therefore trichromatic or tetrachromatic, while all mammals, with the exception of some primates and marsupials, are dichromats or monochromats (totally color blind).
Platyrrhines, on the other hand, are trichromatic in a few cases only.
Specifically, individual females must be heterozygous for two alleles of the opsin gene (red and green) located on the same locus of the X chromosome.
Howler monkeys are one of the most specialized leaf-eaters of the New World monkeys; fruits are not a major part of their diets, and the type of leaves they prefer to consume (young, nutritive, and digestible) are detectable only by a red-green signal.
Field work exploring the dietary preferences of howler monkeys suggests that routine trichromaticism was selected by environment.
He proposed four categories:
* Female transfer systems - females move away from the group in which they were born.
Females of a group will not be closely related whereas males will have remained with their natal groups, and this close association may be influential in social behavior.
The groups formed are generally quite small.
This organization can be seen in chimpanzees, where the males, who are typically related, will cooperate in defense of the group's territory.
Among New World Monkeys, spider monkeys and muriquis use this system.
* Male transfer systems - while the females remain in their natal groups, the males will emigrate as adolescents.
Polygynous and multi-male societies are classed in this category.
Group sizes are usually larger.
This system is common among the ring-tailed lemur, capuchin monkeys and cercopithecine monkeys.
These species do not live in larger groups.
* Solitary species - often males who defend territories that include the home ranges of several females.
This type of organization is found in the prosimians such as the slow loris.
Orangutans do not defend their territory but effectively have this organization.
Other systems are known to occur as well.
For example, with howler monkeys both the males and females typically transfer from their natal group on reaching sexual maturity, resulting in groups in which neither the males nor females are typically related.
An analysis of breeding records of captive primate colonies representing numerous different species indicates that the infant mortality of inbred young is generally higher than that of non-inbred young.
This effect of inbreeding on infant mortality is probably largely a result of increased expression of deleterious recessive alleles (see Inbreeding depression).
Primatologist Jane Goodall, who studied in the Gombe Stream National Park, noted fission-fusion societies in chimpanzees.
There is fission when the main group splits up to forage during the day, then fusion when the group returns at night to sleep as a group.
This social structure can also be observed in the hamadryas baboon, spider monkeys Within a social group there is a balance between cooperation and competition.
Cooperative behaviors include social grooming (removing skin parasites and cleaning wounds), food sharing, and collective defense against predators or of a territory.
Aggressive behaviors often signal competition for food, sleeping sites or mates.
Aggression is also used in establishing dominance hierarchies.
Interspecific associations
Several species of primates are known to associate in the wild.
Some of these associations have been extensively studied.
In the Tai Forest of Africa several species coordinate anti-predator behavior.
These include the Diana monkey, Campbell's mona monkey, lesser spot-nosed monkey, western red colobus, king colobus (western black and white colobus), and sooty mangabey, which coordinate anti-predator alarm calls.
Among the predators of these monkeys is the common chimpanzee.
The red-tailed monkey associates with several species, including the western red colobus, blue monkey, Wolf's mona monkey, mantled guereza, black crested mangabey and Allen's swamp monkey.
In South America, squirrel monkeys associate with capuchin monkeys.
This may have more to do with foraging benefits to the squirrel monkeys than anti-predation benefits.
some can perform tasks requiring cooperation, influence and rank; they are status conscious, manipulative and capable of deception; they can recognise kin and conspecifics; and they can learn to use symbols and understand aspects of human language including some relational syntax and concepts of number and numerical sequence.
Research in primate cognition explores problem solving, memory, social interaction, a theory of mind, and numerical, spatial, and abstract concepts.
Comparative studies show a trend towards higher intelligence going from prosimians to New World monkeys to Old World monkeys, and significantly higher average cognitive abilities in the great apes.
However, there is a great deal of variation in each group .
Capuchin monkeys can exploit many different types of plant matter, including fruit, leaves, flowers, buds, nectar and seeds, but also eat insects and other invertebrates, bird eggs, and small vertebrates such as birds, lizards, squirrels and bats.
The meat consumption includes predation on other primate species, such as the western red colobus monkey.
and invertebrates.
In some instances, bonobos have been shown to consume lower-order primates.
As prey
Predators of primates include various species of carnivorans, birds of prey, reptiles, and other primates.
Even gorillas have been recorded as prey.
Predators of primates have diverse hunting strategies and as such, primates have evolved several different antipredator adaptations including crypsis, alarm calls and mobbing.
Several species have separate alarm calls for different predators such as air-borne or ground-dwelling predators.
Predation may have shaped group size in primates as species exposed to higher predation pressures appear to live in larger groups.
Tool use and manufacture
Tool use
There are many reports of non-human primates using tools, both in the wild or when captive.
The use of tools by primates is varied and includes hunting (mammals, invertebrates, fish), collecting honey, processing food (nuts, fruits, vegetables and seeds), collecting water, weapons and shelter.
In 1960, Jane Goodall observed a chimpanzee poking pieces of grass into a termite mound and then raising the grass to his mouth.
After he left, Goodall approached the mound and repeated the behaviour because she was unsure what the chimpanzee was doing.
She found that the termites bit onto the grass with their jaws.
The chimpanzee had been using the grass as a tool to “fish” or "dip" for termites.
There are more limited reports of the closely related bonobo using tools in the wild; it has been claimed they rarely use tools in the wild although they use tools as readily as chimpanzees when in captivity.
It has been reported that females, both chimpanzee and bonobo, use tools more avidly than males.
Orangutans in Borneo scoop catfish out of small ponds.
Anthropologist Anne Russon saw several animals on these forested islands learn on their own to jab at catfish with sticks, so that the panicked prey would flop out of ponds and into the orangutan's waiting hands There are few reports of gorillas using tools in the wild.
An adult female western lowland gorilla used a branch as a walking stick apparently to test water depth and to aid her in crossing a pool of water.
Another adult female used a detached trunk from a small shrub as a stabilizer during food gathering, and another used a log as a bridge.
The black-striped capuchin was the first non-ape primate for which tool use was documented in the wild; individuals were observed cracking nuts by placing them on a stone anvil and hitting them with another large stone.
In Thailand and Myanmar, crab-eating macaques use stone tools to open nuts, oysters and other bivalves, and various types of sea snails.
Chacma baboons use stones as weapons; stoning by these baboons is done from the rocky walls of the canyon where they sleep and retreat to when they are threatened.
Stones are lifted with one hand and dropped over the side whereupon they tumble down the side of the cliff or fall directly to the canyon floor.
Although they have not been observed to use tools in the wild, lemurs in controlled settings have been shown to be capable of understanding the functional properties of the objects they had been trained to use as tools, performing as well as tool-using haplorhines.
Tool manufacture
Tool manufacture is much rarer than simple tool use and probably represents higher cognitive functioning.
Soon after her initial discovery of tool use, Goodall observed other chimpanzees picking up leafy twigs, stripping off the leaves and using the stems to fish for insects.
This change of a leafy twig into a tool was a major discovery.
Prior to this, scientists thought that only humans manufactured and used tools, and that this ability was what separated humans from other animals.
In the wild, mandrills have been observed to clean their ears with modified tools.
Scientists filmed a large male mandrill at Chester Zoo (UK) stripping down a twig, apparently to make it narrower, and then using the modified stick to scrape dirt from underneath its toenails.
Captive gorillas have made a variety of tools.
Ecology
Non-human primates primarily live in the tropical latitudes of Africa, Asia, and the Americas.
Species that live outside of the tropics; include the Japanese macaque which lives in the Japanese islands of Honshū and Hokkaido; the Barbary macaque which lives in North Africa and several species of langur which live in China.
Primates tend to live in tropical rainforests but are also found in temperate forests, savannas, deserts, mountains and coastal areas.
The number of primate species within tropical areas has been shown to be positively correlated to the amount of rainfall and the amount of rain forest area.
Accounting for 25% to 40% of the fruit-eating animals (by weight) within tropical rainforests, primates play an important ecological role by dispersing seeds of many tree species.
Primate habitats span a range of altitudes: the black snub-nosed monkey has been found living in the Hengduan Mountains at altitudes of 4,700 meters (15,400 ft), the mountain gorilla can be found at 4,200 meters (13,200 ft) crossing the Virunga Mountains, and the gelada has been found at elevations of up to in the Ethiopian Highlands.
Some species interact with aquatic environments and may swim or even dive, including the proboscis monkey, De Brazza's monkey and Allen's swamp monkey.
Some primates, such as the rhesus macaque and gray langurs, can exploit human-modified environments and even live in cities.
Interactions between humans and other primates
Disease transmission
Close interactions between humans and non-human primates (NHPs) can create pathways for the transmission of zoonotic diseases.
Viruses such as Herpesviridae (most notably Herpes B Virus), Poxviridae, measles, ebola, rabies, the Marburg virus and viral hepatitis can be transmitted to humans; in some cases the viruses produce potentially fatal diseases in both humans and non-human primates.
Legal and social status
Only humans are recognized as persons and protected in law by the United Nations Universal Declaration of Human Rights.
The legal status of NHPs, on the other hand, is the subject of much debate, with organizations such as the Great Ape Project (GAP) campaigning to award at least some of them legal rights.
In June 2008, Spain became the first country in the world to recognize the rights of some NHPs, when its parliament's cross-party environmental committee urged the country to comply with GAP's recommendations, which are that chimpanzees, bonobos, orangutans, and gorillas are not to be used for animal experiments.
Many species of NHP are kept as pets by humans, the Allied Effort to Save Other Primates (AESOP) estimates that around 15,000 NHPs live as exotic pets in the United States.
The expanding Chinese middle class has increased demand for NHPs as exotic pets in recent years.
Although NHP import for the pet trade was banned in the U.S. in 1975, smuggling still occurs along the United States - Mexico border, with prices ranging from US$3000 for monkeys to $30,000 for apes.
Primates are used as model organisms in laboratories and have been used in space missions.
They serve as service animals for disabled humans.
Capuchin monkeys can be trained to assist quadriplegic humans; their intelligence, memory, and manual dexterity make them ideal helpers.
NHPs are kept in zoos around the globe.
Historically, zoos were primarily a form of entertainment, but more recently have shifted their focus towards conservation, education and research.
GAP does not insist that all NHPs should be released from zoos, primarily because captive-born primates lack the knowledge and experience to survive in the wild if released.
Role in scientific research
Thousands of non-human primates are used around the world in research because of their psychological and physiological similarity to humans.
In particular, the brains and eyes of NHPs more closely parallel human anatomy than those of any other animals.
NHPs are commonly used in preclinical trials, neuroscience, ophthalmology studies, and toxicity studies.
Rhesus macaques are often used, as are other macaques, African green monkeys, chimpanzees, baboons, squirrel monkeys, and marmosets, both wild-caught and purpose-bred.
In 2005, GAP reported that 1,280 of the 3,100 NHPs living in captivity in the United States were used for experiments.
Governments of many nations have strict care requirements of NHPs kept in captivity.
In the US, federal guidelines extensively regulate aspects of NHP housing, feeding, enrichment, and breeding.
European groups such as the European Coalition to End Animal Experiments are seeking a ban on all NHP use in experiments as part of the European Union's review of animal testing legislation.
Extinction threats
The International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN) lists more than a third of primates as critically endangered or vulnerable.
About 60% of primate species are threatened with extinction, including: 87% of species in Madagascar, 73% in Asia, 37% in Africa, and 36% in South and Central America.
Additionally, 75% of primate species have decreasing populations.
Common threats to primate species include deforestation, forest fragmentation, monkey drives (resulting from primate crop raiding), and primate hunting for use in medicines, as pets, and for food.
Large-scale tropical forest clearing is widely regarded as the process that most threatens primates.
More than 90% of primate species occur in tropical forests.
The main cause of forest loss is clearing for agriculture, although commercial logging, subsistence harvesting of timber, mining, and dam construction also contribute to tropical forest destruction.
Primates with a large body size (over 5 kg) are at increased extinction risk due to their greater profitability to poachers compared to smaller primates.
Data for some African cities show that half of all protein consumed in urban areas comes from the bushmeat trade.
Endangered primates such as guenons and the drill are hunted at levels that far exceed sustainable levels.
Primate crop raiding gives locals a negative impression of primates, hindering conservation efforts.
Madagascar, home to five endemic primate families, has experienced the greatest extinction of the recent past; since human settlement 1,500 years ago, at least eight classes and fifteen of the larger species have become extinct due to hunting and habitat destruction.
Among the primates wiped out were Archaeoindris (a lemur larger than a silverback gorilla) and the families Palaeopropithecidae and Archaeolemuridae.
The pet trade and traditional medicine also increase demand for illegal hunting.
The rhesus macaque, a model organism, was protected after excessive trapping threatened its numbers in the 1960s; the program was so effective that they are now viewed as a pest throughout their range.
This increases the amount of forest vulnerable to edge effects such as farmland encroachment, lower levels of humidity and a change in plant life.
Movement restriction results in a greater amount of inbreeding, which can cause deleterious effects leading to a population bottleneck, whereby a significant percentage of the population is lost.
There are 21 critically endangered primates, 7 of which have remained on the IUCN's "The World's 25 Most Endangered Primates" list since the year 2000: the silky sifaka, Delacour's langur, the white-headed langur, the gray-shanked douc, the Tonkin snub-nosed monkey, the Cross River gorilla and the Sumatran orangutan.
Miss Waldron's red colobus was recently declared extinct when no trace of the subspecies could be found from 1993 to 1999.
A few hunters have found and killed individuals since then, but the subspecies' prospects remain bleak.
Footnotes
Literature cited
Further reading
