Neptune is the eighth and farthest known planet from the Sun in the Solar System.
In the Solar System, it is the fourth-largest planet by diameter, the third-most-massive planet, and the densest giant planet.
Neptune is 17 times the mass of Earth, slightly more massive than its near-twin Uranus.
Neptune is denser and physically smaller than Uranus because its greater mass causes more gravitational compression of its atmosphere.
Neptune orbits the Sun once every 164.8 years at an average distance of .
It is named after the Roman god of the sea and has the astronomical symbol ♆ came out in favour of the name Neptune on 29 December 1846, to the Saint Petersburg Academy of Sciences.
Soon, Neptune became the internationally accepted name.
In Roman mythology, Neptune was the god of the sea, identified with the Greek Poseidon.
The demand for a mythological name seemed to be in keeping with the nomenclature of the other planets, all of which, except for Earth, were named for deities in Greek and Roman mythology.
Most languages today use some variant of the name "Neptune" for the planet; indeed in Chinese, Vietnamese, Japanese, and Korean, the planet's name was translated as "sea king star" ().
In Mongolian, Neptune is called Dalain Van (Далайн ван), reflecting its namesake god's role as the ruler of the sea.
In modern Greek the planet is called Poseidon (Ποσειδώνας, Poseidonas), the Greek counterpart of Neptune.
The discovery of the Kuiper belt in 1992 led many astronomers to debate whether Pluto should be considered a planet or as part of the Kuiper belt.
In 2006, the International Astronomical Union defined the word "planet" for the first time, reclassifying Pluto as a "dwarf planet" and making Neptune once again the outermost known planet in the Solar System.
Physical characteristics
Neptune's mass of 1.0243 kg Its gravity at 1 bar is 11.15 m/s2, 1.14 times the surface gravity of Earth, and surpassed only by Jupiter.
In the search for extrasolar planets, Neptune has been used as a |accessdate
25 February 2008 |archive-url
https:/ web http:/ public eso0618/ |archive-date
13 January 2010 |url-status
live just as scientists refer to various extrasolar bodies as "Jupiters".
Internal structure
Neptune's internal structure resembles that of Uranus.
Its atmosphere forms about 5% to 10% of its mass and extends perhaps 10% to 20% of the way towards the core, where it reaches pressures of about 10 GPa, or about 100,000 times that of Earth's atmosphere.
Increasing concentrations of methane, ammonia and water are found in the lower regions of the atmosphere.
The mantle may consist of a layer of ionic water in which the water molecules break down into a soup of hydrogen and oxygen ions, and deeper down superionic water in which the oxygen crystallises but the hydrogen ions float around freely within the oxygen lattice.
At a depth of 7,000 km, the conditions may be such that methane decomposes into diamond crystals that rain downwards like hailstones.
Scientists also believe that this kind of diamond rain occurs on Jupiter, Saturn, and Uranus.
The core of Neptune is likely composed of iron, nickel and silicates, with an interior model giving a mass about 1.2 times that of Earth.
The pressure at the centre is 7 Mbar (700 GPa), about twice as high as that at the centre of Earth, and the temperature may be 5,400 K.
Atmosphere
At high altitudes, Neptune's atmosphere is 80% hydrogen and 19% helium.
A trace amount of methane is also present.
Prominent absorption bands of methane exist at wavelengths above 600 nm, in the red and infrared portion of the spectrum.
As with Uranus, this absorption of red light by the atmospheric methane is part of what gives Neptune its blue hue, although Neptune's vivid azure differs from Uranus's milder cyan.
Because Neptune's atmospheric methane content is similar to that of Uranus, some unknown atmospheric constituent is thought to contribute to Neptune's colour.
Neptune's spectra suggest that its lower stratosphere is hazy due to condensation of products of ultraviolet photolysis of methane, such as ethane and ethyne.
resulting in a dynamo action.
The dipole component of the magnetic field at the magnetic equator of Neptune is about 14 microteslas (0.14 G).
The dipole magnetic moment of Neptune is about 2.2 T·m3 (14 μT·RN3, where RN is the radius of Neptune).
Neptune's magnetic field has a complex geometry that includes relatively large contributions from non-dipolar components, including a strong quadrupole moment that may exceed the dipole moment in strength.
By contrast, Earth, Jupiter and Saturn have only relatively small quadrupole moments, and their fields are less tilted from the polar axis.
The large quadrupole moment of Neptune may be the result of offset from the planet's centre and geometrical constraints of the field's dynamo generator.
Neptune's bow shock, where the magnetosphere begins to slow the solar wind, occurs at a distance of 34.9 times the radius of the planet.
The magnetopause, where the pressure of the magnetosphere counterbalances the solar wind, lies at a distance of 23-26.5 times the radius of Neptune.
The tail of the magnetosphere extends out to at least 72 times the radius of Neptune, and likely much farther.
At the cloud tops, the prevailing winds range in speed from 400 m s at the poles.
The general pattern of winds showed prograde rotation at high latitudes vs. retrograde rotation at lower latitudes.
The difference in flow direction is thought to be a "skin effect" and not due to any deeper atmospheric processes.
The relative "hot spot" is due to Neptune's axial tilt, which has exposed the south pole to the Sun for the last quarter of Neptune's year, or roughly 40 Earth years.
As Neptune slowly moves towards the opposite side of the Sun, the south pole will be darkened and the north pole illuminated, causing the methane release to shift to the north pole.
Because of seasonal changes, the cloud bands in the southern hemisphere of Neptune have been observed to increase in size and albedo.
This trend was first seen in 1980 and is expected to last until about 2020.
The long orbital period of Neptune results in seasons lasting forty years.
Storms
In 1989, the Great Dark Spot, an anti-cyclonic storm system spanning 13,000 × 6,600 km, was discovered by NASA's Voyager 2 spacecraft.
The storm resembled the Great Red Spot of Jupiter.
Some five years later, on 2 November 1994, the Hubble Space Telescope did not see the Great Dark Spot on the planet.
Instead, a new storm similar to the Great Dark Spot was found in Neptune's northern hemisphere.
The Scooter is another storm, a white cloud group farther south than the Great Dark Spot.
This nickname first arose during the months leading up to the Voyager 2 encounter in 1989, when they were observed moving at speeds faster than the Great Dark Spot (and images acquired later would subsequently reveal the presence of clouds moving even faster than those that had initially been detected by Voyager 2).
Neptune's dark spots are thought to occur in the troposphere at lower altitudes than the brighter cloud features, so they appear as holes in the upper cloud decks.
As they are stable features that can persist for several months, they are thought to be vortex structures.
The persistence of companion clouds shows that some former dark spots may continue to exist as cyclones even though they are no longer visible as a dark feature.
Dark spots may dissipate when they migrate too close to the equator or possibly through some other unknown mechanism.
File:A storm is coming Neptune.tif|Northern
Great Dark Spot is evidence of a huge storm brewing.
File:Neptune’s shrinking vortex.jpg|Neptune's shrinking vortex.
Internal heating
Neptune's more varied weather when compared to Uranus is due in part to its higher internal heating.
Although Neptune lies over 50% farther from the Sun than Uranus, and receives only 40% its amount of sunlight, The upper regions of Neptune's troposphere reach a low temperature of .
At a depth where the atmospheric pressure equals , the temperature is .
Deeper inside the layers of gas, the temperature rises steadily.
As with Uranus, the source of this heating is unknown, but the discrepancy is larger: Uranus only radiates 1.1 times as much energy as it receives from the Sun; whereas Neptune radiates about 2.61 times as much energy as it receives from the Sun.
Neptune is the farthest planet from the Sun, yet its internal energy is sufficient to drive the fastest planetary winds seen in the Solar System.
Depending on the thermal properties of its interior, the heat left over from Neptune's formation may be sufficient to explain its current heat flow, though it is more difficult to simultaneously explain Uranus's lack of internal heat while preserving the apparent similarity between the two planets.
Orbit and rotation
The average distance between Neptune and the Sun is (about 30.1 astronomical units (AU)), and it completes an orbit on average every 164.79 years, subject to a variability of around ±0.1 years.
The perihelion distance is 29.81 AU; the aphelion distance is 30.33 AU.
On 11 July 2011, Neptune completed its first full barycentric orbit since its discovery in 1846, although it did not appear at its exact discovery position in the sky, because Earth was in a different location in its 365.26-day orbit.
Because of the motion of the Sun in relation to the barycentre of the Solar System, on 11 July Neptune was also not at its exact discovery position in relation to the Sun; if the more common heliocentric coordinate system is used, the discovery longitude was reached on 12 July 2011.
The elliptical orbit of Neptune is inclined 1.77° compared to that of Earth.
The axial tilt of Neptune is 28.32°, which is similar to the tilts of Earth (23°) and Mars (25°).
As a result, Neptune experiences similar seasonal changes to Earth.
The long orbital period of Neptune means that the seasons last for forty Earth years.
and it results in strong latitudinal wind shear.
Orbital resonances
Neptune's orbit has a profound impact on the region directly beyond it, known as the Kuiper belt.
The Kuiper belt is a ring of small icy worlds, similar to the asteroid belt but far larger, extending from Neptune's orbit at 30 AU out to about 55 AU from the Sun.
Much in the same way that Jupiter's gravity dominates the asteroid belt, shaping its structure, so Neptune's gravity dominates the Kuiper belt.
Over the age of the Solar System, certain regions of the Kuiper belt became destabilised by Neptune's gravity, creating gaps in the Kuiper belt's structure.
The region between 40 and 42 AU is an example.
There do exist orbits within these empty regions where objects can survive for the age of the Solar System.
These resonances occur when Neptune's orbital period is a precise fraction of that of the object, such as 1:2, or 3:4.
If, say, an object orbits the Sun once for every two Neptune orbits, it will only complete half an orbit by the time Neptune returns to its original position.
The most heavily populated resonance in the Kuiper belt, with over 200 known objects, is the 2:3 resonance.
Objects in this resonance complete 2 orbits for every 3 of Neptune, and are known as plutinos because the largest of the known Kuiper belt objects, Pluto, is among them.
Although Pluto crosses Neptune's orbit regularly, the 2:3 resonance ensures they can never collide.
The 3:4, 3:5, 4:7 and 2:5 resonances are less populated.
Neptune has a number of known trojan objects occupying both the Sun-Neptune and Lagrangian points-gravitationally stable regions leading and trailing Neptune in its orbit, respectively.
Neptune trojans can be viewed as being in a 1:1 resonance with Neptune.
Some Neptune trojans are remarkably stable in their orbits, and are likely to have formed alongside Neptune rather than being captured.
The first object identified as associated with Neptune's trailing Lagrangian point was .
Neptune also has a temporary quasi-satellite, .
The object has been a quasi-satellite of Neptune for about 12,500 years and it will remain in that dynamical state for another 12,500 years.
This hypothesis of migration after formation is favoured, due to its ability to better explain the occupancy of the populations of small objects observed in the trans-Neptunian region.
The current most widely accepted explanation of the details of this hypothesis is known as the Nice model, which explores the effect of a migrating Neptune and the other giant planets on the structure of the Kuiper belt.
Moons
Neptune has 14 known moons.
Triton is the largest Neptunian moon, comprising more than 99.5% of the mass in orbit around Neptune, and it is the only one massive enough to be spheroidal.
Triton was discovered by William Lassell just 17 days after the discovery of Neptune itself.
Unlike all other large planetary moons in the Solar System, Triton has a retrograde orbit, indicating that it was captured rather than forming in place; it was probably once a dwarf planet in the Kuiper belt.
It is close enough to Neptune to be locked into a synchronous rotation, and it is slowly spiralling inward because of tidal acceleration.
It will eventually be torn apart, in about 3.6 billion years, when it reaches the Roche limit.
In 1989, Triton was the coldest object that had yet been measured in the Solar System, with estimated temperatures of .
Neptune's second known satellite (by order of discovery), the irregular moon Nereid, has one of the most eccentric orbits of any satellite in the Solar System.
The eccentricity of 0.7512 gives it an apoapsis that is seven times its periapsis distance from Neptune.
From July to September 1989, Voyager 2 discovered six moons of Neptune.
Of these, the irregularly shaped Proteus is notable for being as large as a body of its density can be without being pulled into a spherical shape by its own gravity.
Although the second-most-massive Neptunian moon, it is only 0.25% the mass of Triton.
Neptune's innermost four moons-Naiad, Thalassa, Despina and Galatea-orbit close enough to be within Neptune's rings.
The next-farthest out, Larissa, was originally discovered in 1981 when it had occulted a star.
This occultation had been attributed to ring arcs, but when Voyager 2 observed Neptune in 1989, Larissa was found to have caused it.
Five new irregular moons discovered between 2002 and 2003 were announced in 2004.
A new moon and the smallest yet, Hippocamp, was found in 2013 by combining multiple Hubble images.
Because Neptune was the Roman god of the sea, Neptune's moons have been named after lesser sea gods.
The three main rings are the narrow Adams Ring, 63,000 km from the centre of Neptune, the Le Verrier Ring, at 53,000 km, and the broader, fainter Galle Ring, at 42,000 km.
A faint outward extension to the Le Verrier Ring has been named Lassell; it is bounded at its outer edge by the Arago Ring at 57,000 km.
The first of these planetary rings was detected in 1968 by a team led by Edward Guinan.
In the early 1980s, analysis of this data along with newer observations led to the hypothesis that this ring might be incomplete.
Evidence that the rings might have gaps first arose during a stellar occultation in 1984 when the rings obscured a star on immersion but not on emersion.
Images from Voyager 2 in 1989 settled the issue by showing several faint rings.
The outermost ring, Adams, contains five prominent arcs now named Courage, Liberté, Egalité 1, Egalité 2 and Fraternité (Courage, Liberty, Equality and Fraternity).
The existence of arcs was difficult to explain because the laws of motion would predict that arcs would spread out into a uniform ring over short timescales.
Astronomers now estimate that the arcs are corralled into their current form by the gravitational effects of Galatea, a moon just inward from the ring.
Earth-based observations announced in 2005 appeared to show that Neptune's rings are much more unstable than previously thought.
Images taken from the W. M. Keck Observatory in 2002 and 2003 show considerable decay in the rings when compared to images by Voyager 2.
In particular, it seems that the Liberté arc might disappear in as little as one century.
Observation
Neptune brightened significantly between 1980 and 2000.
A telescope or strong binoculars will resolve Neptune as a small blue disk, similar in appearance to Uranus.
Because of the distance of Neptune from Earth, its angular diameter only ranges from 2.2 to 2.4 arcseconds, The first scientifically useful observation of Neptune from ground-based telescopes using adaptive optics, was commenced in 1997 from Hawaii.
Neptune is currently entering its spring and summer season and has been shown to be heating up, with increased atmospheric activity and brightness as a consequence.
Combined with technological advancements, ground-based telescopes with adaptive optics are recording increasingly more detailed images of it.
Both Hubble and the adaptive-optics telescopes on Earth have made many new discoveries within the Solar System since the mid-1990s, with a large increase in the number of known satellites and moons around the outer planet, among others.
In 2004 and 2005, five new small satellites of Neptune with diameters between 38 and 61 kilometres were discovered.
From Earth, Neptune goes through apparent retrograde motion every 367 days, resulting in a looping motion against the background stars during each opposition.
These loops carried it close to the 1846 discovery coordinates in April and July 2010 and again in October and November 2011.
As of 2019, it is within 1° of Phi Aquarii.
Observation of Neptune in the radio-frequency band shows that it is a source of both continuous emission and irregular bursts.
Both sources are thought to originate from its rotating magnetic field.
Exploration
Voyager 2 is the only spacecraft that has visited Neptune.
The spacecraft closest approach to the planet occurred on 25 August 1989.
Because this was the last major planet the spacecraft could visit, it was decided to make a close flyby of the moon Triton, regardless of the consequences to the trajectory, similarly to what was done for Voyager 1s encounter with Saturn and its moon Titan.
The images relayed back to Earth from Voyager 2 became the basis of a 1989 PBS all-night program, Neptune All Night.
During the encounter, signals from the spacecraft required 246 minutes to reach Earth.
Hence, for the most part, Voyager 2 mission relied on preloaded commands for the Neptune encounter.
The spacecraft performed a near-encounter with the moon Nereid before it came within 4,400 km of Neptune's atmosphere on 25 August, then passed close to the planet's largest moon Triton later the same day.
The spacecraft verified the existence of a magnetic field surrounding the planet and discovered that the field was offset from the centre and tilted in a manner similar to the field around Uranus.
Neptune's rotation period was determined using measurements of radio emissions and Voyager 2 also showed that Neptune had a surprisingly active weather system.
Six new moons were discovered, and the planet was shown to have more than one ring.
After the Voyager 2 flyby mission, the next step in scientific exploration of the Neptunian system, is considered to be a Flagship orbital mission.
Such a hypothetical mission is envisioned to be possible in the late 2020s or early 2030s.
Another, more recent proposal was for Argo, a flyby spacecraft to be launched in 2019, that would visit Jupiter, Saturn, Neptune, and a Kuiper belt object.
The focus would be on Neptune and its largest moon Triton to be investigated around 2029.
The proposed New Horizons 2 mission (which was later scrapped) might also have done a close flyby of the Neptunian system.
* Neptune, the Mystic - one of the seven movements in Gustav Holst's Planets suite
Notes
Bibliography
Further reading
