"Snow White" is a 19th-century German fairy tale which is today known widely across the Western world.
The Brothers Grimm published it in 1812 in the first edition of their collection Grimms' Fairy Tales.
It was titled in German:
Sneewittchen (in modern orthography Schneewittchen) and numbered as Tale 53.
The name Sneewittchen was Low German and in the first version it was translated with Schneeweißchen.
The Grimms completed their final revision of the story in 1854.
The fairy tale features such elements as the magic mirror, the poisoned apple, the glass coffin, and the characters of the Evil Queen and the Seven Dwarfs.
The seven dwarfs were first given individual names in the 1912 Broadway play Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs and then given different names in Walt Disney's 1937 film Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs.
The Grimm story, which is commonly referred to as "Snow White", The prince is overjoyed, and declares his love for Snow White.
Snow White agrees to marry him.
Snow White and the prince invite everyone to their wedding party, including Snow White's stepmother.
The queen, still believing that Snow White is dead, again asks her magic mirror who is the fairest in the land.
The mirror says that the prince's bride is the fairest.
Not knowing that the bride is her stepdaughter, the queen arrives at the wedding to investigate.
Frozen with rage and fear, she tries to sow chaos but the prince recognizes her as a threat.
He orders that she wear a pair of red-hot iron slippers and dance in them until she drops dead for the attempted murder of Snow White.
File:Franz Jüttner Schneewittchen 1.jpg|1.
The Queen asks the magic mirror
File:Franz Jüttner Schneewittchen 2.jpg|2.
Snow White in the forest
File:Franz Jüttner Schneewittchen 3.jpg|3.
The dwarfs find Snow White asleep
File:Franz Jüttner Schneewittchen 5.jpg|4.
The dwarfs warn Snow White
File:Franz Jüttner Schneewittchen 4.jpg|5.
The Queen visits Snow White
File:Franz Jüttner Schneewittchen 6.jpg|6.
The Queen has poisoned Snow White
File:Franz Jüttner Schneewittchen 7.jpg|7.
The Prince awakes Snow White
File:Franz Jüttner Schneewittchen 8.jpg|8.
The Queen arrives at the wedding
Inspiration
Many scholars have theorized about the possible origins of the tale.
In 1994, a German historian named Eckhard Sander published Schneewittchen: Märchen oder Wahrheit?
(Snow White: Fairy Tale or Truth?), claiming he had uncovered an account that may have inspired the story that first appeared in Grimm’s Fairy Tales.
According to Sander, the character of Snow White was based on the life of Margaretha von Waldeck, a German countess born to Philip IV in 1533.
At the age of 16, Margarete was forced by her stepmother, Katharina of Hatzfeld, to move away to Brussels.
There, Margarete fell in love with a prince who would later become Philip II of Spain.
Margarete’s father and stepmother disapproved of the relationship as it was ‘politically inconvenient’.
Margarete mysteriously died at the age of 21, apparently having been poisoned.
Historical accounts point to the King of Spain who, in opposing the romance, may have dispatched Spanish agents to murder Margarete.
Scholar Graham Anderson compares the story of Snow White to the Roman legend of Chione, recorded in Ovid's Metamorphoses.
The name Chione means "Snow" in Greek and, in the story, she is described as the most beautiful woman in the land, so beautiful that the gods Apollo and Mercury both fell in love with her.
Mercury put her to sleep with the touch of his caduceus and raped her in her sleep.
Then Apollo, disguised as an old crone, approached her and raped her again.
These affections led Chione to openly boast that she was more beautiful than the goddess Diana herself, resulting in Diana shooting her through the tongue with an arrow.
Karlheinz Bartels, a pharmacist and scholar from Lohr am Main, a town in northwestern Bavaria, found evidence that Snow White was Maria Sophia Margarethe Catharina, Baroness von und zu Erthal, who was born in Lohr on June 25, 1725.
Her father, Philipp Christoph von und zu Erthal, was the local representative of the Prince Elector of Mainz.
After the death of Maria Sophia’s birth mother in 1738, her father remarried in 1743.
The stepmother, Claudia Elisabeth von Reichenstein, was domineering and employed her new position to the advantage of her children from her first marriage.
A magic mirror referred to as “The Talking Mirror”, known as always telling the truth, can still be viewed today in the Spessart Museum in the Lohr Castle, where Maria Sophia’s stepmother lived.
This mirror was presumably a present from Maria Sophia’s father to his second wife.
It was a product of the Lohr Mirror Manufacture (Kurmainzische Spiegelmanufaktur).
Her gravestone was found in 2019.
Variations
The principal studies of traditional Snow White variants are Ernst Böklen's, Schneewittchen Studien of 1910, which (re)prints fifty Snow White variants, and studies by Steven Swann Jones.
In their first edition, the Brothers Grimm published the version they had first collected, in which the villain of the piece is Snow White's jealous biological mother.
In a version sent to another folklorist prior to the first edition, additionally, she does not order a servant to take her to the woods, but takes her there herself to gather flowers and abandons her; in the first edition, this task was transferred to a servant.
It is believed that the change to a stepmother in later editions was to tone down the story for children.
A popular version of Snow White is the 1937 American animated film Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs by Walt Disney.
Disney's variation of Snow White gave the dwarfs names and included a singing Snow White.
The Disney film also is the only version in which Snow White and her prince meet before she bites the apple; in fact, it is this meeting that sets the plot in motion.
Instead of her lungs and liver, as written in the original, the huntsman is asked by the queen to bring back Snow White’s heart.
While the heart is mentioned, it is never shown in the box.
Snow White is much more mature (about 14).
And she is discovered by the dwarfs after cleaning the house, not vandalizing it.
Furthermore, in the Disney movie the evil queen tries only once to kill Snow White (by a poisoned apple) and fails (this was likely to save time).
She then dies by falling down a cliff and being crushed by a boulder, after the dwarfs had chased her through the forest.
In the original, the queen is forced to dance to death.
Many later versions omit the Queen's attempted cannibalism, eating what she believed to be the lungs and liver of Snow White.
This may be a reference to old Slavic mythology which includes tales of witches eating human hearts.
In other traditions
Many other variations of the story exist across and outside Europe.
In some of these variations the dwarfs are robbers, while the magic mirror is a dialogue with the sun or moon.
* In a version from Albania, collected by Johann Georg von Hahn,
*Bidasari is a Malay tale written around 1750 which tells the story of a witch queen who asks her magic mirror about the prettiest lady in the kingdom.
In parallel to the stepmother's question of her magic mirror, the Indian epic poem Padmavat (1540) includes the line: "Who is more beautiful, I or Padmavati?, Queen Nagamati asks her new parrot, and it gives a displeasing reply...";
*Nourie Hadig from Armenia was the daughter of a woman who asked the Moon, "Who is the most beautiful in the world?
", and the response is always "Nourie Hadig".
The mother plots to kill her daughter.
* Snow White in New York (1986), a picture book by Fiona French set in 1920s New York.
*"Snow, Glass, Apples", a 1994 short story written by Neil Gaiman, which all but explicitly rewrites the tale to make Snow White a vampire-like entity that is opposed by the Queen, while the prince is strongly implied to have necrophiliac tastes.
* Tímakistan (2013), a novel by Andri Snær Magnason, an adaptation of Snow White.
*Boy, Snow, Bird (2014), a novel by Helen Oyeyemi which adapts the Snow White story as a fable about race and cultural ideas of beauty.
* Winter (2015), a novel by Marissa Meyer loosely based on the story of Snow White.
* Sadie: An Amish Retelling of Snow White (2018) by Sarah Price
*Shattered Snow (2019), a time travel novel by Rachel Huffmire, ties together the life of Margaretha von Waldeck and the Grimm Brothers’ rendition of Snow White.
In theatre
The story of Snow White is a popular theme for British pantomime.
* Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs (1912), a play by Jessie Braham
In other media
* Charmed (2008), an album by Sarah Pinsker, features a song called "Twice the Prince" in which Snow White realizes that she prefers a dwarf to Prince Charming.
* The Haunt of Fear (1953) was a horror comic which featured a gruesome re-imaging of Snow White.
* Sonne (2001) is a music video for the song by Neue Deutsche Härte band Rammstein, where the band are dwarfs mining gold for Snow White.
* Fables (2002), a comic created by Bill Willingham, features Snow White as a major character in the series.
* Snow White with the Red Hair (2006) is a manga which opens with a loose adaptation of the fairy tale, with a wicked prince pursuing a girl with strikingly red hair.
* The Boys (2011), Girls' Generation's third studio album, features a concept photo by Taeyeon inspired by Snow White.
* RWBY (2013) is a web series which features characters called "Weiss Schnee" and "Klein Sieben", German for "White Snow" and "Small Seven" (grammatically incorrect, though, since it would be "Weisser Schnee" and "Kleine Sieben").
*The Wolf Among Us (2013), the Telltale Games video game based on the comic book series Fables
Trademark
In 2013, the United States Patent and Trademark Office issued a trademark to Disney Enterprises, Inc. for the name "Snow White" that covers all live and recorded movie, television, radio, stage, computer, Internet, news, and photographic entertainment uses, excluding literary works of fiction and nonfiction.
"Religious Symbols" article at the website Religion & Snow White analyzes the use of numerous symbols in the story, their implications, and their Christian interpretations, such as the colours red, white, and black; the apple; the number seven; and resurrection.
Other interpretations
The Brothers Grimm story of “Snow White” takes an unusual turn from its other fairy-tale counterparts in that it can be interpreted as a story with a lesson centered around desirable qualities for women.
The Queen’s-Snow White’s step-mother-defining characteristic is her cunning, or intelligence, whereas Snow White’s is her beauty.
Snow White consistently foils the Queen’s jealous attempts to kill her because strangers pity and help her due to her childlike innocence and beauty.
For example, the huntsman, who was ordered to kill Snow White, describes her as a “pretty child” and lets her go, which carries over to when the seven dwarfs decide not to cast her out when they find Snow White in their home.
Even when the Queen devises the poison apple and kills Snow White, she is saved by the Prince because he finds her to be “the fairest of them all.”
The Queen dies at the end of the story while Snow White lives happily ever after with the Prince, implying that the Queen’s cunning was not enough to counter the power of Snow White’s elegance.
This suggests that the moral of the story is that beauty is more desirable than intelligence.
Despite the modern connotations of this concept, one must consider the time period at which the story was written; Snow White as told by the Brothers Grimm was first published in 1812, where at the time, it was arguably common place for people to live according to traditional gender roles.
*Snežana, a Slavic female name meaning "snow woman" with a similar connotation to "Snow White"
Further reading
