Kigelia is a genus of flowering plants in the family Bignoniaceae.
The genus consists of only one species, Kigelia africana, which occurs throughout tropical Africa, from Eritrea and Chad south to northern South Africa, and west to Senegal and Namibia.
Common in India, with many medicinal uses, the species's distribution is most certainly anthropogenic.
The sausage tree grows a fruit that is up to long, weighs about , and looks like a sausage.
Etymology
The genus name comes from the Mozambican Bantu name, kigeli-keia, while the common names sausage tree and cucumber tree
Habitat
It is a tree growing up to tall
and it typically has spreading branches.
The bark is grey and smooth at first, peeling on older trees.
It can be as thick as on a diameter branch.
and up to broad, but has been reported.
Typically it weighs between but occasionally up to , and hangs down on long, rope-like peduncles.
The fruit pulp is fibrous, containing many seeds.
Species associations
Some birds are attracted to the flowers and the strong stems of each flower make ideal footholds.
Their scent is most notable at night indicating that they are adapted to pollination by bats, which visit them for pollen and nectar.
The flowers also remain open by day however, and are freely visited by many insect pollinators, particularly large species such as carpenter bees.
The fruit are eaten by several species of mammals, including baboons, bushpigs, savannah elephants, giraffes, hippopotamuses, monkeys, and porcupines.
The seeds are dispersed in their dung.
The seeds are also eaten by brown parrots and brown-headed parrots, and the tree's foliage by elephants and greater kudu (Joffe 2003; del Hoyo et al. 1997).
Introduced specimens in Australian parks are very popular with cockatoos.
Cultivation and uses
The fresh fruit is poisonous and strongly purgative; fruit are prepared for consumption by drying, roasting or fermentation (Joffe 2003; McBurney 2004).
Kigelia is also used in a number of skin care products.
In Botswana, the timber is used for makoros, yokes and oars.
Swahili: mbungati, mwegea, mnyegea, mvongonya; Hindi balam kheera, hathi bailan;Odia
Silapua Gachha; Luo yago; Malayalam shiva kundalam;
Tamil yaanai pudukan; and Yoruba pandoro.
Tugen (Kalenjin tribe): Rotinwo.
In English: sausage tree.
In Kamba: kiatine, the fruit muatine.
Gallery
File:Sausage tree bark 01A.jpg|Detail of bark of the sausage tree
File:Sausage tree flower green 01B.jpg|Developing flower
File:Sausage tree flower green A01.jpg|Sausage tree inflorescence
File:Sausage tree flower ripe 01A.jpg|Fallen sausage tree flower corollas
File:Sausage tree fruit A01.jpg|Fruit of a sausage tree
File:Kigelia africana -flower.
JPG|Kigelia africana flower at Pondicherry, in Puducherry, India
File:Leaves on the tree Im IMG 4108.jpg|Leaves on the tree in Kolkata, West Bengal, India
File:Flower bud I IMG 4104.jpg|Flower bud in Kolkata, West Bengal, India.
File:Sausage Tree in Botswana.
JPG|A sausage tree in Botswana in use as an airport departure lounge
File:Seeds and husk of Kigelia africana.
JPG|Seeds and husk of a broken fruit, Pune, India.
File:Kigelia africana - sausage tree.
JPG|Kigelia africana - sausage tree
File:Kigelia Africana with fruits, Trinidad.
JPG|Kigelia africana with unripe fruits: campus of UWI, Trinidad, Feb. 2015
File:Kigelia Africana.
JPG|Kigelia africana: campus of U. West Indies, Trinidad, Feb. 2015
File:Sausage Tree (Kigela africana).JPG|Entryway at the Lincoln Park Conservatory in Chicago, Il
File:Kp Kigelia pinnata flowers IMG 9166 (2216465734).jpg|Inflorescence: Kigelia africana.
UQ, St Lucia, Brisbane
File:Kp Kigelia pinnata IMG 8964 (2214369810).jpg|Fruit & flowers: Kigelia africana.
UQ, St Lucia, Brisbane
Bibliography
*del Hoyo, J., Elliott, A., & Sargatal, J., eds.
(1997).
Handbook of the Birds of the World 4: 415. Lynx Edicions.
*Huxley, A., ed. (1992).
Kigelia.
In The New RHS Dictionary of Gardening 2: 735. Macmillan.
*Joffe, P. (2003).
http:/ plantklm web http:/ scihort ecbot-harv.html African Wild Harvest.
Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew.
