Fibonacci (, also , ; - ) was an Italian mathematician from the Republic of Pisa, considered to be "the most talented Western mathematician of the Middle Ages".
The name he is commonly called, Fibonacci, was made up in 1838 by the Franco-Italian historian Guillaume Libri and is short for ("son of Bonacci").
He is also known as Leonardo Bonacci, Leonardo of Pisa, or Leonardo Bigollo Pisano ("Leonardo the Traveller from Pisa").
He also introduced Europe to the sequence of Fibonacci numbers, which he used as an example in Liber Abaci.
History
Fibonacci was born around 1170 to Guglielmo, an Italian merchant and customs official.
Fibonacci travelled with him as a young boy, and it was in Bugia that he learned about the Hindu-Arabic numeral system.
He soon realised the many advantages of the Hindu-Arabic system, which, unlike the Roman numerals used at the time, allowed easy calculation using a place-value system.
In 1202, he completed the Liber Abaci (Book of Abacus or The Book of Calculation), which popularized Hindu-Arabic numerals in Europe.
by granting him a salary in a decree that recognized him for the services that he had given to the city as an advisor on matters of accounting and instruction to citizens:
«Considerantes nostre civitatis et civium honorem atque profectum, qui eis, tam per doctrinam quam per sedula obsequia discreti et sapientis viri magistri Leonardi Bigolli, in abbacandis estimationibus et rationibus civitatis eiusque officialium et aliis quoties expedit, conferuntur; ut eidem Leonardo, merito dilectionis et gratie, atque scientie sue prerogativa, in recompensationem laboris sui quem substinet in audiendis et consolidandis estimationibus et rationibus supradictis, a Comuni et camerariis publicis, de Comuni et pro Comuni, mercede sive salario suo, annis singulis, libre xx denariorum et amisceria consueta dari debeant (ipseque pisano Comuni et eius officialibus in abbacatione de cetero more solito serviat), presenti constitutione firmamus».
The date of Fibonacci's death is not known, but it has been estimated to be between 1240 and 1250, most likely in Pisa.
Liber Abaci
In the Liber Abaci (1202), Fibonacci introduced the so-called modus Indorum (method of the Indians), today known as the Hindu-Arabic numeral system.
The book advocated numeration with the digits 0-9 and place value.
The book showed the practical use and value of the new Hindu-Arabic numeral system by applying the numerals to commercial bookkeeping, converting weights and measures, calculation of interest, money-changing, and other applications.
The book was well-received throughout educated Europe and had a profound impact on European thought.
No copies of the 1202 edition are known to exist.
The second section explains the uses of Hindu-Arabic numerals in business, for example converting different currencies, and calculating profit and interest, which were important to the growing banking industry.
The book also discusses irrational numbers and prime numbers.
In the Fibonacci sequence, each number is the sum of the previous two numbers.
Fibonacci omitted the "0" included today and began the sequence with 1, 1, 2, ... .
He carried the calculation up to the thirteenth place, the value 233, though another manuscript carries it to the next place, the value 377.
Fibonacci did not speak about the golden ratio as the limit of the ratio of consecutive numbers in this sequence.
Legacy
In the 19th century, a statue of Fibonacci was constructed and raised in Pisa.
Today it is located in the western gallery of the Camposanto, historical cemetery on the Piazza dei Miracoli.
There are many mathematical concepts named after Fibonacci because of a connection to the Fibonacci numbers.
Examples include the Brahmagupta-Fibonacci identity, the Fibonacci search technique, and the Pisano period.
Beyond mathematics, namesakes of Fibonacci include the asteroid 6765 Fibonacci and the art rock band The Fibonaccis.
Works
* Liber Abaci (1202), a book on calculations (English translation by Laurence Sigler, 2002)
* Practica Geometriae (1220), a compendium of techniques in surveying, the measurement and partition of areas and volumes, and other topics in practical geometry (English translation by Barnabas Hughes, Springer, 2008).
* Flos (1225), solutions to problems posed by Johannes of Palermo
* Liber quadratorum ("The Book of Squares") on Diophantine equations, dedicated to Emperor Frederick II.
See in particular congruum and the Brahmagupta-Fibonacci identity.
Notes
Further reading
* Goetzmann, William N. and Rouwenhorst, K.Geert, The Origins of Value: The Financial Innovations That Created Modern Capital Markets (2005, Oxford University Press Inc, USA), .
* Goetzmann, William N., http:/ sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=461740 Fibonacci and the Financial Revolution (October 23, 2003), Yale School of Management International Center for Finance Working Paper No. 03-28
* Grimm, R. E., "http:/ Scanned grimm.pdf
The Autobiography of Leonardo Pisano", Fibonacci Quarterly, Vol. 11, No. 1, February 1973, pp.
* Horadam, A. F. "Eight hundred years young," The Australian Mathematics Teacher 31 (1975) 123-134.
* Gavin, J., Schärlig, A., extracts of Liber Abaci online and analyzed on http:/ mathematiques leonard-de-pise-un-sujet-anodin-devenu-reference-et-une-contribution BibNum click 'à télécharger' for English analysis
