The Nile crocodile (Crocodylus niloticus) is a large crocodilian native to freshwater habitats in Africa, where it is present in 26 countries.
Due to its widespread occurrence and stable population trend, it has been listed as Least Concern on the IUCN Red List since 1996.
Although capable of living in saline environments, this species is rarely found in saltwater, but occasionally inhabits deltas and brackish lakes.
The range of this species once stretched northward throughout the Nile, as far north as the Nile delta.
On average, the adult male Nile crocodile is between in length and weighs .
However, specimens exceeding in length and weighing up to have been recorded.
It is the largest freshwater predator in Africa, and may be considered the second-largest extant reptile and in the world, after the saltwater crocodile (Crocodylus porosus).
Sexual dimorphism is prevalent, and females are usually about 30% smaller than males.
Nile crocodiles are relatively social crocodiles.
They share basking spots and large food sources, such as schools of fish and big carcasses.
Their strict hierarchy is determined by size.
Large, old males are at the top of this hierarchy and have primary access to food and the best basking spots.
Crocodiles tend to respect this order; when it is infringed, the results are often violent and sometimes fatal.
Like most other reptiles, Nile crocodiles lay eggs; these are guarded by the females.
The hatchlings are also protected for a period of time, but hunt by themselves and are not fed by the parents.
The Nile crocodile is one of the most dangerous species of crocodile and is responsible for hundreds of human deaths every year.
It is a rather common species of crocodile and is not endangered despite some regional declines or extinctions.
Etymology
The binomial name Crocodylus niloticus is derived from the Greek κρόκη, kroke ("pebble"), δρῖλος, drilos ("worm"), referring to its rough skin; and niloticus, meaning "from the Nile River".
The Nile crocodile is called tanin ha-yeor in Hebrew, timsah al-nil in Arabic, mamba in Swahili, garwe in Shona, ngwenya in Ndebele, ngwena in Venda, and kwena in Sotho and Tswana.
It also sometimes referred to as the African crocodile, Ethiopian crocodile, common crocodile, or the black crocodile.
Taxonomy
Although no subspecies are currently formally recognized, as many as seven have been proposed, mostly due to variations in appearance and size noted in various populations through Africa.
These have consisted of: C. n. africanus (informally named the East African Nile crocodile), C. n. chamses (or the West African Nile crocodile), C. n. corviei (the South African Nile crocodile), C. n. madagascariensis (Malagasy or Madagascar Nile crocodile, regionally also known as the Croco Mada, which translates to Malagasy crocodile), C. n. niloticus (would be the nominate subspecies, or the Ethiopian Nile crocodile), C. n. pauciscutatus (Kenyan Nile crocodile), C. (n.) suchus (now widely perceived by crocodilian biologists as a separate species).
A study on Lake Turkana in Kenya (informally this population would be placed in C. n. pauciscutatus) has shown that the local crocodiles appear to have more osteoderms in their ventral surface than other known populations, thus are of lesser value in leather trading, accounting for an exceptionally large (possibly overpopulated) local population there in the late 20th century.
and habitat preferences.
The separation of the two is not recognized by the IUCN as their last evaluations of the group was in 2008 and 2009, years before the primary publications supporting the distinction of the West African crocodiles.
Other fossil species from Africa are retained in Crocodylus and appear to be closely related to the Nile crocodile: namely C. checchiai from the Miocene in Kenya, C. anthropophagus from Plio-Pleistocene Tanzania, and C. thorbjarnarsoni from Plio-Pleistocene Kenya.
While C. checchiai was about the same size as the larger modern Nile crocodiles, and shared similar physical characteristics to the modern species; C. anthropophagus and C. thorbjarnarsoni were both somewhat larger, with projected total lengths up to .
Also C. anthropophagus and C. thorbjarnarsoni, as well as Rimasuchus spp., were all relatively broad-snouted, as well as large, indicating a specialization at hunting sizeable prey, such as large mammals and freshwater turtles, the latter much larger than any in present-day Africa.
Their skin has a number of poorly understood integumentary sense organs that may react to changes in water pressure, presumably allowing them to track prey movements in the water.
The Nile crocodile has fewer osteoderms on the belly, which are much more conspicuous on some of the more modestly sized crocodilians.
The species, however, also has small, oval osteoderms on the sides of the body, as well as the throat.
The Nile crocodile shares with all crocodilians a nictitating membrane to protect the eyes and lachrymal glands to cleanse its eyes with tears.
The nostrils, eyes, and ears are situated on the top of the head, so the rest of the body can remain concealed under water.
They have a four-chambered heart, although modified for their ectothermic nature due to an elongated cardiac septum, physiologically similar to the heart of a bird, which is especially efficient at oxygenating their blood.
As in all crocodilians, Nile crocodiles have exceptionally high levels of lactic acid in their blood, which allows them to sit motionless in water for up to 2 hours.
Levels of lactic acid as high as they are in a crocodile would kill most vertebrates.
As is the saltwater crocodile, the Nile crocodile is considered a species with medium-width snout relative to other extant crocodilian species.
In a search for the largest crocodilian skulls in museums, the largest verifiable Nile crocodile skulls found were several housed in Arba Minch, Ethiopia, sourced from nearby Lake Chamo, which apparently included several specimens with a skull length more than , with the largest one being in length with a mandibular length of .
Nile crocodiles with skulls this size are likely to measure in the range of , which is also the length of the animals according to the museum where they were found.
However, larger skulls may exist, as this study largely focused on crocodilians from Asia.
The detached head of an exceptionally large Nile crocodile (killed in 1968 and measuring in length) was found to have weighed , including the large tendons used to shut the jaw.
The broadest snouted modern crocodilians are alligators and larger caimans.
For example, a black caiman (Melanosuchus niger) was found to have a notably broader and heavier skull than that of a Nile crocodile measuring .
However, despite their robust skulls, alligators and caimans appear to be proportionately equal in biting force to true crocodiles, as the muscular tendons used to shut the jaws are similar in proportional size.
Only the gharial (Gavialis gangeticus) (and perhaps some of the few very thin-snouted crocodilians) is likely to have noticeably diminished bite force compared to other living species due to its exceptionally narrow, fragile snout.
More or less, the size of the tendons used to impart bite force increases with body size and the larger the crocodilian gets, the stronger its bite is likely to be.
Therefore, a male saltwater crocodile, which had attained a length around , was found to have the most powerful biting force ever tested in a lab setting for any type of animal.
Size
The Nile crocodile is the largest crocodilian in Africa, and is generally considered the second-largest crocodilian after the saltwater crocodile.
According to the Guinness Book of World Records, the typical mature size is between , while Alexander and Marais (2007) state it is and Garrick and Lang (1977) claim from .
Similarly, adult crocodiles from Kruger National Park reportedly average in length.
Adult male Nile crocodiles usually range in length from long; at these lengths, an average sized male may weigh from .
In Limpopo, South Africa, males reportedly average .
Mature female Nile crocodiles typically measure , at which lengths the average female specimen would weigh .
The bulk and mass of individual crocodiles can be fairly variable, some animals being relatively slender, while others being very robust; females are often bulkier than males of a similar length.
In attempts to parse the mean male and female lengths across the species, the mean adult length was estimated to be reportedly in males, at which males would average about in weight, while that of the female is , at which females would average about .
This gives the Nile crocodile somewhat of a size advantage over the next largest non-marine predator on the African continent, the lion (Panthera leo), which averages in males and in females, and attains a maximum known weight of , far less than that of large male crocodiles.
Evidence exists of Nile crocodiles from cooler climates, like the southern tip of Africa, being smaller, and may reach maximum lengths of only .
A smaller population from Mali, the Sahara Desert, and elsewhere in West Africa reaches only in length, but it is now largely recognized as a separate species, the West African crocodile.
although other species, especially the spectacled caiman (Caiman crocodilus) (due to its small size and extreme adaptability in habitat and flexibility in diet), seem to actually be more abundant.
This species’ historic range, however, was even wider.
They were found as far north as the Mediterranean coast in the Nile Delta and across the Red Sea in Israel and Syria.
The Nile crocodile has historically been recorded in areas where they are now regionally extinct.
For example, Herodotus recorded the species inhabiting Lake Moeris in Egypt.
Additionally, the Nile crocodile is known from fossil remains to have once inhabited Lake Edward on the border between the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Uganda.
They are thought to have become extinct in the Seychelles in the early 19th century (1810-1820).
Isolated populations also exist in Madagascar, which likely colonized the island after the extinction of voay.
In Madagascar, crocodiles occur in the western and southern parts from Sambirano to Tôlanaro.
They have been spotted in Zanzibar and the Comoros in modern times, but occur very rarely.
but these populations are now typically recognized as a distinct species, the West African (or desert) crocodile.
The distributional boundaries between these species were poorly understood, but following several studies, they are now better known.
West African crocodiles are found throughout much of West and Central Africa, ranging east to South Sudan and Uganda where the species may come into contact with the Nile crocodile.
Nile crocodiles are absent from most of West and Central Africa, but range into the latter region in eastern and southern Democratic Republic of Congo, and along the Central African coastal Atlantic region (as far north to Cameroon).
Likely a level of habitat segregation occurs between the two species, but this remains to be confirmed.
Nile crocodiles may be able to tolerate an extremely broad range of habitat types, including small brackish streams, fast-flowing rivers, swamps, dams, and tidal lakes and estuaries.
They have been known to enter the sea in some areas, with one specimen having been recorded off St. Lucia Bay in 1917.
Invasive species
Nile crocodiles are an invasive species in North America, and several specimens have been recently captured in South Florida, though no signs that the population is reproducing in the wild have been found.
Genetic studies of Nile crocodiles captured in the wild in Florida have revealed that the specimens are all closely related to each other, suggesting a single source of the introduction.
This source remains unclear, as their genetics do not match samples collected from captives at various zoos and theme parks in Florida.
When compared to Nile crocodiles from their native Africa, the Florida wild specimens are most closely related to South African Nile crocodiles.
It is unknown how many Nile crocodiles are currently at large in Florida.
The animals likely were either brought there to be released, or are escapees.
Behaviour
Generally, Nile crocodiles are relatively inert creatures, as are most crocodilians and other large, cold-blooded creatures.
More than half of the crocodiles observed by Cott (1961), if not disturbed, spent the hours from 9:00 am to 4:00 pm continuously basking with their jaws open if conditions were sunny.
If their jaws are bound together in the extreme midday heat, Nile crocodiles may easily die from overheating.
Although they can remain practically motionless for hours on end, whether basking or sitting in shallows, Nile crocodiles are said to be constantly aware of their surroundings and aware of the presence of other animals.
In the southern reaches of their range, as a response to dry, cool conditions that they cannot survive externally, crocodiles may dig and take refuge in tunnels and engage in aestivation.
They can swim much faster by moving their bodies and tails in a sinuous fashion, and they can sustain this form of movement much longer than on land, with a maximum known swimming speed , more than three times faster than any human.
Nile crocodiles have been widely known to have gastroliths in their stomachs, which are stones swallowed by animals for various purposes.
Although this clearly is a deliberate behaviour for the species, the purpose is not definitively known.
Gastroliths are not present in hatchlings, but increase quickly in presence within most crocodiles examined at and yet normally become extremely rare again in very large specimens, meaning that some animals may eventually expel them.
However, Guggisberg (1972) had seen examples of birds picking scraps of meat from the teeth of basking crocodiles (without entering the mouth) and prey from soil very near basking crocodiles, so felt it was not impossible that a bold, hungry bird may occasionally nearly enter a crocodile's mouth, but not likely as a habitual behaviour.
Out of water, however, the Nile crocodile can only rely on its limbs, as it gallops on solid ground, to chase prey.
No matter where they attack prey, this and other crocodilians take practically all of their food by ambush, needing to grab their prey in a matter of seconds to succeed.
Much prey taken is much smaller than the crocodile itself and such prey can be overpowered and swallowed with ease.
When it comes to larger prey, success depends on the crocodile's body power and weight to pull the prey item back into the water, where it is either drowned or killed by sudden thrashes of the head or by tearing it into pieces with the help of other crocodiles.
Since their speed and agility on land is rather outmatched by most terrestrial animals, they must use obscuring vegetation or terrain to have a chance of succeeding during land-based hunts.
Two subadult crocodiles were once seen carrying the carcass of a nyala (Tragelaphus angasii) across land in unison.
In Zimbabwe, the dietary composition was broadly similar to that in other areas.
After Nile crocodiles reach , the significance of most invertebrates in the diet decreases precipitously.
At Lake St. Lucia in South Africa, many Nile crocodile congregate to feed on striped mullet (Mugil cephalus) as they make their seaward migration for spawning.
Here, the crocodiles may line up in dozens across narrow straits of the estuary to effectively force the mullet into easy striking distance, with no observed in-fighting among these crocodile feeding congregations.
At this time of plenty (before irrigation operations by humans led St. Lucia to have dangerously high saline levels), a crocodile could expect to eat of mullet daily, an exceptionally large daily amount for a crocodile.
Larger fish, like catfish and freshwater bass, are preferred by adults more than in length.
Particularly small fish are likely to be eaten only in case of sudden encounter, mostly in shallow, dry-season ponds where not much effort is needed to catch the small, agile prey.
In Uganda and Zambia, lungfish comprised nearly two-thirds of the piscivorian diet for crocodiles.
In the Okavango Delta, the African pikes (Hepsetus spp.) were the leading prey group for subadults, comprising more than a fourth of the diet.
Extremely large fish, such as Nile perch (Lates niloticus), goliath tigerfish (Hydrocynus goliath), and even sharks, are taken on occasion, in addition to big catfish, such as Bagrus spp.
and Clarias gariepinus, which are preyed upon quite regularly in areas where they are common.
In the Zambezi River and Lake St. Lucia, Nile crocodiles have been known to prey on bull sharks (Carcharhinus leucas) and sand tiger sharks (Carcharias taurus).
The largest fishes attacked in such cases may potentially weigh more than .
When capturing large fish, they often drag the fish onto shore and swing their heads around to smash the fish onto the ground until it is dead or incapacitated.
More modestly sized fish are generally swallowed whole.
Additionally, crocodiles readily take dead or dying fish given the opportunity, thus are likely to incidentally improve the health of some fish species’ populations as this lessens their exposure to diseases and infection.
In general, reptiles become relatively common only in the diet in larger juvenile specimens and subadults.
Large reptiles, or armoured reptiles such as turtles, were almost negligible in crocodiles under and most common in the stomachs of crocodiles over in length from Uganda and Zambia.
Small species of reptiles are largely ignored as prey at this size.
Freshwater turtles are often the most frequently recorded reptilian prey, unsurprisingly perhaps because most other reptiles other than a small handful of Lycodonomorphus water snakes are more terrestrial than water-based.
Other turtle species commonly recorded among Nile crocodile prey include the Speke's hinge-back tortoise (Kinixys spekii) and East African black mud turtle (Pelusios subniger).
Beyond their ready availability and respectable size, turtles are favored by big crocodiles due to their slowness, which allows the cumbersome crocodiles to capture them more easily than swifter vertebrates.
While adults have a sufficient bite force to crush turtle shells, younger crocodiles sometimes are overly ambitious, and will choke to death attempting to swallow whole large river turtles.
Nile crocodiles apparently frequently station themselves underneath breeding colonies of darters and cormorants and presumably snatch up fledgling birds as they drop to the water before they can competently escape the saurian, as has been recorded with several other crocodilians.
On the contrary, several records exist of them capturing wading birds.
Guggisberg (1972) saw multiple cases of predation on marabou storks (Leptoptilos crumenifer) and around Lake Turkana several may frequent heronries to pick off fledglings.
Ospreys (Pandion haliaetus) are known to be grabbed while they dive for fish as are possibly African fish eagles (Haliaeetus vocifer), while crowned eagles (Stephanoaetus coronatus) have reportedly been ambushed on land at carrion.
Crocodiles are occasionally successful in grabbing passerines such as weaver birds, including the abundant red-billed quelea (Quelea quelea), and swallows, having been observed to breach the water and in a matter of seconds sweep off a branch full of birds with remarkable success.
Larger land birds, such as bustards, guineafowl, ground hornbills (Bucorvus spp.) and ostriches (Struthio camelus), may be taken when they come to water to drink, but like most birds, are seldom harassed and a minor part of the diet.
Mammals
Considering the fact that crocodiles defecate in water, making scat analysis impossible, and that the examination of stomach contents is fairly difficult for which capturing of the animals individually is required for analysis, determining anything about the percentage of any specific food item in a crocodile's diet can be difficult.
In addition, as an animal that feeds rarely, sometimes only a few times in a year, even the individual stomach content examinations sometimes prove to be unsuccessful.
However, as crocodiles grow, relying solely on small and agile food items such as fish becomes difficult, this causes a shift in the diet as the animal matures, for energy conservation purposes, as in other predators.
rodents, hares, pangolins, oribi (Ourebia ourebi) and other small ungulates up to the size of a Thomson's gazelle (Eudorcas thomsonii).
Cape porcupines (Hystrix africaeaustralis) are known to have been preyed on several times in Kruger National Park, their quills apparently being an insufficient defense against the tough jaws and digestive systems of crocodiles.
and spotted-necked otters (Hydrictis maculicollis),
Adult Nile crocodiles, i.e. at least , are apex predators.
While adults can and will consume nearly all types of prey consumed by the younger specimens, as adult crocodiles gain bulk, they lose much of the necessary maneuverability to capture agile prey such as fish and are not likely to meet their dietary needs by consuming small prey and may expel unnecessary amounts of energy, so take them secondarily to larger prey.
No records of them hunting apes (other than humans) have been made, but based on a strong reluctance to cross waters with crocodiles and a violent reaction to the visual stimuli of crocodiles, chimpanzees (Pan troglodytes) and gorillas (Gorilla beringei) are thought to consider Nile crocodiles a serious threat.
Few details are known about the dietary habits of Nile crocodiles living in Madagascar, although they are considered potential predators of several lemur species.
Other nonungulate prey known to be attacked by Nile crocodiles includes aardvarks (Orycteropus afer) and African manatees (Trichechus senegalensis).
Among the mammals, the bulk of the prey for adults is antelopes.
In particular, the genus Kobus is often among the most vulnerable because it forages primarily in wetland areas and seeks to evade more prolific mammalian predators (such as hyenas, lions, etc.) by traveling along waterways.
Other antelopes recorded as prey including gazelles, steenbok (Raphicerus campestris), eland (Taurotragus oryx), sable (Hippotragus niger) and roan antelopes (Hippotragus equinus), hartebeest (Alcelaphus buselaphus)
Other ungulates are taken by Nile crocodile more or less opportunistically.
These may include Grévy's (Equus grevyi) and plains zebras (Equus quagga), pygmy hippopotamus (Choeropsis liberiensis), warthogs (Phacochoerus africanus), All domesticated ungulates and pet animals will on occasion be hunted by Nile crocodiles, up to the size of dromedary camels (Camelus dromedarius) and cattle (Bos taurus)
In Tanzania, up to 54 head of cattle may be lost to crocodiles annually, increasing the human-crocodile conflict level.
Goats (Capra aegagrus hircus), donkeys (Equus africanus asinus) and dogs (Canis lupus familiaris) may also rank among the most regularly recorded domesticated animals to be taken by Nile crocodiles.
Particularly large adults, on occasion, take on even larger prey, such as giraffe (Giraffa camelopardalis), Cape buffalo (Syncerus caffer), Even heavier prey, such as black rhinoceros (Diceros bicornis), have been killed by crocodiles.
In one case in the Tana River of Kenya, as observed by Max Fleishmann (communicated via letter to Theodore Roosevelt), a crocodile was able to bring down one of these huge herbivores by the help of muddy bank terrain, the adult female rhino's poor decision to enter deeper water rather than retreat to land and finally having been joined in drowning the animal by one to two other crocodiles.
An additional case of predation on an adult black rhino was reportedly observed in northern Zambia.
Although crocodiles occasionally prey on hippopotamus calves, even large adult crocodiles rarely attack them because of the aggressive defense by mother hippos and the close protection of the herd, which pose a serious threat.
Hippopotamus calves have been observed to at times act brazenly around crocodiles, foraging without apparent concern and even bumping into the reptiles.
A specimen from Zambia was found to have eaten a "half-grown hippo".
However, felines are usually more intelligent and wary of their surroundings than prey species and are more difficult to catch since they usually avoid waters infested with crocodiles.
In order to save energy, crocodiles do not prefer such agile animals, as most attacks will end before they can strike.
Thus they usually attack agile prey in the absence of regular prey items.
African wild dogs, jackals,
Interspecific predatory relationships
Living in the rich biosphere of Africa south of the Sahara, the Nile crocodile may come into contact with multiple other large predators.
Its place in the ecosystems it inhabits is largely unique, as it is the only large tetrapod carnivore that spends the majority of its life in water and hunting prey associated with aquatic zones.
Large mammalian predators in Africa are often social animals and obligated to feed almost exclusively on terrestrial zones.
Most conflicts over food occur near the water and can literally lead to a tug-of-war over a carcass that can end either way, although seldom is there any serious fighting or bloodshed between the large carnivores.
Reproduction
On average, sexual maturity is obtained from 12 to 16 years of age.
On the other hand, that for females is rather more variable, and may be indicative of the health of a regional population based on size at sexual maturity.
On average, according to Cott (1961), female sexual maturity occurs when they reach in length.
However, stunted sexual maturity appears to occur in populations at opposite extremes, both where crocodiles are thought to be overpopulated and where they are overly reduced to heavy hunting, sometimes with females laying eggs when they measure as small as although it is questionable whether such clutches would bear healthy hatchlings.
In the Olifants River in South Africa, rainfall influenced the size of nesting females as only larger females (greater than ) nested during the driest years.
Breeding females along the Olifants were overall larger than those in Zimbabwe.
Once a female has been attracted, the pair warble and rub the undersides of their jaws together.
Compared to the tender behaviour of the female accepting the male, copulation is rather rough (even described as "rape"-like by Graham & Beard (1968)) in which the male often roars and pins the female underwater.
The female may micturate sporadically on the soil to keep it moist, which prevents soil from hardening excessively.
When Nile crocodiles have been entirely free from disturbance in the past, they may nest gregariously with the nest lying so close together that after hatching time the rims of craters are almost contiguous.
These communal nesting sites are not known to exist today, perhaps being most recently recorded at Ntoroko peninsula, Uganda where two such sites remaining until 1952.
In one area, 17 craters were found in an area of , in another 24 in an area of .
Communal nesting areas also reported from Lake Victoria (up until the 1930s) and also in the 20th century at Rahad River, Lake Turkana and Malawi.
The behaviour of the female Nile crocodile is considered unpredictable and may be driven by the regional extent of prior human disturbance and human persecution rather than natural variability.
In some areas, the mother crocodiles will only leave the nest if she needs to cool off (thermoregulation) by taking a quick dip or seeking out a patch of shade.
In other areas, the nesting female may disappear upon potential disturbance which may allow the presence of both the female and her buried nest to escape unwanted detection by predators.
At a reported incubation period of about 90 days, the stage is notably shorter than that of the American alligator (110-120 days) but slightly longer than that of the mugger crocodile.
The hatchlings start to make a high-pitched chirping noise before hatching, which is the signal for the mother to rip open the nest.
It is thought to be either difficult or impossible for hatchlings to escape the nest burrow without assistance, as the surface may become very heavy and packed above them.
The new mother will protect her offspring for up to two years, and if there are multiple nests in the same area, the mothers may form a crèche.
During this time, the mothers may pick up their offspring either in their mouths or gular fold (throat pouch), to keep the babies safe.
The mother will sometimes carry her young on her back to avoid the natural predators of the small crocodiles, which can be surprisingly bold even with the mother around.
Nile crocodiles of under two years are much more rarely observed than larger specimens, and more seldom seen than the same age young in several other types of crocodilian.
Young crocodiles are rather shy and evasive due to the formidable gaunlet of predators that they must face in sub-Saharan Africa, spending little time sunning and moving about nocturnally whenever possible.
The two-year-and-younger crocodiles may spend a surprising amount of time on land, as evidenced by the range of terrestrial insects found in their stomachs, and their lifestyle may resemble a semi-aquatic mid-sized lizard more so than the very aquatic lives of older crocodiles.
The single most virulent predator of nests is almost certainly the Nile monitor.
This predator can destroy about 50% of studied Nile crocodile eggs on its own, often being successful (as are other nest predators) in light of the trance-like state that the mother crocodile enters while brooding or taking advantage of moments where she is distracted or needs to leave the nest.
In comparison, perenties (Varanus giganteus) (the Australian ecological equivalent of the Nile monitor) succeeds in depredating about 90% of freshwater crocodile (Crocodylus johnsoni) eggs and about 25% of saltwater crocodile nests.
It may take a few years before predation is no longer a major cause of mortality for young crocodiles.
African fish eagles can take crocodile hatchlings up to a few months of age and honey badgers can prey on yearlings.
Once they reach their juvenile stage, very large African rock pythons and big cats remain as the only predatory threat to young crocodiles.
Perhaps no predator is more deadly to young Nile crocodiles than larger crocodiles of their own species, as, like most crocodilians, they are cannibalistic.
This species may be particularly dangerous to their own kind considering the aggressive disposition they tend to bear.
While the mother crocodile will react aggressively toward potential predators and has been recorded chasing and occasionally catching and killing such interlopers into her range, due to the sheer number of animals who feed on baby crocodiles and the large number of hatchlings, she is more often unsuccessful at deflecting such predators.
the advent of the readily available firearm made it much easier to kill these potentially dangerous reptiles.
However, as is the case for many large animal species whether they are protected or not, persecution and poaching have continued apace and between the 1950s and 1980s, an estimated 3 million Nile crocodiles were slaughtered by humans for the leather trade.
Recovery for the species appears quite gradual and few areas have recovered to bear crocodile populations, i.e. largely insufficient to produce sustainable populations of young crocodiles, on par with times prior to the peak of leather trading.
Crocodile 'protection programs' are artificial environments where crocodiles exist safely and without the threat of extermination from hunters.
Crocodile farming is one of the few burgeoning industries in Zimbabwe.
Unlike American alligator flesh, Nile crocodile meat is generally considered unappetizing although edible as tribes such as the Turkana may opportunistically feed on them.
According to Graham and Beard (1968), Nile crocodile meat has an "indescribable" and unpleasant taste, greasy texture and a "repellent" smell.
The conservation situation is more grim in central and west Africa presumably for both the Nile and west African crocodiles.
The crocodile population in this area is much more sparse, and has not been adequately surveyed.
While the natural population in these areas may be lower due to a less-than-ideal environment and competition with sympatric slender-snouted and dwarf crocodiles, extirpation may be a serious threat in some of these areas.
At some point in the 20th century, the Nile crocodile appeared to have been extirpated as a breeding species from Egypt, but has locally re-established in some areas such as the Aswan Dam.
Retraction of wetlands due both to direct habitat destruction by humans and environmental factor possibly related to global warming is perhaps linked to the extinction of Nile crocodiles in the last few centuries in Syria, Israel and Tunisia.
In yet another historic crocodile stronghold, the Olifants River, which flows through Kruger National Park, numerous crocodile deaths have been reported.
These are officially due to unknown causes but analysis has indicated that environmental pollutants caused by humans, particularly the burgeoning coal industry, are the primary cause.
Much of the contamination of crocodiles occurs when they consume rancid fish themselves killed by pollutants.
Additional ecological surveys and establishing management programs are necessary to resolve these questions.
The Nile crocodile is the top predator in its environment, and is responsible for checking the population of mesopredator species, such as the barbel catfish and lungfish, that could overeat fish populations on which other species, including birds, rely.
One of the fish predators seriously affected by the unchecked mesopredator fish populations (due again to crocodile declines) is humans, particularly with respect to tilapia, an important commercial fish that has declined due to excessive predation.
Despite most attacks going unreported, the Nile crocodile along with the saltwater crocodile is estimated to kill hundreds (possibly thousands) of people each year, which is more than all other crocodilian species combined.
While these species are much more aggressive toward people than other living crocodilians (as is statistically supported by estimated numbers of crocodile attacks), Nile crocodiles are not particularly more likely to behave aggressively to humans or regard humans as potential prey than saltwater crocodiles.
However, unlike other "man-eating" crocodile species, including the saltwater crocodile, the Nile crocodile lives within close proximity to human populations through most of its range, so contact is more frequent.
This combined with the species’ large size renders a higher risk of attack.
A more contemporary study claimed the number of attacks by Nile crocodiles per year as 275 to 745, of which 63% are fatal, as opposed to an estimated 30 attacks per year by saltwater crocodiles, of which 50% are fatal.
With the Nile crocodile and the saltwater crocodile, the mean size of crocodiles involved in non-fatal attacks was about as opposed to a reported range of or larger for crocodiles responsible for fatal attacks.
The average estimated size of Nile crocodiles involved in fatal attacks is .
Since a majority of fatal attacks are believed to be predatory in nature, the Nile crocodile can be considered the most prolific predator of humans among wild animals.
In comparison, lions, in the years from 1990 to 2006, were responsible for an estimated one-eighth as many fatal attacks on humans in Africa as were Nile crocodiles.
Although Nile crocodiles are more than a dozen times more numerous than lions in the wild, probably fewer than a quarter of living Nile crocodiles are old and large enough to pose a danger to humans.
Other wild animals responsible for more annual human mortalities either attack humans in self-defense, as do venomous snakes, or are deadly only as vectors of disease or infection, such as snails, rats and mosquitos.
Regional reportage from numerous areas with large crocodile populations nearby indicate, per district or large village, that crocodiles often annually claim about a dozen or more lives per year.
Miscellaneous examples of areas in the last few decades with a dozen or more fatal crocodile attacks annually include Korogwe District, Tanzania, Niassa Reserve, Mozambique and the area around Lower Zambezi National Park, Zambia.
Despite historic claims that the victims of Nile crocodile attacks are usually "women and children",
Most biologists who have engaged in months or even years of field work with Nile crocodiles, including Cott (1961), Graham and Beard (1968) and Guggisberg (1972), have found that with sufficient precautions, their own lives and the lives of their local guides were rarely, if ever, at risk in areas with many crocodiles.
A relatively modest top length is additionally supported by mummified crocodiles from ancient Egypt which rarely even approach such a size.
However most crocodile biologists in recent decades accept that Nile crocodiles can exceptionally exceed when not overhunted.
Prior to overhunting in the 20th century, other crocodilians may have also approached or exceeded , such sizes being somewhat reliably reported in gharials and Orinoco crocodiles in very old reports before both species were decimated by hunting and habitat destruction and reported but unverified in black caimans and American crocodiles (although voucher skulls from the latter species show it does likely exceed such lengths in very rare cases).
However, the Nile crocodile is the only modern crocodilian besides the saltwater crocodile where specimens over are merely uncommon rather than rare.
*A specimen, considered authentic by Guinness Records, killed by Erich Novotony in 1948 in the Emin Pasha Gulf of Lake Victoria, Tanzania was measured at .
This enormous crocodile reportedly weighed about .
*Douglas Jones reportedly killed an outsized Nile crocodile in the Juba River of Somalia that measured in a straight-line at just over .
This is considered a reliable report per Guinness Records.
*Per Guinness Records, the largest accurately measured Nile crocodile was shot near Mwanza, Tanzania in 1905 by the Duke of Mecklenburg.
This specimen measured .
Furthermore, its weight was estimated at .
*Mary Kingsley reported that she had killed a crocodile in West Africa.
Although Guggisberg (1972) considered her account believable, Guinness Records notably does not mention this specimen in compiling the largest known Nile crocodiles.
*In 1903, Hans Besser reported that he had killed a specimen in Zambia measuring despite missing "part of its tail", providing details that the body was high at the highest point on the back, girth at the belly of and a (mandibular?) skull length of .
Again, this somewhat outlandish proportioned crocodile was not mentioned by Guinness Records and can firmly be considered unverified and perhaps dubious since typically no voucher remains are known.
*Yet another unverified monster (also not considered inclusive in the Guinness Records run-down of largest crocodiles), possibly the largest Nile crocodile reported in literature from after 1900, was a specimen killed by Captain Riddick in Lake Kyoga, Uganda.
He stated that this crocodile measured in total length.
Unfortunately most details are lacking for this report.
References
