The donkey or ass (Equus africanus asinus)
The change may have come about through a tendency to avoid pejorative terms in speech, and be comparable to the substitution in North American English of rooster for cock, or that of rabbit for coney, which was formerly homophonic with cunny (a variation of the word cunt).
By the end of the 17th century, changes in pronunciation of both ass and arse had caused them to become homophones.
Other words used for the ass in English from this time include cuddy in Scotland, neddy in southwest England and dicky in the southeast; moke is documented in the 19th century, and may be of Welsh or Gypsy origin.
Characteristics
ranges from , and the weight from .
Working donkeys in the poorest countries have a life expectancy of 12 to 15 years; Donkeys have large ears, which may pick up more distant sounds, and may help cool the donkey's blood.
Donkeys can defend themselves by biting, striking with the front hooves or kicking with the hind legs.
Breeding
A jenny is normally pregnant for about 12 months, though the gestation period varies from 11 to 14 months, and usually gives birth to a single foal.
Births of twins are rare, though less so than in horses.
In general jennies have a conception rate that is lower than that of horses (i.e., less than the 60-65% rate for mares).
The time lapse involved in rebreeding, and the length of a jenny's gestation, means that a jenny will have fewer than one foal per year.
Because of this and the longer gestation period, donkey breeders do not expect to obtain a foal every year, as horse breeders often do, but may plan for three foals in four years.
Although formal studies of their behaviour and cognition are rather limited, donkeys appear to be quite intelligent, cautious, friendly, playful, and eager to learn.
History
The genus Equus, which includes all extant equines, is believed to have evolved from Dinohippus, via the intermediate form Plesippus.
One of the oldest species is Equus simplicidens, described as zebra-like with a donkey-shaped head.
The oldest fossil to date is ~3.5 million years old from Idaho, USA.
The genus appears to have spread quickly into the Old World, with the similarly aged Equus livenzovensis documented from western Europe and Russia.
Molecular phylogenies indicate the most recent common ancestor of all modern equids (members of the genus Equus) lived ~5.6 (3.9-7.8) mya.
Direct paleogenomic sequencing of a 700,000-year-old middle Pleistocene horse metapodial bone from Canada implies a more recent 4.07 Myr before present date for the most recent common ancestor (MRCA) within the range of 4.0 to 4.5 Myr BP.
The oldest divergencies are the Asian hemiones (subgenus E. (Asinus), including the kulan, onager, and kiang), followed by the African zebras (subgenera E. (Dolichohippus), and E. (Hippotigris)).
All other modern forms including the domesticated horse (and many fossil Pliocene and Pleistocene forms) belong to the subgenus E. (Equus) which diverged ~4.8 (3.2-6.5) million years ago.
The ancestors of the modern donkey are the Nubian and Somalian subspecies of African wild ass.
Some researchers believe the actual number may be somewhat higher since many donkeys go uncounted.
In Italy, which has the highest consumption of equine meat in Europe and where donkey meat is the main ingredient of several regional dishes, about 1000 donkeys were slaughtered in 2010, yielding approximately 100 tonnes of meat.
In China, donkey meat is considered a delicacy with some restaurants specializing in such dishes, and Guo Li Zhuang restaurants offer the genitals of donkeys in dishes.
Donkey-hide gelatin is produced by soaking and stewing the hide to make a traditional Chinese medicine product.
Ejiao, the gelatine produced by boiling donkey skins, can sell for up to $388 per kilo, at October 2017 prices.
In 2017, a drop in the number of Chinese donkeys, combined with the fact that they are slow to reproduce, meant that Chinese suppliers began to look to Africa.
As a result of the increase in demand, and the price that could be charged, Kenya opened three donkey abattoirs.
Concerns for donkeys' well-being, however, have resulted in a number of African countries (including Uganda, Tanzania, Botswana, Niger, Burkina Faso, Mali, and Senegal) banning China from buying their donkey products.
Donkeys are also less prone to colic.
In temperate climates the forage available is often too abundant and too rich; over-feeding may cause weight gain and obesity, and lead to metabolic disorders such as founder (.
In Mexico, the donkey population is estimated at three million.
There are also substantial burro populations in El Salvador, Guatemala, and Nicaragua.
Burro is the Spanish and Portuguese word for donkey.
In Spanish, burros may also be called ('Mexican donkey'), ('Criollo donkey'), or .
In the United States, "burro" is used as a loan word by English speakers to describe any small donkey used primarily as a pack animal, as well as to describe the feral donkeys that live in Arizona, California, Oregon, Utah, Texas and Nevada.
Among donkeys, burros tend to be on the small side.
A study of working burros in central Mexico found a weight range of , with an average weight of for males and for females.
Height at the withers varied from , with an average of approximately , and girth measurements ranged from , with an average of about .
The average age of the burros in the study was 6.4 years; evaluated by their teeth, they ranged from 1 to 17 years old.
They are gray in color.
Mexican burros tend to be smaller than their counterparts in the USA, which are both larger and more robust.
To strengthen their bloodstock, in May 2005, the state of Jalisco imported 11 male and female donkeys from Kentucky.
Feral donkeys and wild asses
In some areas domestic donkeys have returned to the wild and established feral populations such as those of the Burro of North America and the Asinara donkey of Sardinia, Italy, both of which have protected status.
Feral donkeys can also cause problems, notably in environments that have evolved free of any form of equid, such as Hawaii.
In Australia, where there may be 5 million feral donkeys, they are regarded as an invasive pest and have a serious impact on the environment.
They may compete with livestock and native animals for resources, spread weeds and diseases, foul or damage watering holes and cause erosion.
Wild asses, onagers, and kiangs
Few species of ass exist in the wild.
The African wild ass, Equus africanus, has two subspecies, the Somali wild ass, Equus africanus somaliensis, and the Nubian wild ass, Equus africanus africanus, the principal ancestor of the domestic donkey.
Both are critically endangered.
Extinct species include the European ass, Equus hydruntinus, which became extinct during the Neolithic, and the North African wild ass, Equus africanus atlanticus, which became extinct in Roman times.
There are five subspecies of Asiatic wild ass or onager, Equus hemionus, and three subspecies of the kiang, Equus kiang, of the Himalayan upland.
Donkey hybrids
A male donkey (jack) can be crossed with a female horse to produce a mule.
A male horse can be crossed with a female donkey (jenny) to produce a hinny.
Horse-donkey hybrids are almost always sterile because horses have 64 chromosomes whereas donkeys have 62, producing offspring with 63 chromosomes.
Mules are much more common than hinnies.
This is believed to be caused by two factors, the first being proven in cat hybrids, that when the chromosome count of the male is the higher, fertility rates drop.
The lower progesterone production of the jenny may also lead to early embryonic loss.
In addition, there are reasons not directly related to reproductive biology.
Due to different mating behavior, jacks are often more willing to cover mares than stallions are to breed jennies.
Further, mares are usually larger than jennies and thus have more room for the ensuing foal to grow in the womb, resulting in a larger animal at birth.
It is commonly believed that mules are more easily handled and also physically stronger than hinnies, making them more desirable for breeders to produce.
The offspring of a zebra-donkey cross is called a zonkey, zebroid, zebrass, or zedonk; zebra mule is an older term, but still used in some regions today.
The foregoing terms generally refer to hybrids produced by breeding a male zebra to a female donkey.
Zebra hinny, zebret and zebrinny all refer to the cross of a female zebra with a male donkey.
Zebrinnies are rarer than zedonkies because female zebras in captivity are most valuable when used to produce full-blooded zebras.
There are not enough female zebras breeding in captivity to spare them for hybridizing; there is no such limitation on the number of female donkeys breeding.
References
