The Shaheed Minar is a national monument in Dhaka, Bangladesh, established to commemorate those killed during the Bengali Language Movement demonstrations of 1952 in then East Pakistan.
On 21 and 22 February 1952, students from Dhaka University and Dhaka Medical College and political activists were killed when the Pakistani police force opened fire on Bengali protesters who were demanding official status for their native tongue, Bengali.
The massacre occurred near Dhaka Medical College and Ramna Park in Dhaka.
A makeshift monument was erected on 23 February and it became possible to construct the new monument.
A foundation stone was laid in 1956.
Sculptor Hamidur Rahman created the design of Shaheed Minar under which construction was started in 1957.
Hamidur Rahman's model was a huge complex on a large area of land in the yard of Dhaka Medical College Hostel.
The enormous design included a half-circular column to symbolise the mother with her fallen sons standing on the monument's central dais.
Yellow and deep blue pieces of stained glass, symbolising eyes reflecting the sun, were also to be placed in the columns.
The marble floor was designed to reflect the moving shadows of the columns.
The basement of the Minar also included a fresco depicting the history of the language movement.
A railing decorated with Bengali alphabet was to be constructed in front.
Two footmarks coloured red and black, indicating the two opposite forces, were also in the design.
Besides this a museum and a library were also included in Hamidur Rahman's design.
A fountain shaped like an eye was also to be constructed.
Rahman specifically designed the materials of the monument to withstand the area's tropical climate.
Construction started in November 1957, under the supervision of Hamidur Rahman and Novera Ahmed.
The Pakistani Army crushed the Minar and placed over the rubble a signboard reading "Mosque".
Re-establishment of Shaheed Minar and current state
In 1972, a committee headed by the then president Abu Sayeed Chowdhury was formed and renovation work began.
The original sketch was ignored, while the Construction and Building Directorate followed the 1963 design.
Despite some flaws of proportionality, the Shaheed Minar still stands high.
It is one of the city's most important monuments.
The Shaheed Minar of Dhaka has a very close association with the city's cultural history.
It also happens to be one of the primary Dhaka tourist attractions and is visited by thousands of tourists throughout the year.
It is one of the most well-maintained monuments in Bangladesh.
Special care is taken each year on the occasion of 21 February (Ekushey February).
The premises are washed and cleaned thoroughly.
Artists of the Faculty of Fine Arts of Dhaka University then colourfully paint the Central Shaheed Minar premises with intricate designs.
Thus the Shaheed Minar premises are colourful throughout the year.
Architecture
The enormous design includes a half-circular arrangement of columns to symbolise the mother, with her fallen sons, standing on the monument's central dais, and the red sun shining behind.
The Central Shaheed Minar of Dhaka goes up to a height of and was made with marble stones.
The stairs and barrier are highlighted in white, to create a divine look.
The fence on both sides is painted with lines from poems of legendary poets in iron letters.
As the visitors enter the monument they will find two statues of the patriots who sacrificed their lives in that heinous police firing of 1952.
The marble floor was designed to reveal the moving shadows of the columns.
The basement of the Shaheed Minar also included a 1,500-square-foot (140 m2) mural representing the history of the Language Movement.
Hurried repair of the Shaheed Minar resulted in the Minar to be reconstructed incorrectly.
The height of the column was shorter and the head bent more than originally planned, and the proportions of different parts of the monument were not properly maintained.
Significance
The Language Movement was one of the formidable movements which has come up in the country of Bangladesh, thus the Central Shaheed Minar epitomises efforts to represent the spirit of Bangladeshi nationalism and also highlight the importance of the Bengali language in the social and cultural progress of the country.
As a result, the Shaheed Minar has a very significant place in the social and cultural mechanism of Bangladesh.
At present, all national, mourning, cultural and other activities held each year, regarding 21 February, have been centred on the Shaheed Minar.
Location
The Shaheed Minar is situated near Dhaka Medical College Hospital and in the Dhaka University area.
It is adjacent to the Mathematics Department of Dhaka University.
Further reading
ec6r0rdd6juzqfsoqqork0pvhf3oamt
