Cannibalism is the act of consuming another individual of the same species as food.
Cannibalism is a common ecological interaction in the animal kingdom and has been recorded in more than 1,500 species.
Human cannibalism is well-documented, both in ancient and in recent times.
The rate of cannibalism increases in nutritionally poor environments as individuals turn to conspecifics as an additional food source.
Cannibalism regulates population numbers, whereby resources such as food, shelter and territory become more readily available with the decrease of potential competition.
Although it may benefit the individual, it has been shown that the presence of cannibalism decreases the expected survival rate of the whole population and increases the risk of consuming a relative.
Cannibalism, however, does not-as once believed-occur only as a result of extreme food shortage or of artificial/unnatural conditions, but may also occur under natural conditions in a variety of species.
Cannibalism is prevalent in aquatic ecosystems, in which up to approximately 90% of the organisms engage in cannibalistic activity at some point in their life-cycle.
Cannibalism is not restricted to carnivorous species: it also occurs in herbivores and in detritivores.
A study conducted on wood frog tadpoles showed that those that exhibited cannibalistic tendencies had faster growth rates and higher fitness levels than non-cannibals.
An increase of size and growth would give them the added benefit of protection from potential predators such as other cannibals and give them an advantage when competing for resources This facilitates for faster development; however, a trade-off may occur as there may be less time to ingest these acquired resources.
Studies have shown that there is a noticeable size difference between animals fed on a high conspecific diet which were smaller compared to those fed on a low conspecific diet.
However, this is only the case if the cannibal recognizes its own kin as this won't hinder any future chances of perpetuating its genes in future generations.
The elimination of competition can also increase mating opportunities, allowing further spread of an individual's genes.
Costs
Animals which have diets consisting of predominantly conspecific prey expose themselves to a greater risk of injury and expend more energy foraging for suitable prey as compared to non-cannibalistic species.
In addition, the consumption of conspecific prey may also involve the ingestion of defense compounds and hormones, which have the capacity to impact the developmental growth of the cannibal's offspring.
The act of cannibalism may also facilitate trophic disease transmission within a population, though cannibalistically spread pathogens and parasites generally employ alternative modes of infection.
It has been shown in some studies that the risk of encountering an infected victim increases when there is a higher cannibalism rate, though this risk drops as the number of available hosts decreases.
It is a cerebellar dysfunctional disease which has symptoms including a broad-based gait and decreased motor activity control; however, the disease has a long incubation rate and symptoms may not appear until years later.
It is a neurodegenerative disease and could be spread to humans if the individual were to consume contaminated beef.
The spread of parasites such as nematodes may also be facilitated by cannibalism as eggs from these parasites are transferred more easily from one host to another.
confrontation, or cannibalism.
The presence of smaller prey, or prey which are at a vulnerable stage of their life cycle, increases the chances of cannibalism occurring due to the reduced risk of injury.
A feedback loop occurs when increasing rates of cannibalism decreases population densities, leading to an increased abundance of alternative food sources; making it more beneficial to forage within the environment than for cannibalism to occur.
Sexual cannibalism has been recorded in the female redback spider, black widow spider, praying mantis, and scorpion, among others.
In most species of spiders, the consumption of the male individual occurs before copulation and the male fails to transfer his sperm into the female.
The size of the male spider may play a part in determining its reproductive success as smaller males are less likely to be consumed during pre-copulation; however, larger males may be able to prevent the smaller ones from gaining access to the female.
Hence, species such as the male dark fishing spider of the family dolomedes self-sacrifice and spontaneously die during copulation to facilitate their own consumption by the female, thereby increasing the chance of survivorship of future offspring.
Sexual dimorphism has been theorised to have arisen from sexual selection as smaller males were captured more easily than larger males; however, it is also possible that sexual cannibalism only occurs due to the difference in size between male and females.
Size-structured cannibalism
Size-structured cannibalism is cannibalism in which older, larger, more mature individuals consume smaller, younger conspecifics.
In size-structured populations, (where populations are made of individuals of various sizes, ages, and maturities), cannibalism can be responsible for 8% (Belding's ground squirrel) to 95% (dragonfly larvae) of the total mortality, making it a significant and important factor for population and community dynamics.
Size-structured cannibalism has commonly been observed in the wild for a variety of taxa.
Vertebrate examples include chimpanzees, where groups of adult males have been observed to attack and consume infants.
Filial cannibalism
Filial cannibalism is a specific type of size-structured cannibalism in which adults eat their own offspring.
Although most often thought of as parents eating live young, filial cannibalism includes parental consumption of stillborn infants and miscarried fetuses as well as infertile and still-incubating eggs.
Vertebrate examples include pigs, where savaging accounts for a sizable percentage of total piglet deaths, and cats.
Filial cannibalism is particularly common in teleost fishes, appearing in at least seventeen different families of teleosts.
Within this diverse group of fish, there have been many, variable explanations of the possible adaptive value of filial cannibalism.
One of these is the energy-based hypothesis, which suggests that fish eat their offspring when they are low on energy as an investment in future reproductive success.
male tessellated darters, and male sphinx blenny fish all consume or absorb their own eggs to maintain their physical conditions.
In other words, when males of a fish species are low on energy, it might sometimes be beneficial for them to feed on their own offspring to survive and invest in future reproductive success.
Another hypothesis as to the adaptive value of filial cannibalism in teleosts is that it increases density-dependent egg survivorship.
In other words, filial cannibalism simply increases overall reproductive success by helping the other eggs make it to maturity by thinning out the numbers.
Possible explanations as to why this is so include increasing oxygen availability to the remaining eggs, the negative effects of accumulating embryo waste, and predation.
Further evidence also suggests that occasionally filial cannibalism might be the unfortunate by-product of cuckoldry in fish.
Males consume broods, which may include their own offspring, when they believe a certain percentage of the brood contains genetic material that is not theirs.
It is not always the parent that cannibalises the offspring, in some spiders mothers have been observed to feed herself to her brood as the ultimate provision from mother to children, known as matriphagy.
The dinosaur Coelophysis was once suspected to practice this form of cannibalism but this turned out to be wrong, although Deinonychus may have done.
Skeletal remains from subadults with missing parts are suspected of having been eaten by other Deinonychus, mainly full-grown adults.
Infanticide
Infanticide is the killing of a non-adult animal by an adult of the same species.
Infanticide is often, but not always, accompanied by cannibalism.
It is often displayed in lions; a male lion encroaching on the territory of a rival pride will often kill any existing cubs fathered by other males; this brings the lionesses into heat more quickly, enabling the invading lion to sire his own young.
This is a good example of cannibalistic behavior in a genetic context.
In many species of Lepidoptera, such as Cupido minimus and the Indian mealmoth, the first larvae to hatch will consume the other eggs or smaller larvae on the host plant, decreasing competition.
Intrauterine cannibalism
Intrauterine cannibalism is a behaviour in some carnivorous species, in which multiple embryos are created at impregnation, but only one or two are born.
The larger or stronger ones consume their less-developed siblings as a source of nutrients.
In adelphophagy or embryophagy, the fetus eats sibling embryos, while in oophagy it feeds on eggs.
Adelphophagy occurs in some marine gastropods (calyptraeids, muricids, vermetids, and buccinids) and in some marine annelids (Boccardia proboscidia in Spionidae).
Intrauterine cannibalism is known to occur in lamnoid sharks such as the sand tiger shark, and in the fire salamander, as well as in some teleost fishes.
Protection against cannibalism
Animals have evolved protection to prevent and deter potential predators such as those from their own kind.
Queen laid eggs have a different scent than worker laid eggs, allowing workers to differentiate between the two, allowing them to nurture and protect queen laid eggs rather than cannibalising them.
Japanese brown frog tadpoles have been shown to exhibit morphological plasticity when they are in a high stress environment where cannibalism between tadpoles and more developed individuals were present.
Shifting their morphology plays a key role in their survival, creating bulkier bodies when put into environments where more developed tadpoles were present, to make it difficult for the individuals to swallow them whole.
Diet shifts between different stages of development have also evolved to decrease competition between each stage, thereby increasing the amount of food availability so that there is a decreased chance that the individuals will turn to cannibalism as an additional food source.
Further reading
* M. A. Elgar and Bernard J. Crespi (eds.).
Cannibalism: Ecology and Evolution of Cannibalism among Diverse Taxa Oxford University Press, New York.
i19he20chuvw1rio71u2nsagpu12osn
