In mathematics, a square root of a number is a number such that ; in other words, a number whose square (the result of multiplying the number by itself, or &sdot; ) is .
For example, 4 and −4 are square roots of 16 because .
Every nonnegative real number has a unique nonnegative square root, called the principal square root, which is denoted by , where is called the radical sign or radix.
For example, the principal square root of 9 is 3, which is denoted by , because and 3 is nonnegative.
The term (or number) whose square root is being considered is known as the radicand.
The radicand is the number or expression underneath the radical sign, in this example 9.
Every positive number has two square roots: , which is positive, and , which is negative.
Together, these two roots are denoted as (see ± shorthand).
Although the principal square root of a positive number is only one of its two square roots, the designation "the square root" is often used to refer to the principal square root.
For positive , the principal square root can also be written in exponent notation, as .
Square roots of negative numbers can be discussed within the framework of complex numbers.
More generally, square roots can be considered in any context in which a notion of "squaring" of some mathematical objects is defined (including algebras of matrices, endomorphism rings, etc.)
History
The Yale Babylonian Collection YBC 7289 clay tablet was created between 1800 BC and 1600 BC, showing and as 1;24,51,10 and 0;42,25,35 base 60 numbers on a square crossed by two diagonals.
(1;24,51,10) base 60 corresponds to 1.41421296 which is a correct value to 5 decimal points (1.41421356...).
The Rhind Mathematical Papyrus is a copy from 1650 BC of an earlier Berlin Papyrus and other textspossibly the Kahun Papyrusthat shows how the Egyptians extracted square roots by an inverse proportion method.
In Ancient India, the knowledge of theoretical and applied aspects of square and square root was at least as old as the Sulba Sutras, dated around 800-500 BC (possibly much earlier).
A method for finding very good approximations to the square roots of 2 and 3 are given in the Baudhayana Sulba Sutra.
Aryabhata in the Aryabhatiya (section 2.4), has given a method for finding the square root of numbers having many digits.
It was known to the ancient Greeks that square roots of positive whole numbers that are not perfect squares are always irrational numbers: numbers not expressible as a ratio of two integers (that is, they cannot be written exactly as m/n, where m and n are integers).
This is the theorem Euclid X, 9 almost certainly due to Theaetetus dating back to circa 380 BC.
The particular case is assumed to date back earlier to the Pythagoreans and is traditionally attributed to Hippasus.
It is exactly the length of the diagonal of a square with side length 1.
In the Chinese mathematical work Writings on Reckoning, written between 202 BC and 186 BC during the early Han Dynasty, the square root is approximated by using an "excess and deficiency" method, which says to "...combine the excess and deficiency as the divisor; (taking) the deficiency numerator multiplied by the excess denominator and the excess numerator times the deficiency denominator, combine them as the dividend."
A symbol for square roots, written as an elaborate R, was invented by Regiomontanus (1436-1476).
An R was also used for Radix to indicate square roots in Gerolamo Cardano's Ars Magna.
According to historian of mathematics D.E. Smith, Aryabhata's method for finding the square root was first introduced in Europe by Cataneo in 1546.
According to Jeffrey A. Oaks, Arabs used the letter jīm/ĝīm (), the first letter of the word “” (variously transliterated as jaḏr, jiḏr, ǧaḏr or ǧiḏr, “root”), placed in its initial form () over a number to indicate its square root.
The letter jīm resembles the present square root shape.
Its usage goes as far as the end of the twelfth century in the works of the Moroccan mathematician Ibn al-Yasamin.
The symbol '√' for the square root was first used in print in 1525 in Christoph Rudolff's Coss.
Properties and uses
The principal square root function f (x) = (usually just referred to as the "square root function") is a function that maps the set of nonnegative real numbers onto itself.
In geometrical terms, the square root function maps the area of a square to its side length.
The square root of x is rational if and only if x is a rational number that can be represented as a ratio of two perfect squares.
The square root function maps rational numbers into algebraic numbers (a superset of the rational numbers).
For all real numbers x,
\sqrt
\left|x\right
\begin
x, & \mboxx \ge 0 \\
-x, & \mboxx CH, i.e. (with equality if and only if ), which is the arithmetic-geometric mean inequality for two variables and, as noted above, is the basis of the Ancient Greek understanding of "Heron's method".
Another method of geometric construction uses right triangles and induction: can, of course, be constructed, and once has been constructed, the right triangle with legs 1 and has a hypotenuse of .
Constructing successive square roots in this manner yields the Spiral of Theodorus depicted above.
* Solving quadratic equations with continued fractions
The square root of NOT gate (), one of the logic gates used in quantum computers (doesn't exist for non-quantum where NOT gates are used)
Notes
