Greyfriars Bobby (May 4, 1855 - January 14, 1872) was a Skye Terrier who became known in 19th-century Edinburgh for spending 14 years guarding the grave of his owner until he died himself on 14 January 1872.
The story continues to be well known in Scotland, through several books and films.
A prominent commemorative statue and nearby graves are a tourist attraction.
Traditional view
The best-known version of the story is that Bobby belonged to John Gray, who worked for the Edinburgh City Police as a nightwatchman.
When John Gray died he was buried in Greyfriars Kirkyard, the kirkyard surrounding Greyfriars Kirk in the Old Town of Edinburgh.
Bobby then became known locally, spending the rest of his life sitting on his master's grave.
In 1867 the Lord Provost of Edinburgh, Sir William Chambers, who was also a director of the Scottish Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals, paid for Bobby's licence and gave the dog a collar, now in the Museum of Edinburgh.
Bobby is said to have sat by the grave for 14 years.
Several books and films have since been based on Bobby's life, including the novel (2006).
Alternative views
The accuracy of stories of Greyfriars Bobby has been challenged many times: for instance, in Forbes Macgregor's Greyfriars Bobby: The Real Story at Last,, Jan Bondeson's Greyfriars Bobby: The Most Faithful Dog in the World, and Richard Brassey's "Greyfriars Bobby The Most Famous Dog in Scotland".
Questions about the story's accuracy are not new.
In a newspaper article in The Scotsman, "Greyfriars Bobby A Dog's Devotion" (11 August 1934), Councillor Wilson McLaren responds to contemporary questions about the accuracy of the stories by describing his own conversation, in 1871, with "Mr Traill" of "Traill's Coffee House" in relation to the dog he himself was then feeding, reassuring readers about the story Mr Traill had given him, and describing responses in 1889 to questions about the story's accuracy.
A sense of the difficulty of determining accuracy is gained from two opposing letters to The Scotsman newspaper on 8 February 1889 , both from people claiming close links to Greyfriars Kirk, both claiming to have known of the dog personally but with opposing views over the accuracy of stories.
A common discussion is over which of two people named John Gray was the real owner of Bobby (one being a night watchman and the other a farmer).
A plaque on the base reads, "A tribute to the affectionate fidelity of Greyfriars Bobby.
In 1858, this faithful dog followed the remains of his master to Greyfriars Churchyard and lingered near the spot until his death in 1872.
With permission erected by the Baroness Burdett-Coutts".
Inscribed on the statue is "Greyfriars Bobby, from the life just before his death" and "W.H. Brodie Sc RSA 1872".
Since around 2000 this has been treated like a shrine, with sticks (for Bobby to fetch) frequently left, and occasionally dog toys, flowers, etc.
The monument reads, "Greyfriars Bobby - Died 14 January 1872 -
Aged 16 years - Let his loyalty and devotion be a lesson to us all".
Books and films directly about Bobby
* The 1902 historical account, "The True Story of Greyfriars Bobby" by Henry T. Hutton, Publisher: Edinburgh
The 1912 book Greyfriars Bobby by Eleanor Atkinson embellished the story and made John Gray a shepherd, known as "Auld Jock".
The 1961 Walt Disney film Greyfriars Bobby: The True Story of a Dog was based on this book.
* The Adventures of Greyfriars Bobby, another film, was released in the UK in February 2006 starring James Cosmo and Christopher Lee (released elsewhere in 2005 under the alternative title Greyfriars Bobby).
The Edinburgh Castle scenes in this film were actually shot at Stirling Castle.
Many expressed reservations that a Cairn Terrier was cast as Bobby, and that new characters were added while one of the major characters in Bobby's life, John Traill, was omitted.
Other references in popular culture
* Challenge to Lassie (1949), is an earlier film based on Atkinson's book, replacing Bobby with Lassie.
* The 1945 film The Body Snatcher, has an oblique reference to Bobby.
The title character John Gray, played by Boris Karloff, while seeking to dig up a corpse in Greyfriars Kirkyard, encounters a dog (named "Robbie") guarding the grave.
The dog is killed.
* Red Dead Redemption 2 features an easter egg that depicts a dog sitting next to its owner's grave in reference to Bobby.
