Mount Everest (Nepali: Sagarmatha ; Tibetan: Chomolungma ; Chinese: Zhumulangma ) is Earth's highest mountain above sea level, located in the Mahalangur Himal sub-range of the Himalayas.
The international border between Nepal (Province No. 1) and China (Tibet Autonomous Region) runs across its summit point.
The current official elevation of , recognised by China and Nepal, was established by a 1955 Indian survey and subsequently confirmed by a Chinese survey in 1975.
Mount Everest attracts many climbers, some of them highly experienced mountaineers.
There are two main climbing routes, one approaching the summit from the southeast in Nepal (known as the "standard route") and the other from the north in Tibet.
While not posing substantial technical climbing challenges on the standard route, Everest presents dangers such as altitude sickness, weather, and wind, as well as significant hazards from avalanches and the Khumbu Icefall.
, over 300 people have died on Everest, many of whose bodies remain on the mountain.
The first recorded efforts to reach Everest's summit were made by British mountaineers.
As Nepal did not allow foreigners to enter the country at the time, the British made several attempts on the north ridge route from the Tibetan side.
After the first reconnaissance expedition by the British in 1921 reached on the North Col, the 1922 expedition pushed the north ridge route up to , marking the first time a human had climbed above .
Seven porters were killed in an avalanche on the descent from the North Col.
The 1924 expedition resulted in one of the greatest mysteries on Everest to this day: George Mallory and Andrew Irvine made a final summit attempt on 8 June but never returned, sparking debate as to whether or not they were the first to reach the top.
They had been spotted high on the mountain that day but disappeared in the clouds, never to be seen again, until Mallory's body was found in 1999 at on the north face.
Tenzing Norgay and Edmund Hillary made the first official ascent of Everest in 1953, using the southeast ridge route.
Norgay had reached the previous year as a member of the 1952 Swiss expedition.
The Chinese mountaineering team of Wang Fuzhou, Gonpo, and Qu Yinhua made the first reported ascent of the peak from the north ridge on 25 May 1960.
Name
The Tibetan name is Qomolangma (, lit.
"Holy Mother").
The name was first recorded with a Chinese transcription on the 1721 Kangxi Atlas, and then appeared as Tchoumour Lancma on a 1733 map published in Paris by the French geographer D'Anville based on the former map.
It is also popularly romanised as Chomolungma and (in Wylie) as Jo-mo-glang-ma.
The official Chinese transcription is whose pinyin form is Zhūmùlǎngmǎ Fēng.
It is also infrequently simply translated into Chinese as Shèngmǔ Fēng lit.
"Holy Mother Peak").
Many other local names exist, including "Deodungha" ("Holy Mountain") in Darjeeling
In the late 19th century, many European cartographers incorrectly believed that a native name for the mountain was Gaurishankar, a mountain between Kathmandu and Everest.
In 1849, the British survey wanted to preserve local names if possible (e.g., Kangchenjunga and Dhaulagiri), Waugh argued that he could not find any commonly used local name.
Waugh's search for a local name was hampered by Nepal and Tibet's exclusion of foreigners.
Waugh argued that because there were many local names, it would be difficult to favour one name over all others; He decided that Peak XV should be named after British surveyor Sir George Everest, his predecessor as Surveyor General of India.
Everest himself opposed the name suggested by Waugh and told the Royal Geographical Society in 1857 that "Everest" could not be written in Hindi nor pronounced by "the native of India".
Waugh's proposed name prevailed despite the objections, and in 1865, the Royal Geographical Society officially adopted Mount Everest as the name for the highest mountain in the world.
is different from Sir George's pronunciation of his surname ( ).
In the early 1960s, the Nepalese government coined the Nepali name Sagarmāthā or Sagar-Matha they climbed the North Col to an altitude of .
From there, Mallory espied a route to the top, but the party was unprepared for the great task of climbing any further and descended.
The British returned for a 1922 expedition.
George Finch climbed using oxygen for the first time.
He ascended at a remarkable speed- per hour, and reached an altitude of , the first time a human reported to climb higher than 8,000 m. Mallory and Col. Felix Norton made a second unsuccessful attempt.
Mallory was faulted for leading a group down from the North Col which got caught in an avalanche.
Mallory was pulled down too but survived.
Seven native porters were killed.
The next expedition was in 1924.
The initial attempt by Mallory and Geoffrey Bruce was aborted when weather conditions prevented the establishment of Camp VI.
The next attempt was that of Norton and Somervell, who climbed without oxygen and in perfect weather, traversing the North Face into the Great Couloir.
Norton managed to reach , though he ascended only or so in the last hour.
Mallory rustled up oxygen equipment for a last-ditch effort.
He chose young Andrew Irvine as his partner.
On 8 June 1924, George Mallory and Andrew Irvine made an attempt on the summit via the North Col-North Ridge-Northeast Ridge route from which they never returned.
On 1 May 1999, the Mallory and Irvine Research Expedition found Mallory's body on the North Face in a snow basin below and to the west of the traditional site of Camp VI.
Controversy has raged in the mountaineering community whether one or both of them reached the summit 29 years before the confirmed ascent and safe descent of Everest by Sir Edmund Hillary and Tenzing Norgay in 1953.
In 1933, Lady Houston, a British millionairess, funded the Houston Everest Flight of 1933, which saw a formation of aircraft led by the Marquess of Clydesdale fly over the summit in an effort to deploy the British Union Flag at the top.
Early expeditions-such as General Charles Bruce's in the 1920s and Hugh Ruttledge's two unsuccessful attempts in 1933 and 1936-tried to ascend the mountain from Tibet, via the North Face.
Access was closed from the north to Western expeditions in 1950 after China took control of Tibet.
In 1950, Bill Tilman and a small party which included Charles Houston, Oscar Houston, and Betsy Cowles undertook an exploratory expedition to Everest through Nepal along the route which has now become the standard approach to Everest from the south.
The 1952 Swiss Mount Everest Expedition, led by Edouard Wyss-Dunant, was granted permission to attempt a climb from Nepal.
It established a route through the Khumbu icefall and ascended to the South Col at an elevation of .
Raymond Lambert and Sherpa Tenzing Norgay were able to reach an elevation of about on the southeast ridge, setting a new climbing altitude record.
Tenzing's experience was useful when he was hired to be part of the British expedition in 1953.
One reference says that no attempt at an ascent of Everest was ever under consideration in this case,
although John Hunt (who met the team in Zurich on their return) wrote that when the Swiss Expedition "just failed" in the spring they decided to make another post-monsoon (summit ascent) attempt in the autumn; although as it was only decided in June the second party arrived too late, when winter winds were buffeting the mountain.
First successful ascent by Tenzing and Hillary, 1953
In 1953, a ninth British expedition, led by John Hunt, returned to Nepal.
Hunt selected two climbing pairs to attempt to reach the summit.
The first pair, Tom Bourdillon and Charles Evans, came within of the summit on 26 May 1953, but turned back after running into oxygen problems.
As planned, their work in route finding and breaking trail and their oxygen caches were of great aid to the following pair.
Two days later, the expedition made its second assault on the summit with the second climbing pair: the New Zealander Edmund Hillary and Tenzing Norgay, a Nepali Sherpa climber.
They reached the summit at 11:30 local time on 29 May 1953 via the South Col route.
At the time, both acknowledged it as a team effort by the whole expedition, but Tenzing revealed a few years later that Hillary had put his foot on the summit first.
Tenzing, a Nepali Sherpa who was a citizen of India, was granted the George Medal by the UK.
Hunt was ultimately made a life peer in Britain, while Hillary became a founding member of the Order of New Zealand.
Hillary and Tenzing are also recognised in Nepal, where annual ceremonies in schools and offices celebrate their accomplishment.
1950´s - 1960´s
On 23 May 1956 Ernst Schmied and Juerg Marmet ascended.
Wang Fuzhou, Gonpo and Qu Yinhua of China made the first reported ascent of the peak from the North Ridge on 25 May 1960.
1970´s
In 1970 Japanese mountaineers conducted a major expedition.
The centerpiece was a large "siege"-style expedition led by Saburo Matsukata, working on finding a new route up the southwest face.
Another element of the expedition was an attempt to ski Mount Everest.
Miura's exploits became the subject of film, and he went on to become the oldest person to summit Mount Everest in 2003 at age 70 and again in 2013 at the age of 80.
In 1975, Junko Tabei, a Japanese woman, became the first woman to summit Mount Everest.
The successful winter ascent of Mount Everest started a new decade of Winter Himalaism, which became a Polish specialisation.
After 1980 Poles did ten first winter ascents on 8000 metre peaks, which earned Polish climbers a reputation of "Ice Warriors".
Lho La tragedy, 1989
In May 1989, Polish climbers under the leadership of Eugeniusz Chrobak organised an international expedition to Mount Everest on a difficult western ridge.
Ten Poles and nine foreigners participated, but ultimately only the Poles remained in the attempt for the summit.
On 24 May, Chrobak and Andrzej Marciniak, starting from camp V at 8,200 m, overcame the ridge and reached the summit.
But on 27 May in the avalanche from the wall Khumbutse on the Lho La Pass, four Polish climbers were killed: Mirosław Dąsal, Mirosław Gardzielewski, Zygmunt Andrzej Heinrich and Wacław Otręba.
The following day, due to his injuries, Chrobak also died.
Marciniak, who was also injured, was saved by a rescue expedition in which Artur Hajzer and New Zealanders Gary Ball and Rob Hall took part.
In the organisation of the rescue expedition they took part, inter alia Reinhold Messner, Elizabeth Hawley, Carlos Carsolio and the US consul.
1996 disaster
On 11 May 1996 eight climbers died after several expeditions were caught in a blizzard high up on the mountain.
During the 1996 season, 15 people died while climbing on Mount Everest.
These were the highest death tolls for a single event, and for a single season, until the sixteen deaths in the 2014 Mount Everest avalanche.
The disaster gained wide publicity and raised questions about the commercialisation of climbing Mount Everest.
Journalist Jon Krakauer, on assignment from Outside magazine, was in one of the affected parties, and afterward published the bestseller Into Thin Air, which related his experience.
Anatoli Boukreev, a guide who felt impugned by Krakauer's book, co-authored a rebuttal book called The Climb.
The dispute sparked a debate within the climbing community.
In May 2004, Kent Moore, a physicist, and John L. Semple, a surgeon, both researchers from the University of Toronto, told New Scientist magazine that an analysis of weather conditions on 11 May suggested that freak weather caused oxygen levels to plunge approximately 14 percent.
One of the survivors was Beck Weathers, an American client of New Zealand-based guide service Adventure Consultants.
Weathers was left for dead about 275 metres (900 feet) from Camp 4 at 7,950 metres (26,085 feet).
After spending a night on the mountain, Weathers managed to find his way to Camp 4 with massive frostbite and vision impaired due to snow blindness.
When he arrived at Camp 4, fellow climbers considered his condition terminal and left him in a tent to die overnight.
Before leaving Camp 4 Jon Krakauer heard Weathers calling for help from his tent.
Weathers' condition had not improved and an immediate descent to a lower elevation was deemed essential.
2006 mountaineering season
In 2006 12 people died.
One death in particular (see below) triggered an international debate and years of discussion about climbing ethics.
The season was also remembered for the rescue of Lincoln Hall who had been left by his climbing team and declared dead, but was later discovered alive and survived being helped off the mountain.
David Sharp ethics controversy, 2006
There was an international controversy about the death of a solo British climber David Sharp, who attempted to climb Mount Everest in 2006 but died in his attempt.
The story broke out of the mountaineering community into popular media, with a series of interviews, allegations, and critiques.
The question was whether climbers that season had left a man to die and whether he could have been saved.
He was said to have attempted to summit Mount Everest by himself with no Sherpa or guide and fewer oxygen bottles than considered normal.
He went with a low-budget Nepali guide firm that only provides support up to Base Camp, after which climbers go as a "loose group", offering a high degree of independence.
The manager at Sharp's guide support said Sharp did not take enough oxygen for his summit attempt and did not have a Sherpa guide.
It is less clear who knew Sharp was in trouble, and if they did know, whether they were qualified or capable of helping him.
Inglis said 40 people had passed by Sharp, but he might have been overlooked as climbers assumed Sharp was the corpse nicknamed "Green Boots", but Inglis was not aware that Turkish climbers had tried to help Sharp despite being in the process of helping an injured woman down (a Turkish woman named Burçak Poçan).
There has also been some discussion about Himex in the commentary on Inglis and Sharp.
In regards to Inglis's initial comments, he later revised certain details because he had been interviewed while he was "...physically and mentally exhausted, and in a lot of pain.
He had suffered severe frostbite - he later had five fingertips amputated."
When they went through Sharp's possessions they found a receipt for US$7,490, believed to be the whole financial cost.
Comparatively, most expeditions are between $35,000 to US$100,000 plus an additional $20,000 in other expenses that range from gear to bonuses.
It was estimated on 14 May that Sharp summitted Mount Everest and began his descent down, but 15 May he was in trouble but being passed by climbers on their way up and down.
The Tribune of India quoted someone who described what happened to Sharp as "the most shameful act in the history of mountaineering".
In addition to Sharp's death, at least nine other climbers perished that year, including multiple Sherpas working for various guiding companies.
Much of this controversy was captured by the Discovery Channel while filming the television program , preventing him from walking; the later descending climbers are lower on oxygen and lack the strength to offer aid; time runs out for any Sherpas to return and rescue him.
David Sharp's body remained just below the summit on the Chinese side next to "Green Boots"; they shared a space in a small rock cave that was an ad hoc tomb for them.
Sharp's body was removed from the cave in 2007, according to the BBC, and since 2014, Green Boots has been missing, presumably removed or buried.
Lincoln Hall rescue, 2006
As the Sharp debate kicked off, on 26 May 2006 Australian climber Lincoln Hall was found alive, after being left for dead the day before.
There were no rocks around to do this and he was abandoned.
The erroneous information of his death was passed on to his family.
The next day he was discovered by another party alive.
Heroic rescue actions have been recorded since Hall, including on 21 May 2007, when Canadian climber Meagan McGrath initiated the successful high-altitude rescue of Nepali Usha Bista.
Recognising her heroic rescue, Major Meagan McGrath was selected as a 2011 recipient of the Sir Edmund Hillary Foundation of Canada Humanitarian Award, which recognises a Canadian who has personally or administratively contributed a significant service or act in the Himalayan Region of Nepal.
Ascent statistics up to 2010 season
By the end of the 2010 climbing season, there had been 5,104 ascents to the summit by about 3,142 individuals, with 77% of these ascents being accomplished since 2000.
The route was closed to foreigners once again in 2009 in the run-up to the 50th anniversary of the Dalai Lama's exile.
These closures led to declining interest in the north route, and, in 2010, two-thirds of the climbers reached the summit from the south.
and a subsequent record was set in 2019 with over 890 summiters.
2014 avalanche and season
On 18 April 2014, an avalanche hit the area just below the Base Camp 2 at around 01:00 UTC (06:30 local time) and at an elevation of about .
Sixteen people were killed in the avalanche (all Nepalese guides) and nine more were injured.
This was not the only tragedy in the region, with over 43 killed in the 2014 Nepal snowstorm disaster, and they were not even summiting but rather trekking the Annapurna Circuit.
One positive outcome of the season was a 13-year-old girl, Malavath Purna, reaching the summit, breaking the record for youngest female.
Additionally, one team used a helicopter to fly from south base camp to Camp 2 to avoid the Khumbu Icefall, then reached the Everest summit.
This team had to use the south side because the Chinese had denied them a permit to climb.
Nepal turned Chinese reluctance into a success for the country, with the executive donating tens of thousands of dollars to local hospitals and achieving a new hybrid aviation-mountaineering technique.
She was named the Nepalese "International Mountaineer of the Year".
Over 100 people summited Everest from China (Tibet region), and six from Nepal in the 2014 season.
This included 72-year-old Bill Burke, the Indian teenage girl, and a Chinese woman Jing Wang.
Another teen girl summiter was Ming Kipa Sherpa who summited with her elder sister Lhakpa Sherpa in 2003, and who had achieved the most times for woman to the summit of Mount Everest at that time.
2015 avalanche, earthquake, season
2015 was set to be a record-breaking season of climbs, with hundreds of permits issued in Nepal and many additional permits in Tibet (China).
However, a magnitude 7.8 earthquake on 25 April 2015 effectively shut down the Everest climbing season.
2015 was the first time since 1974 with no spring summits, as all climbing teams pulled out after the quakes and avalanche.
Just weeks after the first quake, the region was rattled again by a 7.3 magnitude quake and there were also many considerable aftershocks.
On 25 April 2015, an earthquake measuring 7.8 Mw triggered an avalanche that hit Everest Base Camp.
18 bodies were recovered from Mount Everest by the Indian Army mountaineering team.
The avalanche began on Pumori, moved through the Khumbu Icefall on the southwest side of Mount Everest, and slammed into the South Base Camp.
The quakes trapped hundreds of climbers above the Khumbu icefall, and they had to be evacuated by helicopter as they ran low on supplies.
The quake shifted the route through the ice fall, making it essentially impassable to climbers.
and about 22,000 injured.
By 29 April 2015, the Tibet Mountaineering Association (North/Chinese side) closed Everest and other peaks to climbing, stranding 25 teams and about 300 people on the north side of Everest.
On the south side, helicopters evacuated 180 people trapped at Camps 1 and 2.
Mountain re-opens in August 2015
On 24 August 2015 Nepal re-opened Everest to tourism including mountain climbers.
The only climber permit for the autumn season was awarded to Japanese climber Nobukazu Kuriki, who had tried four times previously to summit Everest without success.
He made his fifth attempt in October, but had to give up just from the summit due to "strong winds and deep snow".
Kuriki noted the dangers of climbing Everest, having himself survived being stuck in a freezing snow hole for two days near the top, which came at the cost of all his fingertips and his thumb, lost to frostbite, which added further difficulty to his climb.
Some sections of the trail from Lukla to Everest Base Camp (Nepal) were damaged in the earthquakes earlier in the year and needed repairs to handle trekkers.
2016 season
Hawley's database records 641 made it to the summit in early 2016.
2017 season
2017 was the biggest season yet, permit-wise, yielding hundreds of summiters and a handful of deaths.
On 27 May 2017, Kami Rita Sherpa made his 21st climb to the summit with the Alpine Ascents Everest Expedition, one of three people in the World along with Apa Sherpa and Phurba Tashi Sherpa to make it to the summit of Mount Everest 21 times.
The season had a tragic start with the death of Ueli Steck of Switzerland, who died from a fall during a warm-up climb.
There was a continued discussion about the nature of possible changes to the Hillary Step.
Total summiters for 2017 was tallied up to be 648.
807 climbers summited Mount Everest in 2018, Various records were broken including an extraordinary case of a 70-year-old double-amputee, who undertook his climb after winning a court case in the Nepali Supreme Court.
Figures for the number of permits issued by Nepal range from 347 to 375.
The spring or pre-monsoon window for 2019 witnessed the deaths of a number of climbers and worldwide publication of images of hundreds of mountaineers queuing to reach the summit and sensational media reports of climbers stepping over dead bodies dismayed people around the world.
There were reports of various winter expeditions in the Himalayas, including K2, Nanga Parbat, and Meru with the buzz for the Everest 2019 beginning just 14 weeks to the weather window.
Noted climber Cory Richards announced on Twitter that he was hoping to establish a new climbing route to the summit in 2019.
China closed the base-camp to those without climbing permits in February 2019 on the northern side of Mount Everest.
By early April, climbing teams from around the world were arriving for the 2019 spring climbing season.
In the 2019 spring mountaineering season, there were roughly 40 teams with almost 400 climbers and several hundred guides attempting to summit on the Nepali side.
Nepal issued 381 climbing permits for 2019.
For the northern routes in Chinese Tibet, several hundred more permits were issued for climbing by authorities there.
In May 2019, Nepali mountaineering guide Kami Rita summited Mount Everest for the 23rd and 24th time, making international news headlines.
In Chinese Tibet, one Austrian climber died from a fall, By May 28, the death toll increased to 11 when a climber passed away at about 26,000 feet during the descent, the natural dangers of climbing such as falls and avalanches combined with medical issues aggravated by Everest's extreme altitude led to 2019 being a year with a comparatively high death toll.
Regardless of the number of permits, the weather window impacts the timing of when climbers head to the summit.
The 2018 season had a similar number of climbers, but an 11-day straight calm, while in 2019 the weather windows were shorter and broken up by periods of bad weather.
By May 31, 2019, the climbing season was thought to be all but concluded, as shifting weather patterns and increased wind speed make summiting more difficult.
The next window is generally when the monsoon season ends in September; however, this is a less popular option as the monsoon leaves large amounts of snow on the mountain, thus increasing the danger of avalanches, which historically account for about one quarter of Everest fatalities.
In 2017 a permit evader who tried to climb Everest without the $11,000 permit faced, among other penalties, a $22,000 fine, bans, and a possible four years in jail after he was caught (he had made it up past the Khumbu icefall).
In the end he was given a 10-year mountaineering ban in Nepal and allowed to return home, according to the British newspaper Daily Mail.
* 2014 - 326 (extended for use in any year up to 2019)
* 2015 - 356 (extended for use in any year up to 2017)
* 2017 - 366-373 (last year for 2015 extended permits)
The Chinese side in Tibet is also managed with permits for summiting Everest.
They did not issue permits in 2008, due to the Olympic torch relay being taken to the summit of Mount Everest.
Routes
Mount Everest has two main climbing routes, the southeast ridge from Nepal and the north ridge from Tibet, as well as many other less frequently climbed routes.
Of the two main routes, the southeast ridge is technically easier and more frequently used.
It was the route used by Edmund Hillary and Tenzing Norgay in 1953 and the first recognised of 15 routes to the top by 1996.
Most attempts are made during May, before the summer monsoon season.
As the monsoon season approaches, the jet stream shifts northward, thereby reducing the average wind speeds high on the mountain.
While attempts are sometimes made in September and October, after the monsoons, when the jet stream is again temporarily pushed northward, the additional snow deposited by the monsoons and the less stable weather patterns at the monsoons' tail end makes climbing extremely difficult.
Southeast ridge
The ascent via the southeast ridge begins with a trek to Base Camp at on the south side of Everest, in Nepal.
Expeditions usually fly into Lukla (2,860 m) from Kathmandu and pass through Namche Bazaar.
Climbers then hike to Base Camp, which usually takes six to eight days, allowing for proper altitude acclimatisation in order to prevent altitude sickness.
Climbing equipment and supplies are carried by yaks, dzopkyos (yak-cow hybrids), and human porters to Base Camp on the Khumbu Glacier.
When Hillary and Tenzing climbed Everest in 1953, the British expedition they were part of (comprising over 400 climbers, porters, and Sherpas at that point) started from the Kathmandu Valley, as there were no roads further east at that time.
Climbers spend a couple of weeks in Base Camp, acclimatising to the altitude.
During that time, Sherpas and some expedition climbers set up ropes and ladders in the treacherous Khumbu Icefall.
Seracs, crevasses, and shifting blocks of ice make the icefall one of the most dangerous sections of the route.
Many climbers and Sherpas have been killed in this section.
To reduce the hazard, climbers usually begin their ascent well before dawn, when the freezing temperatures glue ice blocks in place.
Above the icefall is Camp I at .
From Camp I, climbers make their way up the Western Cwm to the base of the Lhotse face, where Camp II or Advanced Base Camp (ABC) is established at .
The Western Cwm is a flat, gently rising glacial valley, marked by huge lateral crevasses in the centre, which prevent direct access to the upper reaches of the Cwm.
Climbers are forced to cross on the far right, near the base of Nuptse, to a small passageway known as the "Nuptse corner".
The Western Cwm is also called the "Valley of Silence" as the topography of the area generally cuts off wind from the climbing route.
The high altitude and a clear, windless day can make the Western Cwm unbearably hot for climbers.
From Advanced Base Camp, climbers ascend the Lhotse face on fixed ropes, up to Camp III, located on a small ledge at .
From there, it is another 500 metres to Camp IV on the South Col at .
From Camp III to Camp IV, climbers are faced with two additional challenges: the Geneva Spur and the Yellow Band.
The Geneva Spur is an anvil shaped rib of black rock named by the 1952 Swiss expedition.
Fixed ropes assist climbers in scrambling over this snow-covered rock band.
The Yellow Band is a section of interlayered marble, phyllite, and semischist, which also requires about 100 metres of rope for traversing it.
Hillary and Tenzing were the first climbers to ascend this step, and they did so using primitive ice climbing equipment and ropes.
Nowadays, climbers ascend this step using fixed ropes previously set up by Sherpas.
Once above the step, it is a comparatively easy climb to the top on moderately angled snow slopes-though the exposure on the ridge is extreme, especially while traversing large cornices of snow.
With increasing numbers of people climbing the mountain in recent years, the Step has frequently become a bottleneck, with climbers forced to wait significant amounts of time for their turn on the ropes, leading to problems in getting climbers efficiently up and down the mountain.
After the Hillary Step, climbers also must traverse a loose and rocky section that has a large entanglement of fixed ropes that can be troublesome in bad weather.
Climbers typically spend less than half an hour at the summit to allow time to descend to Camp IV before darkness sets in, to avoid serious problems with afternoon weather, or because supplemental oxygen tanks run out.
North ridge route
The north ridge route begins from the north side of Everest, in Tibet.
Expeditions trek to the Rongbuk Glacier, setting up base camp at on a gravel plain just below the glacier.
To reach Camp II, climbers ascend the medial moraine of the east Rongbuk Glacier up to the base of Changtse, at around .
Camp III (ABC-Advanced Base Camp) is situated below the North Col at .
To reach Camp IV on the North Col, climbers ascend the glacier to the foot of the col where fixed ropes are used to reach the North Col at .
From the North Col, climbers ascend the rocky north ridge to set up Camp V at around .
The route crosses the North Face in a diagonal climb to the base of the Yellow Band, reaching the site of Camp VI at .
From Camp VI, climbers make their final summit push.
Climbers face a treacherous traverse from the base of the First Step: ascending from , to the crux of the climb, the Second Step, ascending from .
Once above the Second Step the inconsequential Third Step is clambered over, ascending from .
Once above these steps, the summit pyramid is climbed by a snow slope of 50 degrees, to the final summit ridge along which the top is reached.
Summit
The routes usually share one spot in common, the summit itself.
The summit of Everest has been described as "the size of a dining room table".
The summit is capped with snow over ice over rock, and the layer of snow varies from year to year.
The rock summit is made of Ordovician limestone and is a low-grade metamorphic rock according to Montana State University.
Below the summit there is an area known as "rainbow valley", filled with dead bodies still wearing brightly coloured winter gear.
Down to about 8000 metres is an area commonly called the "death zone", due to the high danger and low oxygen because of the low pressure.
Death zone
At the higher regions of Mount Everest, climbers seeking the summit typically spend substantial time within the death zone (altitudes higher than ), and face significant challenges to survival.
Temperatures can dip to very low levels, resulting in frostbite of any body part exposed to the air.
Since temperatures are so low, snow is well-frozen in certain areas and death or injury by slipping and falling can occur.
High winds at these altitudes on Everest are also a potential threat to climbers.
Another significant threat to climbers is low atmospheric pressure.
The atmospheric pressure at the top of Everest is about a third of sea level pressure or , resulting in the availability of only about a third as much oxygen to breathe.
Debilitating effects of the death zone are so great that it takes most climbers up to 12 hours to walk the distance of from South Col to the summit.
Achieving even this level of performance requires prolonged altitude acclimatisation, which takes 40-60 days for a typical expedition.
A sea-level dweller exposed to the atmospheric conditions at the altitude above without acclimatisation would likely lose consciousness within 2 to 3 minutes.
In May 2007, the Caudwell Xtreme Everest undertook a medical study of oxygen levels in human blood at extreme altitude.
Over 200 volunteers climbed to Everest Base Camp where various medical tests were performed to examine blood oxygen levels.
A small team also performed tests on the way to the summit.
Even at base camp, the low partial pressure of oxygen had direct effect on blood oxygen saturation levels.
At sea level, blood oxygen saturation is generally 98-99%.
At base camp, blood saturation fell to between 85 and 87%.
Blood samples taken at the summit indicated very low oxygen levels in the blood.
A side effect of low blood oxygen is a greatly increased breathing rate, often 80-90 breaths per minute as opposed to a more typical 20-30.
Exhaustion can occur merely attempting to breathe.
Lack of oxygen, exhaustion, extreme cold, and climbing hazards all contribute to the death toll.
An injured person who cannot walk is in serious trouble, since rescue by helicopter is generally impractical and carrying the person off the mountain is very risky.
People who die during the climb are typically left behind.
As of 2006, about 150 bodies had never been recovered.
It is not uncommon to find corpses near the standard climbing routes.
QTEMPLATE |Debilitating symptoms consistent with high altitude cerebral oedema commonly present during descent from the summit of Mount Everest.
Profound fatigue and late times in reaching the summit are early features associated with subsequent death.|Mortality on Mount Everest, 1921-2006: descriptive study
A 2008 study noted that the "death zone" is indeed where most Everest deaths occur, but also noted that most deaths occur during descent from the summit.
A 2014 article in The Atlantic about deaths on Everest noted that while falling is one of the greatest dangers the death zone presents for all 8000ers, avalanches are a more common cause of death at lower altitudes.
However, Everest climbing is more deadly than BASE jumping, although some have combined extreme sports and Everest including a Russian who base-jumped off Everest in a wingsuit (he did survive, though).
Despite this, Everest is safer for climbers than a number of peaks by some measurements, but it depends on the period.
Some examples are Kangchenjunga, K2, Annapurna, Nanga Parbat, and the Eiger (especially the nordwand).
Some factors that affect total mountain lethality include the level of popularity of the mountain, the skill of those climbing, and the difficulty of the climb.
Up to a quarter of Everest climbers can experience retinal haemorrhages, and although they usually heal within weeks of returning to lower altitudes, in 2010 a climber went blind and ended up dying in the death zone.
Even for the able, the Everest North-East ridge is recognised as a challenge.
It is hard to rescue someone who has become incapacitated and it can be beyond the ability of rescuers to save anyone in such a difficult spot.
They successfully launched off the summit and para-glided down to Namche Bazaar in just 42 minutes, without having to climb down the mountain.
* 1978 - First ascent without supplemental oxygen by Reinhold Messner and Peter Habeler
* 1980 - First winter ascent, by Polish National Expedition Winter 1979/1980 (Leszek Cichy and Krzysztof Wielicki)
* 1980 - First solo ascent without supplemental oxygen, by Reinhold Messner
The cross-over climb was also the first to be recorded on live broadcast television.
* 1988 - First descent by paraglider, by Jean-Marc Boivin
* 1988 - First female ascent without supplemental oxygen by Lydia Bradey
* 1998 - Fastest to reach the summit via the southeast ridge (South Col), without supplemental oxygen, by Kazi Sherpa, in 20 hours and 24 minutes.
* 2001 - First ascent by a blind climber, Erik Weihenmayer
* 2001 - Lhakpa Sherpa becomes first Nepali woman to summit Everest and survive.
* 2004 - Fastest to reach the summit via the southeast ridge (South Col), with supplemental oxygen, by Pemba Dorje, in 8 hours and 10 minutes.
* 2006 - Lhakpa Sherpa summits for the 6th time, breaking her own record for most successful female Everest climber.
* 2007 - Fastest to reach the summit via the northeast ridge, without supplemental oxygen, by Christian Stangl, in 16 hours, 42 minutes.
* 2010 - Youngest male to reach the summit, by Jordan Romero (13-year and 10 months old)
* 2011 - Most times to reach the summit, Apa Sherpa (21 times; 10 May 1990 - 11 May 2011)
* 2013 - Apa Sherpa tied for most times to reach the summit by Phurba Tashi (21 times; 1999-2013)
* 2013 - Melissa Arnot, American, summits for the 5th time breaking her own record for most successful summits by any non-Sherpa woman.
* 2014 - Youngest female to reach the summit, by Malavath Purna (13-year and 11 months old)
* 2017 - Kami Rita Sherpa of Alpine Ascents reaches 21 ascents to the summit.
* 2019 - Kami Rita Sherpa reaches 24 ascents to the summit.
Summiting with disabilities
Summiting Everest with disabilities such as amputations and diseases has become popular in the 21st century, with stories like that of Sudarshan Gautam, a man with no arms who made it to the top in 2013.
A teenager with Down's syndrome made it to Base camp, which has become a substitute for more extreme record-breaking because it carries many of the same thrills including the trip to the Himalayas and rustic scenery.
Danger lurks even at base camp though, which was the site where dozens were killed in the 2015 Mount Everest avalanches.
Others that have climbed Everest with amputations include Mark Inglis (no legs), Paul Hockey (one arm only), and Arunima Sinha (one leg only).
Aviation
1933: Flight over Everest
Lucy, Lady Houston, a British millionaire former showgirl, funded the Houston Everest Flight of 1933.
A formation of airplanes led by the Marquess of Clydesdale flew over the summit in an effort to photograph the unknown terrain .
1988:
First climb and glide
On 26 September 1988, having climbed the mountain via the south-east ridge, Jean-Marc Boivin made the first paraglider descent of Everest, in the process creating the record for the fastest descent of the mountain and the highest paraglider flight.
Boivin said: "I was tired when I reached the top because I had broken much of the trail, and to run at this altitude was quite hard."
Boivin ran from below the summit on 40-degree slopes to launch his paraglider, reaching Camp II at in 12 minutes (some sources say 11 minutes).
Boivin would not repeat this feat, as he was killed two years later in 1990, base-jumping off Venezuela's Angel Falls.
1991:
Hot air balloon flyover
In 1991 four men in two balloons achieved the first hot-air balloon flight over Mount Everest.
In one balloon was Andy Elson and Eric Jones (cameraman), and in the other balloon Chris Dewhirst and Leo Dickinson (cameraman).
Dickinson went on to write a book about the adventure called Ballooning Over Everest.
Dewhirst has offered to take passengers on a repeat of this feat for US$2.6 million per passenger.
He needed to land for two minutes to set the Fédération Aéronautique Internationale (FAI) official record, but he stayed for about four minutes, twice.
with this landing and the Everest records confirmed by the FAI.
Delsalle also rescued two Japanese climbers at while he was there.
One climber noted that the new record meant a better chance of rescue.
After the paraglide they kayaked to the Indian Ocean, and they had made it to the Bay of Bengal by the end of June 2011.
2014:
Helicopter-assisted ascent
In 2014, a team financed and led by mountaineer Wang Jing used a helicopter to fly from South base camp to Camp 2 to avoid the Khumbu Icefall, and thence climbed to the Everest summit.
This climb immediately sparked outrage and controversy in much of the mountaineering world over the legitimacy and propriety of her climb.
Nepal ended up investigating Wang, who initially denied the claim that she had flown to Camp 2, admitting only that some support crew were flown to that higher camp, over the Khumbu Icefall.
In August 2014, however, she stated that she had flown to Camp 2 because the icefall was impassable.
"If you don't fly to Camp II, you just go home," she said in an interview.
In that same interview she also insisted that she had never tried to hide this fact.
In particular it was noted that flights saved icefall porters 80 trips but still increased commercial activity at Everest.
Financial cost of guided climbs
Climbing Mount Everest can be a relatively expensive undertaking for climbers.
Climbing gear required to reach the summit may cost in excess of US$8,000, and most climbers also use bottled oxygen, which adds around US$3,000.
The permit to enter the Everest area from the south via Nepal costs US$10,000 to US$25,000 per person, depending on the size of the team.
The ascent typically starts at one of the two base camps near the mountain, both of which are approximately from Kathmandu and from Lhasa (the two nearest cities with major airports).
Transferring one's equipment from the airport to the base camp may add as much as US$2,000.
Going with a "celebrity guide", usually a well-known mountaineer typically with decades of climbing experience and perhaps several Everest summits, can cost over £100,000 as of 2015.
On the other hand, a limited support service, offering only some meals at base camp and bureaucratic overhead like a permit, can cost as little as US$7,000 as of 2007.
One barrier to this is that low-budget firms make money not taking inexperienced climbers to the summit.
Those turned away by Western firms can often find another firm willing to take them for a pricethat they return home soon after arriving after base camp, or part way up the mountain.
By the early-1990s, several companies were offering guided tours to the mountain.
Rob Hall, one of the mountaineers who died in the 1996 disaster, had successfully guided 39 clients to the summit before that incident.
Tourism is about four percent of Nepal's economy, but Everest is special in that an Everest porter can make nearly double the nations's average wage in a region in which other sources of income are lacking.
Beyond this point, costs may vary widely.
It is technically possible to reach the summit with minimal additional expenses, and there are "budget" travel agencies which offer logistical support for such trips.
However, this is considered difficult and dangerous (as illustrated by the case of David Sharp).
Many climbers hire "full service" guide companies, which provide a wide spectrum of services, including acquisition of permits, transportation to/from base camp, food, tents, fixed ropes, medical assistance while on the mountain, an experienced mountaineer guide, and even personal porters to carry one's backpack and cook one's meals.
The cost of such a guide service may range from US$40,000-80,000 per person.
Since most equipment is moved by Sherpas, clients of full-service guide companies can often keep their backpack weights under , or hire a Sherpa to carry their backpack for them.
By contrast, climbers attempting less commercialised peaks, like Denali, are often expected to carry backpacks over and, occasionally, to tow a sled with of gear and food.
The degree of commercialisation of Mount Everest is a frequent subject of criticism.
Jamling Tenzing Norgay, the son of Tenzing Norgay, said in a 2003 interview that his late father would have been shocked to discover that rich thrill-seekers with no climbing experience were now routinely reaching the summit, "You still have to climb this mountain yourself with your feet.
But the spirit of adventure is not there any more.
It is lost.
There are people going up there who have no idea how to put on crampons.
They are climbing because they have paid someone $65,000.
It is very selfish.
It endangers the lives of others."
Reinhold Messner concurred in 2004, "You could die in each climb and that meant you were responsible for yourself.
We were real mountaineers: careful, aware and even afraid.
By climbing mountains we were not learning how big we were.
We were finding out how breakable, how weak and how full of fear we are.
You can only get this if you expose yourself to high danger.
I have always said that a mountain without danger is not a mountain....
High altitude alpinism has become tourism and show.
These commercial trips to Everest, they are still dangerous.
But the guides and organisers tell clients, "Don't worry, it's all organised."
The route is prepared by hundreds of Sherpas.
Extra oxygen is available in all camps, right up to the summit.
People will cook for you and lay out your beds.
Clients feel safe and don't care about the risks.
However, not all opinions on the subject among prominent mountaineers are strictly negative.
For example, Edmund Hillary, who went on record saying that he has not liked "the commercialisation of mountaineering, particularly of Mount Everest" and claimed that "Having people pay $65,000 and then be led up the mountain by a couple of experienced guides...isn't really mountaineering at all", nevertheless noted that he was pleased by the changes brought to Everest area by Westerners, "I don't have any regrets because I worked very hard indeed to improve the condition for the local people.
When we first went in there they didn't have any schools, they didn't have any medical facilities, all over the years we have established 27 schools, we have two hospitals and a dozen medical clinics and then we've built bridges over wild mountain rivers and put in fresh water pipelines so in cooperation with the Sherpas we've done a lot to benefit them."
One of the early guided summiters, Richard Bass (of Seven Summits fame) responded in an interview about Everest climbers and what it took to survive there, "Climbers should have high altitude experience before they attempt the really big mountains.
People don't realise the difference between a 20,000-foot mountain and 29,000 feet.
It's not just arithmetic.
The reduction of oxygen in the air is proportionate to the altitude alright, but the effect on the human body is disproportionate-an exponential curve.
People climb Denali 20,320 feet or Aconcagua 22,834 feet and think, 'Heck, I feel great up here, I’m going to try Everest.'
But it's not like that."
Law and order
Some climbers have reported life-threatening thefts from supply caches.
Vitor Negrete, the first Brazilian to climb Everest without oxygen and part of David Sharp's party, died during his descent, and theft of gear and food from his high-altitude camp may have contributed.
"Several members were bullied, gear was stolen, and threats were made against me and my climbing partner, Michael Kodas, making an already stressful situation even more dire", said one climber.
In addition to theft, Michael Kodas describes in his book, High Crimes: The Fate of Everest in an Age of Greed (2008): unethical guides and Sherpas, prostitution and gambling at the Tibet Base Camp, fraud related to the sale of oxygen bottles, and climbers collecting donations under the pretense of removing trash from the mountain.
The Chinese side of Everest in Tibet was described as "out of control" after one Canadian had all his gear stolen and was abandoned by his Sherpa.
Another sherpa helped the victim get off the mountain safely and gave him some spare gear.
Other climbers have also reported missing oxygen bottles, which can be worth hundreds of dollars each.
One problem is: hundreds of climbers pass by people's tents.
Another is: weather can damage or even blow people's equipment away.
Westerners have sometimes struggled to understand the ancient culture and desperate poverty that drives some locals, some of whom have a different concept of the value of a human life.
For example, for just 1,000 rupees (£6.30) per person, several foreigners were forced to leave the lodge where they were staying and tricked into believing they were being led to safety.
Instead they were abandoned and died in the snowstorm.
Some still wanted to climb but there was really too much controversy to continue that year.
Other Everest skiers include Davo Karničar of Slovenia, who completed a top to south base camp descent in 2000, Hans Kammerlander of Italy in 1996 on the north side, and Kit DesLauriers of the United States in 2006.
In 2006 Swede Tomas Olsson and Norwegian Tormod Granheim skied together down the north face.
Olsson's anchor broke while they were rappelling down a cliff in the Norton couloir at about 8,500 metres, resulting in his death from a two and a half-kilometre fall.
Granheim skied down to camp III.
Also, Marco Siffredi died in 2002 on his second snow-boarding expedition.
during which he became the first person to fly a hang-glider off the mountain.
On 5 May 2013, the beverage company Red Bull sponsored Valery Rozov, who successfully BASE jumped off of the mountain while wearing a wingsuit, setting a record for world's highest BASE jump in the process.
Everest and religion
The southern part of Mount Everest is regarded as one of several "hidden valleys" of refuge designated by Padmasambhava, a ninth-century "lotus-born" Buddhist saint.
For Sherpas living on the slopes of Everest in the Khumbu region of Nepal, Rongbuk Monastery is an important pilgrimage site, accessed in a few days of travel across the Himalayas through Nangpa La.
Miyolangsangma, a Tibetan Buddhist "Goddess of Inexhaustible Giving", is believed to have lived at the top of Mt Everest.
According to Sherpa Buddhist monks, Mt Everest is Miyolangsangma's palace and playground, and all climbers are only partially welcome guests, having arrived without invitation.
Waste management
In 2015 the president of the Nepal Mountaineering Association warned that pollution, especially human waste, has reached critical levels.
As much as "26,500 pounds of human excrement" each season is left behind on the mountain.
Human waste is strewn across the verges of the route to the summit, making the four sleeping areas on the route up Everest's south side minefields of human excrement.
Climbers above Base Camp-for the 62-year history of climbing on the mountain-have most commonly either buried their excrement in holes they dug by hand in the snow, or slung it into crevasses, or simply defecated wherever convenient, often within meters of their tents.
The only place where climbers can defecate without worrying about contaminating the mountain is Base Camp.
At approximately 18,000 feet, Base Camp sees the most activity of all camps on Everest because climbers acclimate and rest there.
In the late-1990s, expeditions began using toilets that they fashioned from blue plastic 50-gallon barrels fitted with a toilet seat and enclosed.
The problem of human waste is compounded by the presence of more anodyne waste: spent oxygen tanks, abandoned tents, empty cans and bottles.
The Nepalese government now requires each climber to pack out eight kilograms of waste when descending the mountain.
In February 2019, due to the mounting waste problem, China closed the base camp on its side of Everest to visitors without climbing permits.
Tourists are allowed to go as far as the Rongbuk Monastery.
In April 2019, the Solukhumbu district's Khumbu Pasanglhamu Rural Municipality launched a campaign to collect nearly 10,000 kg of garbage from Everest.
Names
Context and maps
Nearby peaks include Lhotse, ; Nuptse, , and Changtse, among others.
Another nearby peak is Khumbutse, and many of the highest mountains in the world are near Mount Everest.
On the southwest side, a major feature in the lower areas is the Khumbu icefall and glacier, an obstacle to climbers on those routes but also to the base camps.
Further reading
