Hurricane Ismael was a weak, but deadly Pacific hurricane that killed over one hundred people in northern Mexico in September of the 1995 Pacific hurricane season.
It developed from a persistent area of deep convection on September 12, and steadily strengthened as it moved to the north-northwest.
Ismael attained hurricane status on September 14 while located 210 miles (340 km) off the coast of Mexico.
It continued to the north, and after passing a short distance east of Baja California it made landfall on Topolobampo in the state of Sinaloa with winds of 80 mph (130 km/h).
Ismael rapidly weakened over land, and dissipated on September 16 over northwestern Mexico.
The remnants entered the United States and extended eastward into the Mid-Atlantic States.
Offshore, Ismael produced waves of up to 30 feet (9 m) in height.
Hundreds of fishermen were unprepared for the hurricane, which was expected to move more slowly, and as a result 52 ships were wrecked, killing 57 fishermen.
On land, Ismael caused 59 deaths in mainland Mexico and resulted in $26 million in damage (1995 USD, $ USD).
The hurricane destroyed thousands of houses, leaving 30,000 people homeless.
Moisture from the storm extended into the United States, causing heavy rainfall and localized moderate damage in southeastern New Mexico.
Meteorological history
A poorly organized area of convection persisted about off the southern coast of Guatemala on September 9.
It moved west-northwestward, and after three days without further organization a circulation developed off the southwest coast of Mexico.
The system quickly organized, resulting in Dvorak classifications beginning later that day.
Convective banding became better organized, and late on September 12 it developed into Tropical Depression Ten while located about south-southwest of Manzanillo, Colima.
The depression moved to the northwest, and following an increase in deep convection it intensified into Tropical Storm Ismael early on September 13.
Upon attaining tropical storm status, Ismael was located in an area of warm water temperatures with well-established upper-level outflow.
Initially the storm moved to the northwest, though in response to the interaction with an upper-level low over Baja California Ismael gradually turned to the north.
Ismael became better organized, and later on September 14 it intensified into a hurricane while located 210 miles (340 km) west-southwest of Puerto Vallarta.
Impact
Hurricane Ismael produced 30 foot (9 m) waves over the Gulf of California and coastal waters off of Mexico.
The hurricane, which was forecast to move more slowly, left hundreds of fisherman unprepared with dozens washing ashore as the high tides receded.
About 150 fishermen survived the storm by waiting on islands, sandbars, or disabled fishing boats.
Navy rescue teams and other fishermen searched for days off the Mexican coast to find victims and survivors from the storm.
While moving through northwestern Mexico, Hurricane Ismael dropped moderate to heavy rainfall including a state record of in Sinaloa, resulting in the flooding of four municipalities.
In one municipality, the passage of the hurricane destroyed 373 cardboard houses and damaged 4,790 others.
The passage of the hurricane left 177 houses without drinking water and left four municipalities without power.
Moisture from the remnants of Ismael extended into southwestern Arizona and southern New Mexico.
The storm dropped heavy precipitation near the New Mexico/Texas border, including a peak total of in Hobbs, New Mexico.
In addition, there were unofficial estimates of over .
The rainfall led to flooding of roads and buildings.
Multiple highways and railroads were closed due to washouts.
Damaged totaled to $250,000 (1995 USD) in New Mexico.
In Lubbock, Texas, the rainfall led to flash flooding, closing many intersections and roads.
The remnants of Ismael produced over of rain in southwestern Oklahoma and northern Arkansas,
Aftermath
Following the passage of the hurricane, reinforcement workers quickly repaired the communication network, and other workers distributed aid to victims in Sonora.
The Mexican government allocated about $ (1995 USD, $ 1995 MXN, $ USD) in funds for the restoration of houses and the overall infrastructure.
The name Israel was replaced with Ivo during the season.
