Hurricane Dorian was the most intense tropical cyclone on record to strike the Bahamas, and is regarded as the worst natural disaster in the country's history.
It was the fourth named storm, second hurricane, and the first major hurricane of the 2019 Atlantic hurricane season.
Dorian struck the Abaco Islands on September 1 with maximum sustained winds of 185 mph (295 km/h), tying with the 1935 Labor Day hurricane for the highest wind speeds of an Atlantic hurricane ever recorded at landfall.
Dorian went on to strike Grand Bahama at similar intensity, stalling just north of the territory with unrelenting winds for at least 24 hours.
The resultant damage to these islands was catastrophic; most structures were flattened or swept to sea, and at least 70,000 people were left homeless.
After its ravages through the Bahamas, Dorian proceeded along the coasts of the Southeastern United States and Atlantic Canada, leaving behind considerable damage and economic losses in those regions.
Dorian developed from a tropical wave on August 24 over the Central Atlantic.
The storm moved through the Lesser Antilles and became a hurricane north of the Greater Antilles on August 28.
Dorian proceeded to undergo rapid intensification over the following days to reach its peak as a Category 5 hurricane with one-minute sustained winds of 185 mph (295 km/h) and a minimum central pressure of by September 1.
It made landfall in the Bahamas in Elbow Cay, just east of Abaco Island, and again on Grand Bahama several hours later, where it remained nearly stationary for the next day or so.
After weakening considerably, Dorian began moving northwestward on September 3, parallel to the east coast of Florida.
Dwindling in strength, the hurricane turned to the northeast the next day and made landfall on Cape Hatteras at Category 1 intensity on September 6.
It transitioned into an extratropical cyclone before striking first Nova Scotia and then Newfoundland with hurricane-force winds on September 8.
It finally dissipated near Greenland on September 10.
From August 26 to August 28, the storm affected several parts of the northernmost Lesser Antilles.
Damaging winds primarily affected the Virgin Islands where gusts reached .
Extensive precautionary measures were taken to mitigate damage, especially in Puerto Rico, where one person died.
Elsewhere in the Lesser Antilles, impacts from the storm were relatively minor.
In preparation for the storm, the states of Florida, Georgia, South Carolina, North Carolina and Virginia all declared a state of emergency and many coastal counties from Florida to North Carolina issued mandatory evacuation orders.
Damage in the Bahamas was catastrophic due to the prolonged and intense storm conditions, including heavy rainfall, high winds and storm surge, with thousands of homes destroyed and at least 61 deaths recorded.
Meteorological history
On August 19, 2019, the National Hurricane Center (NHC) identified a tropical wave-an elongated trough of low air pressure-within a monsoon trough over Guinea and Senegal in western Africa.
Convective activity associated with the wave was limited by an abundance of Saharan dust in the region.
Propagating west over the tropical Atlantic Ocean, the system remained disorganized for several days.
On August 23, a defined area of low pressure consolidated at the surface and thunderstorm activity increased.
The system acquired sufficient organized convection to be classified as Tropical Depression Five at 15:00 UTC on August 24.
At this time the system was situated 805 mi (1,300 km) east-southeast of Barbados.
A deep ridge imparted continued westward movement of the depression, steering it toward the Lesser Antilles.
A small cyclone, it soon developed a defined inner-core with a 12 mi (18 km) wide eye-like feature.
This marked the system's intensification into a tropical storm, at which time it was assigned the name Dorian by the NHC.
Thereafter, moderate wind shear and surrounding dry air limited further organization.
Rainbands gradually wrapped more around Dorian on August 25-26, though convection remained inconsistent.
Dorian continued moving west and barely missed Barbados, bringing tropical storm-force winds and heavy rain.
It then started moving northwestward toward Saint Lucia.
At 10:00 UTC on August 27, Dorian made landfall on the island of Saint Lucia as a tropical storm, briefly disrupting the core of the storm, before entering the Caribbean Sea.
The storm underwent a center relocation further north, to the west of Martinique, causing the island to experience tropical storm-force winds as well.
Dorian had been predicted to travel northwest and pass over or near the Dominican Republic or Puerto Rico, possibly allowing their mountainous terrain to weaken the tropical storm.
At that time, dry air and wind shear were expected to prevent Dorian from attaining hurricane status-although just barely.
However, Dorian took a more northerly track than expected, causing it to pass to the east of Puerto Rico and hit the US Virgin Islands.
On August 28, Dorian intensified into a Category 1 hurricane as it approached Saint Thomas in the US Virgin Islands, where hurricane-force winds were recorded; at 18:00 UTC that day, Dorian made landfall on Saint Thomas at Category 1 intensity.
Once the system moved north past the Virgin Islands, the storm entered a more favorable environment.
On the next day, the system started to rapidly intensify, reaching Category 2 status early on August 30.
Rapid intensification continued, and the storm eventually reached major hurricane status several hours later, on the same day.
This strengthening trend came to a halt for the remainder of the day, but soon resumed.
The system continued strengthening, and on August 31, Dorian attained Category 4 major hurricane status.
Dorian reached Category 5 intensity on the following day.
On the morning of September 1, a dropsonde deployed by a NOAA aircraft measured a wind gust of at the surface.
With one-minute sustained winds of 180 mph (285 km/h) and a minimum pressure of , the NHC noted that Dorian was the strongest hurricane in modern records to affect the northwestern Bahamas.
At 16:40 UTC on September 1, Hurricane Dorian made landfall on Great Abaco Island in the Bahamas, with one-minute sustained winds of , wind gusts over , and a central barometric pressure of .
The storm's central pressure bottomed out at within a few hours, as Dorian reached its peak intensity during landfall.
Storm chaser Josh Morgerman observed a pressure of in Marsh Harbour.
Hurricane Dorian's forward speed decreased around this time, slowing to a westward crawl of .
Afterward, Dorian's forward speed slowed to just , as the Bermuda High that was steering the storm westward weakened.
Later that day, the storm began to undergo an eyewall replacement cycle to the north of Grand Bahama; the Bermuda High to the northeast of Dorian also collapsed, causing Hurricane Dorian to stall just north of Grand Bahama.
Around the same time, the combination of the eyewall replacement cycle and upwelling of cold water caused Dorian to begin weakening, with Dorian dropping to Category 4 status at 15:00 UTC.
Due to the absence of steering currents, Hurricane Dorian stalled north of Grand Bahama for about a day.
While moving northwestward, Dorian gradually reorganized.
At 06:00 UTC on September 5, Dorian moved over the warm waters of the Gulf Stream and completed its eyewall replacement cycle, reintensifying into a Category 3 hurricane off the coast of South Carolina.
However, several hours later, Dorian encountered high wind shear, causing the storm to weaken to a Category 2 hurricane, and later to Category 1 intensity, early on September 6.
On September 6 at 12:35 UTC, Dorian made landfall in Cape Hatteras, North Carolina as a Category 1 hurricane, with 1-minute sustained winds of 90 mph (150 km/h) and a minimum central pressure of .
Afterward, Dorian began to transition into an extratropical cyclone as it quickly moved northeastward, completing its transition on September 7.
The storm subsequently restrengthened, due to baroclinic processes, generating Category 2 hurricane-equivalent winds.
Several hours later, at 7:05 p.m. AST on September 7 (23:05 UTC on September 7), Dorian made landfall on Sambro Creek, Nova Scotia, as a Category 2-equivalent extratropical storm, before making another landfall on the northern part of Newfoundland several hours later.
By 11:00 p.m. AST on September 8 (03:00 UTC on September 9), Dorian had moved into the Labrador Sea, 375 miles off the coast, moving northeastward at , with wind speeds of , maintaining tropical storm-strength winds.
As Dorian no longer posed a threat to Atlantic Canada at that time, the NHC issued their final advisory on the storm.
On September 10, Dorian's extratropical remnant dissipated off the coast of southern Greenland.
Preparations
Caribbean
At 09:00 UTC on August 25, a tropical storm watch was issued for the island of Barbados.
Later that day, more watches and warnings were issued for more of the islands.
A hurricane watch was also issued at 15:00 UTC August 26 for Saint Lucia.
Late on August 26, a tropical storm watch was issued for Puerto Rico.
In Barbados, Prime Minister Mia Mottley ordered the closure of all schools and advised the nation's residents to remain indoors for the duration of the storm.
Infra worked to clear public drains island-wide.
Homeless persons were transported to shelter by emergency personnel.
On August 26, St. Lucia prime minister Allen Chastanet announced that the nation would "shut down" for the duration of Dorian and all residents were mandated to stay home.
Numerous people ignored this warning, however, and the police detained several people who refused to return home.
LIAT cancelled multiple flights across the Lesser Antilles due to the storm.
The Department of Infrastructure, Ports and Energy placed all heavy machinery and equipment owners on standby to assist in cleanup and relief efforts.
In Dominica, Prime Minister Roosevelt Skerrit ordered all public sector workers to remain home and prepare for the storm.
The devastation from Hurricane Maria in 2017 brought greater vigilance from the public, and Skerrit assured residents that the nation was "better place now" than after Maria and there would be "no shutting of the country" for Dorian.
The Ministry of Public Works mobilized heavy machinery and the police were placed on high alert to more effectively respond to emergency calls.
Small craft advisories and flash flood watches were issued for the island.
With Puerto Rico also recovering from Hurricane Maria in 2017, Governor Wanda Vázquez Garced declared a state of emergency for the territory on August 27.
Fears centered around the still-unstable power grid which was largely destroyed by Maria.
In some areas, power lines remained affixed to palm trees.
Residents boarded up windows with plywood and stocked up on bottled water and generators.
All government offices and schools closed for the duration of the hurricane.
Territory-wide, 360 shelters with a collective capacity of 48,500 persons opened; 24,000 cots were distributed to these shelters.
Similar to Puerto Rico, the Virgin Islands were still recovering from hurricanes Irma and Maria in 2017.
A state of emergency was declared for the United States Virgin Islands on August 28, Auguste George Airport, Virgin Gorda Airport, and Terrance B. Lettsome International Airport closed for the duration of the storm.
The majority of the British Virgin Islands' clinics and hospitals suspended operations during the hurricane; however, a few remained open.
Bahamas
A warning to take immediate cover was issued on the NHC Twitter account, at 11 a.m. EDT on September 1, 2019, as Dorian made landfall in Elbow Cay, Bahamas, at 16:40 UTC as a Category 5 hurricane.
Samuel Butler, the Royal Bahamas Police Force assistant commissioner with responsibility for Grand Bahama and the Northern Region (Abaco, Bimini and the Berry Islands), told residents "if you do not heed to the warning ...
we know that the end could be fatal" and Don Cornish, the administrator with the City of Freeport told others seeking shelter at Old Bahama Bay Hotel "that is not a good idea ... reconsider that decision".
Mainland United States
Florida
On August 28, Florida governor Ron DeSantis declared a state of emergency for 26 counties in the hurricane's expected path.
This later expanded to the entire state on August 29.
First responders distributed sandbags in many counties.
Residents began stocking up on supplies throughout the state.
In Brevard County, locals worked to trim large tree branches to protect power lines.
The University of Central Florida, Stetson University, Rollins College, and Daytona State College cancelled classes between August 30 and September 3.
In addition, the Florida Institute of Technology, University of North Florida, Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University, Florida Atlantic University, University of South Florida, and the University of Miami cancelled classes for at least one day on top of the three-day Labor Day weekend.
When it became apparent that Dorian would near the Florida coastline, a tropical storm watch was issued for the Florida east coast from Deerfield Beach to Sebastian Inlet on August 31.
It was upgraded to a tropical storm warning a few hours later.
A hurricane watch was issued for the area north of Deerfield Beach on September 1, and it was upgraded to a hurricane warning later that day.
The night of September 1, a hurricane watch was issued for Volusia and Broward counties, which was later upgraded to a hurricane warning and extended down the coast.
The Florida State League and Gulf Coast League of Minor League Baseball both cancelled the remainder of the regular season and the playoffs due to the hurricane.
In college football, the game between the Florida State Seminoles and the Boise State Broncos originally scheduled for 7 p.m. on August 31 in Jacksonville was moved to 12:00 p.m. on August 31 in Tallahassee to move the game out of the path of the storm.
The Orlando Pride of the National Women's Soccer League postponed their game against the Washington Spirit from August 31 to October 5.
Kay Ivey, Governor of Alabama, announced that the Alabama National Guard would be sending up to fifty support personnel to Florida to aid in recovery efforts.
On September 1, Governor DeSantis said that 4,500 members of the United States National Guard had been activated to help aid those affected by Dorian, saying that the hurricane is "way too close for comfort."
On Sunday, September 1, Jacksonville, Florida, announced mandatory evacuations for Monday, September 2, taking effect at 8 a.m.
The city bridges closed when wind speeds of were recorded.
Emergency shelters opened at 10 a.m. on Monday.
Broward County Public Schools will be closed Tuesday; all city and government offices, as well as all Duval County Public Schools, St. Johns County Public Schools, and Brevard Public Schools will be closed for Tuesday and Wednesday.
Neptune Beach, Jacksonville Beach, and Atlantic Beach will closed Sunday night.
Legoland Florida and parts of Walt Disney World were closed on Tuesday.
The parts not closed stayed open until either 2 p.m or 3 p.m. EDT.
It was announced on Tuesday that Walt Disney World would fully open back up for Wednesday.
Uber started offering fee waivers on roundtrip rides to and from shelters for up to $20.
Comcast started offering free Wifi to everyone in Florida, Verizon provided unlimited calling, data, and texting for customers, and AT&T waived data overage charges for residents.
On Tuesday, September 3, 115 general shelters and 48 special needs shelters were open across the state of Florida.
Georgia
On August 28, Georgia governor Brian Kemp declared a state of emergency for coastal counties of Georgia that are in the forecast path of the hurricane, including Brantley, Bryan, Camden, Charlton, Chatham, Effingham, Glynn, Liberty, Long, McIntosh, Pierce and Wayne counties.
Governor Kemp added several more counties on Wednesday, September 4, bringing the total number of counties under emergency to 21.
Atlanta Motor Speedway opened their campgrounds free of charge to evacuees of Hurricane Dorian.
The Georgia State Park System waived parking and pet fees at their parks and made many campgrounds available for evacuees.
On September 2, a hurricane watch was issued for the south coast of Georgia as Dorian neared.
It was later extended to include the whole coast.
A tropical storm warning was issued for the entire coast as well.
South Carolina
On August 31, South Carolina governor Henry McMaster declared a state of emergency for the entire state after the path of Dorian shifted to affect South Carolina as a strong hurricane.
On September 1, during a news conference, Governor McMaster announced that mandatory evacuations for Jasper, Beaufort, Colleton, Charleston, Berkeley, Dorchester, Georgetown, and Horry counties will go into effect on Monday, September 2, at noon.
State government offices and schools in the counties previously mentioned will be closed until further notice, starting Tuesday.
Due to the evacuations, many colleges including College of Charleston and Coastal Carolina University were closed from Tuesday until further notice.
On September 2, as Dorian's track shifted, a hurricane watch was issued for the entire coast.
This was later upgraded to a warning as Dorian's expected track took it near the coast.
North Carolina
On August 30, North Carolina governor Roy Cooper declared a state of emergency for the entire state, due to the hurricane.
Charlotte Motor Speedway opened their campgrounds free of charge to evacuees of Hurricane Dorian.
In Durham, a large statewide hurricane shelter opened inside the former Sears store at the Northgate Mall.
The University of North Carolina at Wilmington cancelled classes for the week of September 3 and issued a mandatory evacuation of the campus.
Over the Labor Day weekend, several school districts announced plans to close ahead of expected evacuations.
New Hanover County, Pender County and Brunswick County, all in the Cape Fear region, cancelled public schools on September 4-5, as did several private schools and community colleges.
Early voting for most counties in the special election in North Carolina's 3rd congressional district and for some counties in the special election for the 9th congressional district was also temporarily halted after Wednesday, September 4 as a result, until the North Carolina State Board of Elections could decide what action to take.
Ultimately, Karen Brinson Bell, the Board's Executive Director, would opt to use her emergency powers to extend early voting hours for the 9th district through Saturday, September 7, but only in four harder-hit counties that actually closed polling sites, and to have other counties further inland which did not close polling sites end early voting on Friday, September 6, as originally prescribed under state law, in order to make the most of the district's resources.
Likewise, the Board extended early voting hours through Saturday for 11 counties in the 3rd district, but not for 6 other affected counties suffering from "power outages, poor conditions or a lack of workers."
Further north, along the Outer Banks in Dare County a mandatory evacuation order was given on September 2, 2019.
Visitors and tourists were required to evacuate by noon on September 3, while residents were required to evacuate by 6:00 a.m. on September 4.
The state's ports were closed starting at 1:00 p.m. on Wednesday, September 4, until further notice.
On September 3, Governor Cooper activated more than 300 members of the North Carolina National Guard to help aid in recovery efforts.
On September 3, a hurricane watch was issued for the entire coastline.
It was later upgraded to a warning just a few hours later.
Virginia
On September 2, Virginia governor Ralph Northam declared a state of emergency ahead of Dorian's anticipated impact on coastal Virginia.
On September 3, a tropical storm watch was issued for the Delmarva Peninsula.
This was upgraded to a warning a day later as Dorian's track became more apparent.
Maryland and Delaware
On September 4, as Dorian's large size was expected to potentially bring tropical storm conditions to southern Maryland and Delaware, in correspondence with the upgrading of the tropical storm watch in effect for the Delmarva to a warning, a tropical storm watch was issued for areas south of Fenwick Island, and areas of the Tidal Potomac River south of Cobb Island, as well as areas south of Drum Point.
In Ocean City, Maryland, officials closed the seawall and removed items from the beach and boardwalk; swimming restrictions were also put into place.
In Rehoboth Beach, Delaware, swimming restrictions were also put into place, while the portion of the weekend Sandcastle Contest to take place on September 6 was cancelled.
Along the Jersey Shore in New Jersey, officials in Margate City prepared sandbags in case of flooding from the storm while officials in Brigantine removed lifeguard stands and boats from the beach.
Alabama controversy
On September 1, President Donald Trump tweeted that multiple states, including Alabama, "will most likely be hit (much) harder than anticipated."
By that date, no weather forecaster was predicting that Dorian would impact Alabama, and the eight National Hurricane Center forecast updates over the preceding 24 hours showed Dorian steering well away from Alabama and moving up the Atlantic coast.
Trump was apparently relying on information that was several days old.
Twenty minutes later, the Birmingham, Alabama office of the National Weather Service (NWS) issued a tweet that appeared to contradict Trump, saying that Alabama "will NOT see any impacts from Dorian".
Over the following days Trump insisted repeatedly that he had been right about the hurricane threatening Alabama.
On September 4 in the Oval Office, Trump displayed a modified version of the National Hurricane Center's August 29 diagram of Dorian's projected track.
The modification was done with a black Sharpie marker to extend the cone of uncertainty of the hurricane's possible path into southern Alabama.
Trump said he did not know how the map came to be modified.
The incident resulted in the hashtag "Sharpiegate" trending on Twitter.
Later the same day, Trump tweeted a map dated August 28, showing numerous projected paths of Dorian.
Trump falsely asserted "almost all models" showed Dorian hitting Alabama, even though the map showed most predicted paths would not enter Alabama.
On September 6, NOAA published an unsigned statement which supported Trump's initial claim that Alabama was a target of the storm and criticized the Birmingham NWS office for denying it.
It was later revealed that NOAA had been ordered to issue such a statement by Commerce Secretary Wilbur Ross, This direct White House involvement raised questions about political influence over NOAA, and is under investigation by multiple agencies including NOAA's acting chief scientist, the inspector general of the Commerce Department, and the House of Representatives committee which oversees NOAA.
Atlantic Canada
As Dorian approached Atlantic Canada, hurricane and tropical storm warnings were issued for Nova Scotia, Prince Edward Island, and Newfoundland.
On September 6, the Halifax Regional Municipality encouraged residents living along the eastern shores of Nova Scotia to evacuate, citing expected high winds, heavy rainfall, and waves up to in height.
The Nova Scotia Emergency Management Office implored residents to secure easily dislodged objects to prevent high winds from turning them into projectiles, drawing comparisons to Hurricane Juan in 2003.
Nova Scotia Power set up an emergency operations center and mobilized 1,000 personnel, including forestry crews, damage assessors, as well as power line technicians from adjacent provinces, to prepare for Dorian's impacts.
WestJet, Air Canada, and Porter Airlines issued travel advisories for the weekend and waived rebooking fees for flights to and from affected areas.
Impacts
Caribbean
On August 26, winds began to pick up in the Lesser Antilles and water levels along the coast began to rise (storm surge).
downing trees and power lines.
Overall, Dorian caused little damage in Barbados, with only one home suffering damage in Saint Peter.
In Martinique, heavy rains-peaking at in Rivière-Pilote-and winds up to caused some damage.
Approximately 4,000 homes lost power and many streets became impassable due to flooding; one road was washed out.
Heavy showers in Dominica left multiple communities without power and water; however, effects were otherwise limited.
Rainfall extended north to Guadeloupe were accumulations reached in Matouba.
Striking the Virgin Islands as an intensifying hurricane, Dorian brought strong winds and heavy rains to the region.
Wind gusts on Saint Thomas reached .
Island-wide blackouts occurred on Saint Thomas and Saint John, while 25,000 customers lost power on Saint Croix.
The high winds downed trees across the islands.
Some flooding occurred on Tortola in the British Virgin Islands.
Downed trees knocked out power to some residences on Virgin Gorda.
Because the hurricane moved farther northeast than initially anticipated, its effects in Puerto Rico were relatively limited.
Wind gusts in Culebra reached and in San Juan.
Approximately 23,000 households lost power across the territory.
At 7:00 (UTC) on September 2, 2019, Grand Bahama International Airport was underwater.
Minister of Agriculture Michael Pintard reported an estimated storm tide of at his home on Grand Bahama.
The Bahamas prime minister, Hubert Minnis, said "This is a deadly ... monster storm".
Marsh Harbour received "catastrophic damage", according to an ABC News team.
Over half of the homes had been damaged, Marsh Harbour International Airport's runway was underwater, there was significant flooding on streets and beaches, damage to trees and with some home's roofs ripped off entirely.
The scene was described by an ABC reporter as "pure hell".
Four other people, along with the eight-year-old boy, were confirmed dead on the Abaco Islands, the prime minister told reporters on Monday.
By Wednesday, the death toll had been raised to twenty, according to the prime minister.
This soon increased to forty-three by Saturday.
However, a Bahamas newspaper suggested that the actual death toll could be over 3,000.
The local animal shelters were hit hard by the storm with the Humane Society of Grand Bahama's experiencing stronger storm surges than expected.
Workers had attempted to help the animals before retreating to the attic crawl space but almost half of the 190 dogs in their care died in the flooding and some of the 85 cats died as well.
The numbers of animals has varied with earlier reports claiming that there were 135 dogs and 155 cats in the shelters care, with 80 cats and 90 dogs surviving.
The International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies (IFRC) reported that as many as 13,000 homes were damaged or destroyed on Abaco Island.
Extensive flooding is also believed to have caused water wells to be contaminated with seawater, creating an urgent need for clean water.
Property damage in the country were estimated at $7 billion, which is expected to make it by far the costliest storm in Bahamian history.
the following day at 1:50 (UTC) 40% of power had been restored.
Tropical storm conditions continued into Monday, September 2.
At 2 p.m. EDT, a sustained wind of and a gust of at a NOAA Coastal Marine observing site at Settlement Point on the west end of Grand Bahama Island.
On September 3, Prime Minister Hubert Minnis stated, "Our urgent task will be to provide food, water, shelter, safety and security.
Additional food will be delivered by NEMA tomorrow."
He went on to say that Dorian was "the greatest national crisis in our country's history."
The United Nations projected that as of Saturday, September 7, at least 70,000 people are homeless on Grand Bahama and the Abaco Islands.
On Thursday, September 12, over 1,300 people were missing or unaccounted for in the Bahamas, a number which plummeted from 2,500 over the previous two weeks.
On September 26, the number of people missing in the Bahamas dropped to 600, while the official death toll rose to 56.
Mainland United States
The National Centers for Environmental Information estimated total damage in the United States to be in excess of $1.2 billion.
Florida
On September 2, Florida began experiencing tropical storm-force winds.
At 18:00 UTC (2 p.m. EDT), the pier in Juno Beach recorded a wind gust of .
One death occurred in the central coast barrier island town of Indiatlantic, when a man fell three stories while boarding up his home.
During September 3 and 4, tropical storm force winds continued to move up the east coast of Florida, with the storm's eye staying about 100 miles away from landfall.
Many areas along the Atlantic coast reporting gusts of over tropical storm force, especially at Cape Canaveral.
At 8 AM EDT on September 4 at St. Augustine Beach, a sustained wind of and a gust of was reported.
In Jacksonville, the city experienced tropical storm force winds on September 4 which blew around debris and knocked out power.
A lifeguard rescued a woman pulled out by a rip current in Jacksonville Beach while other swimmers were ordered out of the water.
South Carolina
By September 5, tropical-storm force winds arrived.
Dorian also produced some flooding, especially in Charleston.
Over 160,000 buildings lost power.
A tornado was reported in Little River that damaged trees, roofing, and lifted a car.
North Carolina
A fatality occurred in North Carolina on September 2, when an 85-year-old man fell off a ladder while boarding up his home, and another was confirmed dead on September 6, a 65-year-old man after he, too, fell off a ladder.
On September 5, several tornadoes spawned by Dorian were sighted in Onslow County.
At around 9 a.m. EST that day a tornado touched down in the town of Emerald Isle, causing severe damage to a recreational vehicle park and some mobile homes.
Flooding from the storm washed out a road in Sampson County.
On the next day, Dorian made landfall in Cape Hatteras, North Carolina as a Category 1 storm.
Several people on Ocracoke Island were trapped in their attics by flooding from the storm surge, requiring rescue by boats.
People were airlifted off the island to shelters on the mainland while food and water were brought in to residents on the island.
North Carolina Highway 12 along Ocracoke Island suffered damage from flooding.
More than 190,000 people in North Carolina lost power from the storm.
The National Park Service Incident Management Team also reported that wave erosion from Dorian reshaped parts of the barrier islands in the Outer Banks.
A third fatality occurred on September 7 when a man died from injuries sustained in a chainsaw accident while he was trying to clear a fallen tree.
The Jersey Shore saw gusty winds and rough waves from the storm.
The State of Alabama received no rainfall or wind effects from Hurricane Dorian during its track up the continental coast.
Effects in Cape Cod were minor, and in Maine, effects were brief, with high winds, surge, and heavy rain, as Dorian was over Halifax.
Atlantic Canada
On September 7, 2019, at 5 p.m. EDT, Nova Scotia started to experience hurricane-force winds.
By 7 p.m. EDT, the eye of the storm passed over Halifax while tropical storm conditions were being felt in Prince Edward Island.
As of September 8, approximately 402,103 customers in Nova Scotia lost power, accounting for approximately 80 percent of the province, as well as 80,000 customers in New Brunswick.
Flooding was reported, roofs were torn off buildings, and a crane also collapsed onto a building being constructed.
The collapse led to local evacuations for some residents and businesses.
First responders evacuated 31 people from a campground in Prince Edward Island early Sunday morning as it was inundated by storm surge.
Though Dorian was post-tropical on arrival, winds off the coast of Nova Scotia were estimated to reach , equivalent to a Category 2 hurricane.
Rainfall totals were highest in Mahone Bay, Nova Scotia, which received of rain.
Various stations across Nova Scotia and Prince Edward Island recorded rainfall amounts in excess of .
Winds of also affected the Magdalen Islands of Quebec in the Gulf of Saint Lawrence.
7,000 customers were without power there at one point, representing nearly all customers on the islands.
On the night of September 7, a buoy off the coast of Newfoundland detected a rogue wave, which had been generated by Dorian's winds.
Insurance damage across the region were amounted at C$105 million (US$78.9 million).
Aftermath
Bahamian prime minister Hubert Minnis praised the United States for "assisting us with all of our needs."
President Donald Trump assured the Bahamian prime minister of help in relief efforts.
In September 2019, President Donald Trump stated that his administration is planning to extend temporary protected status to immigrants from the hurricane-hit Bahamas.
There was confusion with the statement however, with the acting Commissioner of US Customs and Border Protection Mark Morgan stating that the US would "...accept anyone on humanitarian reasons...".
Shortly after his statement Trump stated that no one would be allowed in without proper documentation, claiming "...the Bahamas had some tremendous problems with people going to the Bahamas that weren't supposed to be there" and the need to protect the US against gang members and drug dealers.
The Bahamas Paradise, Royal Caribbean, Norwegian, and Carnival cruise lines started sending water bottles and meals to the Bahamas.
The Grand Celebration offered to give a chance for evacuees to evacuate to Florida free of charge, given they have the proper documentation.
On September 7, the Grand Celebration helped bring more than 1,100 evacuees to Florida.
The company stated in a press release that "the cruise line spent nearly a full day clearing potential evacuees, including vetting their visa and passport documentation."
The Royal Caribbean International also helped deliver more than 43,000 water bottles and 10,000 meals to the Bahamas.
As the Hurricane had damaged or destroyed a majority of the Humane Society of Grand Bahama and killed many of the animals in its care, a GoFundMe was created in order to help renovate and aid the organization's locations.
Surviving animals were airlifted to the United States in order to disperse them to other shelters while the organization was stabilized.
About 300 military personnel from the Canadian Armed Forces were deployed to the Halifax area to assist with recovery.
Parks Canada estimated that 80 per cent of the trees in the western, Cavendish segment of Prince Edward Island National Park were downed by the storm, as well as causing of coastal erosion.
All public schools in Nova Scotia were closed on September 9 and 10.
Public schools were closed across Prince Edward Island on the 9th, and most re-opened the next day.
Records
With sustained winds of 185 mph (295 km/h), Dorian is the strongest hurricane on record to strike the Bahamas since records began in 1851.
Dorian is tied with the 1935 Labor Day hurricane for the highest sustained winds at landfall in an Atlantic hurricane; by the same metric, it is also the strongest Atlantic hurricane since Wilma in 2005.
As of pressure, it was the fifth hurricane with the lowest pressure upon landfall.
Dorian is one of only two Category 5 hurricanes to make landfall on the Abaco Islands, the other having occurred in 1932, and is the only such storm on record to have impacted Grand Bahama.
Additionally, Dorian featured the highest sustained winds in an Atlantic hurricane recorded at latitude (26.6°N), and was the strongest hurricane detected outside the main development region (MDR), surpassing Hurricane Irma to become the most intense tropical cyclone ever recorded in the open Atlantic Ocean.
Dorian also tracked the least distance in a 24-hour period recorded for an Atlantic major hurricane since Hurricane Betsy in 1965.
* 1928 Okeechobee hurricane - passed through the Lesser Antilles and the Bahamas as a major hurricane in September 1928, before curving northwards over Florida.
* 1932 Bahamas hurricane - another Category 5 hurricane that struck the Abaco Islands.
* 1935 Labor Day hurricane - similarly strong hurricane that affected the nearby Florida Keys in 1935.
* Hurricane Andrew (1992) - took a similar track and struck the Bahamas and south Florida in August 1992.
* Hurricane Floyd (1999) - took a similar track and affected the Bahamas and the US East Coast.
* Hurricane Juan (2003) - a Category 2 hurricane in September 2003 that struck Nova Scotia.
* Hurricane Matthew (2016) - formed near Barbados and affected the Windward Islands, Grand Bahama, Florida and the Outer Banks in late September 2016.
