Nitrogen is the chemical element with the symbol N and atomic number 7.
It was first discovered and isolated by Scottish physician Daniel Rutherford in 1772.
Although Carl Wilhelm Scheele and Henry Cavendish had independently done so at about the same time, Rutherford is generally accorded the credit because his work was published first.
The name nitrogène was suggested by French chemist Jean-Antoine-Claude Chaptal in 1790, when it was found that nitrogen was present in nitric acid and nitrates.
Antoine Lavoisier suggested instead the name azote, from the Greek ἀζωτικός "no life", as it is an asphyxiant gas; this name is instead used in many languages, such as French, Russian, Romanian and Turkish, and appears in the English names of some nitrogen compounds such as hydrazine, azides and azo compounds.
Nitrogen is the lightest member of group 15 of the periodic table, often called the pnictogens.
The name comes from the Greek πνίγειν "to choke", directly referencing nitrogen's asphyxiating properties.
It is a common element in the universe, estimated at about seventh in total abundance in the Milky Way and the Solar System.
At standard temperature and pressure, two atoms of the element bind to form dinitrogen, a colourless and odorless diatomic gas with the formula N2.
Dinitrogen forms about 78% of Earth's atmosphere, making it the most abundant uncombined element.
Nitrogen occurs in all organisms, primarily in amino acids (and thus proteins), in the nucleic acids (DNA and RNA) and in the energy transfer molecule adenosine triphosphate.
The human body contains about 3% nitrogen by mass, the fourth most abundant element in the body after oxygen, carbon, and hydrogen.
The nitrogen cycle describes movement of the element from the air, into the biosphere and organic compounds, then back into the atmosphere.
Many industrially important compounds, such as ammonia, nitric acid, organic nitrates (propellants and explosives), and cyanides, contain nitrogen.
The extremely strong triple bond in elemental nitrogen (N≡N), the second strongest bond in any diatomic molecule after carbon monoxide (CO), dominates nitrogen chemistry.
This causes difficulty for both organisms and industry in converting N2 into useful compounds, but at the same time means that burning, exploding, or decomposing nitrogen compounds to form nitrogen gas releases large amounts of often useful energy.
Synthetically produced ammonia and nitrates are key industrial fertilisers, and fertiliser nitrates are key pollutants in the eutrophication of water systems.
Apart from its use in fertilisers and energy-stores, nitrogen is a constituent of organic compounds as diverse as Kevlar used in high-strength fabric and cyanoacrylate used in superglue.
Nitrogen is a constituent of every major pharmacological drug class, including antibiotics.
Many drugs are mimics or prodrugs of natural nitrogen-containing signal molecules: for example, the organic nitrates nitroglycerin and nitroprusside control blood pressure by metabolizing into nitric oxide.
Many notable nitrogen-containing drugs, such as the natural caffeine and morphine or the synthetic amphetamines, act on receptors of animal neurotransmitters.
History
Nitrogen compounds have a very long history, ammonium chloride having been known to Herodotus.
They were well known by the Middle Ages.
Alchemists knew nitric acid as aqua fortis (strong water), as well as other nitrogen compounds such as ammonium salts and nitrate salts.
The mixture of nitric and hydrochloric acids was known as aqua regia (royal water), celebrated for its ability to dissolve gold, the king of metals.
Though he did not recognise it as an entirely different chemical substance, he clearly distinguished it from Joseph Black's "fixed air", or carbon dioxide.
The fact that there was a component of air that does not support combustion was clear to Rutherford, although he was not aware that it was an element.
Nitrogen was also studied at about the same time by Carl Wilhelm Scheele, Henry Cavendish, and Joseph Priestley, who referred to it as burnt air or phlogisticated air.
Nitrogen gas was inert enough that Antoine Lavoisier referred to it as "s" for the group headed by nitrogen, from the Greek πνίγειν "to choke".
The English word nitrogen (1794) entered the language from the French nitrogène, coined in 1790 by French chemist Jean-Antoine Chaptal (1756-1832), from the French nitre (potassium nitrate, also called saltpeter) and the French suffix -gène, "producing", from the Greek -γενής (-genes, "begotten").
Chaptal's meaning was that nitrogen is the essential part of nitric acid, which in turn was produced from nitre.
In earlier times, niter had been confused with Egyptian "natron" (sodium carbonate) - called νίτρον (nitron) in Greek - which, despite the name, contained no nitrate.
The earliest military, industrial, and agricultural applications of nitrogen compounds used saltpeter (sodium nitrate or potassium nitrate), most notably in gunpowder, and later as fertiliser.
In 1910, Lord Rayleigh discovered that an electrical discharge in nitrogen gas produced "active nitrogen", a monatomic allotrope of nitrogen.
The "whirling cloud of brilliant yellow light" produced by his apparatus reacted with mercury to produce explosive mercury nitride.
For a long time, sources of nitrogen compounds were limited.
Natural sources originated either from biology or deposits of nitrates produced by atmospheric reactions.
Nitrogen fixation by industrial processes like the Frank-Caro process (1895-1899) and Haber-Bosch process (1908-1913) eased this shortage of nitrogen compounds, to the extent that half of global food production (see Applications) now relies on synthetic nitrogen fertilisers.
At the same time, use of the Ostwald process (1902) to produce nitrates from industrial nitrogen fixation allowed the large-scale industrial production of nitrates as feedstock in the manufacture of explosives in the World Wars of the 20th century.
Properties
Atomic
A nitrogen atom has seven electrons.
In the ground state, they are arranged in the electron configuration 1s2s2p2p2p.
It therefore has five valence electrons in the 2s and 2p orbitals, three of which (the p-electrons) are unpaired.
It has one of the highest electronegativities among the elements (3.04 on the Pauling scale), exceeded only by chlorine (3.16), oxygen (3.44), and fluorine (3.98).
The lack of radial nodes in the 2p subshell is directly responsible for many of the anomalous properties of the first row of the p-block, especially in nitrogen, oxygen, and fluorine.
The 2p subshell is very small and has a very similar radius to the 2s shell, facilitating orbital hybridisation.
It also results in very large electrostatic forces of attraction between the nucleus and the valence electrons in the 2s and 2p shells, resulting in very high electronegativities.
Hypervalency is almost unknown in the 2p elements for the same reason, because the high electronegativity makes it difficult for a small nitrogen atom to be a central atom in an electron-rich three-center four-electron bond since it would tend to attract the electrons strongly to itself.
Thus, despite nitrogen's position at the head of group 15 in the periodic table, its chemistry shows huge differences from that of its heavier congeners phosphorus, arsenic, antimony, and bismuth.
Nitrogen may be usefully compared to its horizontal neighbours carbon and oxygen as well as its vertical neighbours in the pnictogen column, phosphorus, arsenic, antimony, and bismuth.
Although each period 2 element from lithium to oxygen shows some similarities to the period 3 element in the next group (from magnesium to chlorine; these are known as diagonal relationships), their degree drops off abruptly past the boron-silicon pair.
The similarities of nitrogen to sulfur are mostly limited to sulfur nitride ring compounds when both elements are the only ones present.
While it does not share the proclivity of carbon for catenation, nitrogen chains composed of eight atoms (PhN
N-N (Ph)-N
N-N (Ph)-N=NPh) and more are obtainable.
Like carbon, nitrogen tends to form ionic or metallic compounds with metals.
Nitrogen forms an extensive series of nitrides with carbon, including those with chain-, graphitic-, and fullerenic-like structures.
It resembles oxygen with its high electronegativity and concomitant capability for hydrogen bonding and the ability to form coordination complexes by donating its lone pairs of electrons.
There are some parallels between the chemistry of ammonia NH3 and water H2O.
For example, the capacity of both compounds to be pronated to give NH4+ and H30+ or deprotonated to give NH2− and OH−, with all of these able to be isolated in solid compounds.
The high electronegativity of nitrogen is misleading.
Nitrogen has a negative electron affinity, which means that energy is required to add an electron to it.
This is because nitrogen has three p-orbitals each occupied with one electron.
An incoming electron will experience significant repulsion from the electrons in these orbitals.
This does not happen with carbon, which has one unoccupied p sub shell.
Nor does it occur with oxygen, since the increased nuclear charge is sufficient to overcome inter-electron repulsion effects.
Nitrogen shares with both its horizontal neighbours a preference for forming multiple bonds, typically with carbon, oxygen, or other nitrogen atoms, through pπ-pπ interactions.
Thus, for example, nitrogen occurs as diatomic molecules and therefore has very much lower melting (−210 °C) and boiling points (−196 °C) than the rest of its group, as the N2 molecules are only held together by weak van der Waals interactions and there are very few electrons available to create significant instantaneous dipoles.
This is not possible for its vertical neighbours; thus, the nitrogen oxides, nitrites, nitrates, nitro-, nitroso-, azo-, and diazo-compounds, azides, cyanates, thiocyanates, and imino-derivatives find no echo with phosphorus, arsenic, antimony, or bismuth.
By the same token, however, the complexity of the phosphorus oxoacids finds no echo with nitrogen.
Isotopes
Nitrogen has two stable |volume
55 |issue
5 |pages
434-56|bibcode
1939PhRv...55..434B|doi= 10.1103/PhysRev.55.434
The relative abundance of 14N and 15N is practically constant in the atmosphere but can vary elsewhere, due to natural isotopic fractionation from biological redox reactions and the evaporation of natural ammonia or nitric acid.
Biologically mediated reactions (e.g., assimilation, nitrification, and denitrification) strongly control nitrogen dynamics in the soil.
These reactions typically result in 15N enrichment of the substrate and depletion of the product.
The heavy isotope 15N was first discovered by S. M. Naudé in 1929, soon after heavy isotopes of the neighbouring elements oxygen and carbon were discovered.
It presents one of the lowest thermal neutron capture cross-sections of all isotopes.
It is frequently used in nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy to determine the structures of nitrogen-containing molecules, due to its fractional nuclear spin of one-half, which offers advantages for NMR such as narrower line width.
14N, though also theoretically usable, has an integer nuclear spin of one and thus has a quadrupole moment that leads to wider and less useful spectra.
This may be somewhat alleviated by isotopic enrichment of 15N by chemical exchange or fractional distillation.
15N-enriched compounds have the advantage that under standard conditions, they do not undergo chemical exchange of their nitrogen atoms with atmospheric nitrogen, unlike compounds with labelled hydrogen, carbon, and oxygen isotopes that must be kept away from the atmosphere.
Of the ten other isotopes produced synthetically, ranging from 12N to 23N, 13N has a half-life of ten minutes and the remaining isotopes have half-lives on the order of seconds (16N and 17N) or even milliseconds.
No other nitrogen isotopes are possible as they would fall outside the nuclear drip lines, leaking out a proton or neutron.
Given the half-life difference, 13N is the most important nitrogen radioisotope, being relatively long-lived enough to use in positron emission tomography (PET), although its half-life is still short and thus it must be produced at the venue of the PET, for example in a cyclotron via proton bombardment of 16O producing 13N and an alpha particle.
The radioisotope 16N is the dominant radionuclide in the coolant of pressurised water reactors or boiling water reactors during normal operation, and thus it is a sensitive and immediate indicator of leaks from the primary coolant system to the secondary steam cycle, and is the primary means of detection for such leaks.
It is produced from 16O (in water) via an (n,p) reaction in which the 16O atom captures a neutron and expels a proton.
It has a short half-life of about 7.1 s, Because of this, access to the primary coolant piping in a pressurised water reactor must be restricted during reactor power operation.
Given the great reactivity of atomic nitrogen, elemental nitrogen usually occurs as molecular N2, dinitrogen.
This molecule is a colourless, odourless, and tasteless diamagnetic gas at standard conditions: it melts at −210 °C and boils at −196 °C.
This is because they should all decompose to dinitrogen, whose N≡N triple bond (bond energy 946 kJ⋅mol−1) is much stronger than those of the N=N double bond (418 kJ⋅mol−1) or the N-N single bond (160 kJ⋅mol−1): indeed, the triple bond has more than thrice the energy of the single bond.
A great disadvantage is that most neutral polynitrogens are not expected to have a large barrier towards decomposition, and that the few exceptions would be even more challenging to synthesise than the long-sought but still unknown tetrahedrane.
This stands in contrast to the well-characterised cationic and anionic polynitrogens azide (), pentazenium (), and pentazolide (cyclic aromatic ).
At atmospheric pressure, molecular nitrogen condenses (liquefies) at 77 K (−195.79 °C) and freezes at 63 K (−210.01 °C) into the beta hexagonal close-packed crystal allotropic form.
Below 35.4 K (−237.6 °C) nitrogen assumes the cubic crystal allotropic form (called the alpha phase).
Liquid nitrogen, a colourless fluid resembling water in appearance, but with 80.8% of the density (the density of liquid nitrogen at its boiling point is 0.808 g/mL), is a common cryogen.
Solid nitrogen has many crystalline modifications.
It forms a significant dynamic surface coverage on Pluto and outer moons of the Solar System such as Triton.
Even at the low temperatures of solid nitrogen it is fairly volatile and can sublime to form an atmosphere, or condense back into nitrogen frost.
It is very weak and flows in the form of glaciers and on Triton geysers of nitrogen gas come from the polar ice cap region.
Dinitrogen complexes
The first example of a dinitrogen complex to be discovered was Ru (NH3)5 (N2)2+ (see figure at right), and soon many other such complexes were discovered.
These complexes, in which a nitrogen molecule donates at least one lone pair of electrons to a central metal cation, illustrate how N2 might bind to the metal (s) in nitrogenase and the catalyst for the Haber process: these processes involving dinitrogen activation are vitally important in biology and in the production of fertilisers.
Dinitrogen is able to coordinate to metals in five different ways.
The more well-characterised ways are the end-on M←N≡N (η1) and M←N≡N→M (μ, bis-η1), in which the lone pairs on the nitrogen atoms are donated to the metal cation.
The less well-characterised ways involve dinitrogen donating electron pairs from the triple bond, either as a bridging ligand to two metal cations (μ, bis-η2) or to just one (η2).
The fifth and unique method involves triple-coordination as a bridging ligand, donating all three electron pairs from the triple bond (μ3-N2).
A few complexes feature multiple N2 ligands and some feature N2 bonded in multiple ways.
Since N2 is isoelectronic with carbon monoxide (CO) and acetylene (C2H2), the bonding in dinitrogen complexes is closely allied to that in carbonyl compounds, although N2 is a weaker σ-donor and π-acceptor than CO.
Theoretical studies show that σ donation is a more important factor allowing the formation of the M-N bond than π back-donation, which mostly only weakens the N-N bond, and end-on (η1) donation is more readily accomplished than side-on (η2) donation.
:3 Ca + N2 → Ca3N2
:3 Mg + 2 NH3 → Mg3N2 + 3 H2 (at 900 °C)
Zn (NH2)2 → Zn3N2 + 4 NH3
Many variants on these processes are possible.
The most ionic of these nitrides are those of the alkali metals and alkaline earth metals, Li3N (Na, K, Rb, and Cs do not form stable nitrides for steric reasons) and M3N2 (M = Be, Mg, Ca, Sr, Ba).
These can formally be thought of as salts of the N3− anion, although charge separation is not actually complete even for these highly electropositive elements.
However, the alkali metal azides NaN3 and KN3, featuring the linear anion, are well-known, as are Sr (N3)2 and Ba (N3)2.
Azides of the B-subgroup metals (those in groups 11 through 16) are much less ionic, have more complicated structures, and detonate readily when shocked.
Many other binary nitrogen hydrides are known, but the most important are hydrazine (N2H4) and hydrogen azide (HN3).
Although it is not a nitrogen hydride, hydroxylamine (NH2OH) is similar in properties and structure to ammonia and hydrazine as well.
Hydrazine is a fuming, colourless liquid that smells similarly to ammonia.
Its physical properties are very similar to those of water (melting point 2.0 °C, boiling point 113.5 °C, density 1.00 g/cm3).
Despite it being an endothermic compound, it is kinetically stable.
It burns quickly and completely in air very exothermically to give nitrogen and water vapour.
It is a very useful and versatile reducing agent and is a weaker base than ammonia.
Hydrazine is generally made by reaction of ammonia with alkaline sodium hypochlorite in the presence of gelatin or glue:
:NH3 + OCl− → NH2Cl + OH−
:NH2Cl + NH3 → + Cl− (slow)
: + OH− → N2H4 + H2O (fast)
The reason for adding gelatin is that it removes metal ions such as Cu2+ that catalyses the destruction of hydrazine by reaction with monochloramine (NH2Cl) to produce ammonium chloride and nitrogen.
Five nitrogen fluorides are known.
Nitrogen trifluoride (NF3, first prepared in 1928) is a colourless and odourless gas that is thermodynamically stable, and most readily produced by the electrolysis of molten ammonium fluoride dissolved in anhydrous hydrogen fluoride.
Like carbon tetrafluoride, it is not at all reactive and is stable in water or dilute aqueous acids or alkalis.
Only when heated does it act as a fluorinating agent, and it reacts with copper, arsenic, antimony, and bismuth on contact at high temperatures to give tetrafluorohydrazine (N2F4).
The cations and are also known (the latter from reacting tetrafluorohydrazine with strong fluoride-acceptors such as arsenic pentafluoride), as is ONF3, which has aroused interest due to the short N-O distance implying partial double bonding and the highly polar and long N-F bond.
Tetrafluorohydrazine, unlike hydrazine itself, can dissociate at room temperature and above to give the radical NF2•. Fluorine azide (FN3) is very explosive and thermally unstable.
Dinitrogen difluoride (N2F2) exists as thermally interconvertible cis and trans isomers, and was first found as a product of the thermal decomposition of FN3.
For this reason, small amounts of nitrogen triiodide are sometimes synthesised as a demonstration to high school chemistry students or as an act of "chemical magic".
Chlorine azide (ClN3) and bromine azide (BrN3) are extremely sensitive and explosive.
Two series of nitrogen oxohalides are known: the nitrosyl halides (XNO) and the nitryl halides (XNO2).
The first are very reactive gases that can be made by directly halogenating nitrous oxide.
Nitrosyl fluoride (NOF) is colourless and a vigorous fluorinating agent.
Nitrosyl chloride (NOCl) behaves in much the same way and has often been used as an ionising solvent.
Nitrosyl bromide (NOBr) is red.
The reactions of the nitryl halides are mostly similar: nitryl fluoride (FNO2) and nitryl chloride (ClNO2) are likewise reactive gases and vigorous halogenating agents.
and N (NO2)3 (trinitramide).
All are thermally unstable towards decomposition to their elements.
One other possible oxide that has not yet been synthesised is oxatetrazole (N4O), an aromatic ring.
It is formed by catalytic oxidation of ammonia.
It is a colourless paramagnetic gas that, being thermodynamically unstable, decomposes to nitrogen and oxygen gas at 1100-1200 °C.
Its bonding is similar to that in nitrogen, but one extra electron is added to a π* antibonding orbital and thus the bond order has been reduced to approximately 2.5; hence dimerisation to O
N-N
O is unfavourable except below the boiling point (where the cis isomer is more stable) because it does not actually increase the total bond order and because the unpaired electron is delocalised across the NO molecule, granting it stability.
There is also evidence for the asymmetric red dimer O
N-O
N when nitric oxide is condensed with polar molecules.
It reacts with oxygen to give brown nitrogen dioxide and with halogens to give nitrosyl halides.
It also reacts with transition metal compounds to give nitrosyl complexes, most of which are deeply coloured.
It is a deliquescent, colourless crystalline solid that is sensitive to light.
In the solid state it is ionic with structure NO2+NO3−; as a gas and in solution it is molecular O2N-O-NO2.
Hydration to nitric acid comes readily, as does analogous reaction with hydrogen peroxide giving peroxonitric acid (HOONO2).
It is a violent oxidising agent.
Gaseous dinitrogen pentoxide decomposes as follows:
Nitrous acid (HNO2) is not known as a pure compound, but is a common component in gaseous equilibria and is an important aqueous reagent: its aqueous solutions may be made from acidifying cool aqueous nitrite (, bent) solutions, although already at room temperature disproportionation to nitrate and nitric oxide is significant.
It is a weak acid with pKa 3.35 at 18 °C.
They may be titrimetrically analysed by their oxidation to nitrate by permanganate.
They are readily reduced to nitrous oxide and nitric oxide by sulfur dioxide, to hyponitrous acid with tin (II), and to ammonia with hydrogen sulfide.
Salts of hydrazinium react with nitrous acid to produce azides which further react to give nitrous oxide and nitrogen.
Sodium nitrite is mildly toxic in concentrations above 100 mg/kg, but small amounts are often used to cure meat and as a preservative to avoid bacterial spoilage.
It is also used to synthesise hydroxylamine and to diazotise primary aromatic amines as follows: The amount of nitrogen in a chemical substance can be determined by the Kjeldahl method.
In particular, nitrogen is an essential component of nucleic acids, amino acids and thus proteins, and the energy-carrying molecule adenosine triphosphate and is thus vital to all life on Earth.
Nitrogen compounds constantly interchange between the atmosphere and living organisms.
Nitrogen must first be processed, or "fixed", into a plant-usable form, usually ammonia.
Some nitrogen fixation is done by lightning strikes producing the nitrogen oxides, but most is done by diazotrophic bacteria through enzymes known as nitrogenases (although today industrial nitrogen fixation to ammonia is also significant).
When the ammonia is taken up by plants, it is used to synthesise proteins.
These plants are then digested by animals who use the nitrogen compounds to synthesise their own proteins and excrete nitrogen-bearing waste.
Finally, these organisms die and decompose, undergoing bacterial and environmental oxidation and denitrification, returning free dinitrogen to the atmosphere.
Industrial nitrogen fixation by the Haber process is mostly used as fertiliser, although excess nitrogen-bearing waste, when leached, leads to eutrophication of freshwater and the creation of marine dead zones, as nitrogen-driven bacterial growth depletes water oxygen to the point that all higher organisms die.
Furthermore, nitrous oxide, which is produced during denitrification, attacks the atmospheric ozone layer.
In animals, free radical nitric oxide (derived from an amino acid), serves as an important regulatory molecule for circulation.
Nitric oxide's rapid reaction with water in animals results in production of its metabolite nitrite.
Animal metabolism of nitrogen in proteins, in general, results in excretion of urea, while animal metabolism of nucleic acids results in excretion of urea and uric acid.
The characteristic odour of animal flesh decay is caused by the creation of long-chain, nitrogen-containing amines, such as putrescine and cadaverine, which are breakdown products of the amino acids ornithine and lysine, respectively, in decaying proteins.
Production
Nitrogen gas is an industrial gas produced by the fractional distillation of liquid air, or by mechanical means using gaseous air (pressurised reverse osmosis membrane or pressure swing adsorption).
Nitrogen gas generators using membranes or pressure swing adsorption (PSA) are typically more cost and energy efficient than bulk delivered nitrogen.
Commercial nitrogen is often a byproduct of air-processing for industrial concentration of oxygen for steelmaking and other purposes.
When supplied compressed in cylinders it is often called OFN (oxygen-free nitrogen).
Commercial-grade nitrogen already contains at most 20 ppm oxygen, and specially purified grades containing at most 2 ppm oxygen and 10 ppm argon are also available.
In a chemical laboratory, it is prepared by treating an aqueous solution of ammonium chloride with sodium nitrite.
:NH4Cl + NaNO2 → N2 + NaCl + 2 H2O
Small amounts of the impurities NO and HNO3 are also formed in this reaction.
The impurities can be removed by passing the gas through aqueous sulfuric acid containing potassium dichromate.
:2 NaN3 → 2 Na + 3 N2
Applications
Gas
The applications of nitrogen compounds are naturally extremely widely varied due to the huge size of this class: hence, only applications of pure nitrogen itself will be considered here.
Two-thirds of nitrogen produced by industry is sold as the gas and the remaining one-third as the liquid.
The gas is mostly used as an inert atmosphere whenever the oxygen in the air would pose a fire, explosion, or oxidising hazard.
Some examples include:
In incandescent light bulbs as an inexpensive alternative to argon.
*In inmate execution as an alternative to lethal injection.
In fire suppression systems for Information technology (IT) equipment.
* In some aircraft fuel systems to reduce fire hazard (see inerting system).
* To inflate race car and aircraft tires, reducing the problems of inconsistent expansion and contraction caused by moisture and oxygen in natural air.
Nitrogen can be used as a replacement, or in combination with, carbon dioxide to pressurise kegs of some beers, particularly stouts and British ales, due to the smaller bubbles it produces, which makes the dispensed beer smoother and headier.
A pressure-sensitive nitrogen capsule known commonly as a "widget" allows nitrogen-charged beers to be packaged in cans and bottles.
Nitrogen tanks are also replacing carbon dioxide as the main power source for paintball guns.
Nitrogen must be kept at higher pressure than CO2, making N2 tanks heavier and more expensive.
Nitrogen gas has become the inert gas of choice for inert gas asphyxiation, and is under consideration as a replacement for lethal injection in Oklahoma.
Nitrogen gas, formed from the decomposition of sodium azide, is used for the inflation of airbags.
Liquid
Liquid nitrogen is a cryogenic liquid.
When insulated in proper containers such as Dewar flasks, it can be transported without much evaporative loss.
Like dry ice, the main use of liquid nitrogen is as a refrigerant.
Among other things, it is used in the cryopreservation of blood, reproductive cells (sperm and egg), and other biological samples and materials.
It is used in the clinical setting in cryotherapy to remove cysts and warts on the skin.
It is used in cold traps for certain laboratory equipment and to cool infrared detectors or X-ray detectors.
It has also been used to cool central processing units and other devices in computers that are overclocked, and that produce more heat than during normal operation.
Other uses include freeze-grinding and machining materials that are soft or rubbery at room temperature, shrink-fitting and assembling engineering components, and more generally to attain very low temperatures whenever necessary (around −200 °C).
Because of its low cost, liquid nitrogen is also often used when such low temperatures are not strictly necessary, such as refrigeration of food, freeze-branding livestock, freezing pipes to halt flow when valves are not present, and consolidating unstable soil by freezing whenever excavation is going on underneath.
An example occurred shortly before the launch of the first Space Shuttle mission on March 19, 1981, when two technicians died from asphyxiation after they walked into a space located in the Shuttle's Mobile Launcher Platform that was pressurised with pure nitrogen as a precaution against fire.
When inhaled at high partial pressures (more than about 4 bar, encountered at depths below about 30 m in scuba diving), nitrogen is an anesthetic agent, causing nitrogen narcosis, a temporary state of mental impairment similar to nitrous oxide intoxication.
Nitrogen dissolves in the blood and body fats.
Rapid decompression (as when divers ascend too quickly or astronauts decompress too quickly from cabin pressure to spacesuit pressure) can lead to a potentially fatal condition called decompression sickness (formerly known as caisson sickness or the bends), when nitrogen bubbles form in the bloodstream, nerves, joints, and other sensitive or vital areas.
Bubbles from other "inert" gases (gases other than carbon dioxide and oxygen) cause the same effects, so replacement of nitrogen in breathing gases may prevent nitrogen narcosis, but does not prevent decompression sickness.
Liquid
As a cryogenic liquid, liquid nitrogen can be dangerous by causing cold burns on contact, although the Leidenfrost effect provides protection for very short exposure (about one second).
Ingestion of liquid nitrogen can cause severe internal damage.
For example, in 2012, a young woman in England had to have her stomach removed after ingesting a cocktail made with liquid nitrogen.
Because the liquid-to-gas expansion ratio of nitrogen is 1:694 at 20 °C, a tremendous amount of force can be generated if liquid nitrogen is rapidly vaporised in an enclosed space.
In an incident on January 12, 2006 at Texas A&M University, the pressure-relief devices of a tank of liquid nitrogen were malfunctioning and later sealed.
As a result of the subsequent pressure buildup, the tank failed catastrophically.
The force of the explosion was sufficient to propel the tank through the ceiling immediately above it, shatter a reinforced concrete beam immediately below it, and blow the walls of the laboratory 0.1-0.2 m off their foundations.
Liquid nitrogen readily evaporates to form gaseous nitrogen, and hence the precautions associated with gaseous nitrogen also apply to liquid nitrogen.
For example, oxygen sensors are sometimes used as a safety precaution when working with liquid nitrogen to alert workers of gas spills into a confined space.
Vessels containing liquid nitrogen can condense oxygen from air.
The liquid in such a vessel becomes increasingly enriched in oxygen (boiling point −183 °C, higher than that of nitrogen) as the nitrogen evaporates, and can cause violent oxidation of organic material.
Bibliography
