Tiberius ( ; ; 16 November 42 BC - 16 March 37 AD) was the second Roman emperor, reigning from 14 AD to 37 AD, succeeding Augustus.
Born to Tiberius Claudius Nero and Livia Drusilla in a Claudian family, he was given the personal name Tiberius Claudius Nero.
His mother divorced Nero and married Octavian-later to ascend to Emperor as Augustus-who officially became his stepfather.
Tiberius would later marry Augustus' daughter (from his marriage to Scribonia), Julia the Elder, and even later be adopted by Augustus.
Through the adoption, he officially became a Julian, assuming the name Tiberius Julius Caesar.
The emperors after Tiberius would continue this blended dynasty of both families for the following thirty years; historians have named it the Julio-Claudian dynasty.
His relationship to the other emperors of this dynasty was as follows: he was the stepson of Augustus, grand-uncle of Caligula, paternal uncle of Claudius, and great-grand uncle of Nero.
Tiberius' 22-and-a-half-year reign would be the longest after that of Augustus until that of Antoninus Pius, who surpassed his reign by a few months.
Tiberius was one of the greatest Roman generals; his conquest of Pannonia, Dalmatia, Raetia, and (temporarily) parts of Germania, laid the foundations for the northern frontier.
Even so, he came to be remembered as a dark, reclusive and sombre ruler who never really desired to be emperor; Pliny the Elder called him "the gloomiest of men".
After the death of his son Drusus Julius Caesar in 23 AD, Tiberius became more reclusive and aloof.
In 26 AD he removed himself from Rome and left administration largely in the hands of his unscrupulous Praetorian prefects Lucius Aelius Sejanus and Quintus Naevius Sutorius Macro.
When Tiberius died, he was succeeded by his grand-nephew and adopted grandson, Caligula.
Early life (42BC-6BC)
Background
Tiberius was born in Rome on 16 November 42 BC to Tiberius Claudius Nero and Livia.
In 39 BC his mother divorced his biological father and, though again pregnant by Tiberius Nero, married Gaius Julius Caesar Octavianus.
In 38 BC his brother, Nero Claudius Drusus, was born.
Little is recorded of Tiberius' early life.
In 32 BC Tiberius, at the age of nine, delivered the eulogy for his biological father at the rostra.
In 29 BC, he rode in the triumphal chariot along with his adoptive father Octavian in celebration of the defeat of Antony and Cleopatra at Actium.
In response, a series of potential heirs seem to have been selected, among them Tiberius and his brother Drusus.
In 24 BC, at the age of seventeen, Tiberius entered politics under Augustus' direction, receiving the position of quaestor, and was granted the right to stand for election as praetor and consul five years in advance of the age required by law.
Similar provisions were made for Drusus.
Civil and military career
Shortly thereafter Tiberius began appearing in court as an advocate, and it was presumably at this time that his interest in Greek rhetoric began.
In 20 BC, Tiberius was sent east under Marcus Vipsanius Agrippa.
The Parthian Empire had captured the standards of the legions under the command of Marcus Licinius Crassus (53 BC) (at the Battle of Carrhae), Decidius Saxa (40 BC), and Mark Antony (36 BC).
He was appointed to the position of praetor, and was sent with his legions to assist his brother Drusus in campaigns in the west.
While Drusus focused his forces in Gallia Narbonensis and along the German frontier, Tiberius combated the tribes in the Alps and within Transalpine Gaul, conquering Raetia.
In 15 BC he discovered the sources of the Danube, and soon afterward the bend of the middle course.
Returning to Rome in 13 BC, Tiberius was appointed as consul, and around this same time his son, Drusus Julius Caesar, was born.
Agrippa's death in 12 BC elevated Tiberius and Drusus with respect to the succession.
At Augustus' request in 11 BC, Tiberius divorced Vipsania and married Julia the Elder, Augustus' daughter and Agrippa's widow.
Tiberius continued to be elevated by Augustus, and after Agrippa's death and his brother Drusus' death in 9 BC, seemed the clear candidate for succession.
As such, in 12 BC he received military commissions in Pannonia and Germania; both areas highly volatile and of key importance to Augustan policy.
In 6 BC, Tiberius launched a pincer movement against the Marcomanni.
Setting out northwest from Carnuntum on the Danube with four legions, Tiberius passed through Quadi territory in order to invade Marcomanni territory from the east.
Meanwhile, general Gaius Sentius Saturninus would depart east from Moguntiacum on the Rhine with two or three legions, pass through newly annexed Hermunduri territory, and attack the Marcomanni from the west.
The campaign was a resounding success, but Tiberius could not subjugate the Marcomanni because he was soon summoned to the Rhine frontier to protect Rome's new conquests in Germania.
He returned to Rome and was consul for a second time in 7 BC, and in 6 BC was granted tribunician power (tribunicia potestas) and control in the East, all of which mirrored positions that Agrippa had previously held.
However, despite these successes and despite his advancement, Tiberius was not happy.
Midlife (6BC-14)
Retirement to Rhodes (6 BC)
In 6 BC, on the verge of accepting command in the East and becoming the second-most powerful man in Rome, Tiberius suddenly announced his withdrawal from politics and retired to Rhodes.
The precise motives for Tiberius's withdrawal are unclear.
Historians have speculated a connection with the fact that Augustus had adopted Julia's sons by Agrippa, Gaius and Lucius, and seemed to be moving them along the same political path that both Tiberius and Drusus had trodden.
Tiberius' move thus seemed to be an interim solution: he would hold power only until his stepsons would come of age, and then be swept aside.
The promiscuous, and very public, behavior of his unhappily married wife, Julia, may have also played a part.
Somewhat apocryphal stories tell of Augustus pleading with Tiberius to stay, even going so far as to stage a serious illness.
Tiberius reportedly regretted his departure and requested to return to Rome several times, but each time Augustus refused his requests.
Heir to Augustus
With Tiberius' departure, succession rested solely on Augustus' two young grandsons, Lucius and Gaius Caesar.
The situation became more precarious in AD 2 with the death of Lucius.
Augustus, with perhaps some pressure from Livia, allowed Tiberius to return to Rome as a private citizen and nothing more.
In AD 4, Gaius was killed in Armenia, and Augustus had no other choice but to turn to Tiberius.
The death of Gaius in AD 4 initiated a flurry of activity in the household of Augustus.
Tiberius was adopted as full son and heir, and in turn he was required to adopt his nephew Germanicus, the son of his brother Drusus and Augustus' niece Antonia Minor.
Along with his adoption, Tiberius received tribunician power as well as a share of Augustus' maius imperium, something that even Marcus Agrippa may never have had.
In AD 7, Agrippa Postumus, a younger brother of Gaius and Lucius, was disowned by Augustus and banished to the island of Pianosa, to live in solitary confinement.
Thus, when in AD 13, the powers held by Tiberius were made equal, rather than second, to Augustus' own powers, he was for all intents and purposes a "co-Princeps" with Augustus, and, in the event of the latter's passing, would simply continue to rule without an interregnum or possible upheaval.
However, according to Suetonius, after a two-year stint in Germania, which lasted from 10-12 AD, "Tiberius returned and celebrated the triumph which he had postponed, accompanied also by his generals, for whom he had obtained the triumphal regalia.
And before turning to enter the Capitol, he dismounted from his chariot and fell at the knees of his father, who was presiding over the ceremonies.”
"Since the consuls caused a law to be passed soon after this that he should govern the provinces jointly with Augustus and hold the census with him, he set out for Illyricum on the conclusion of the lustral ceremonies."
Thus, according to Suetonius, these ceremonies and the declaration of his "co-Princeps" took place in the year 12 AD, after Tiberius' return from Germania.
He was buried with all due ceremony and, as had been arranged beforehand, deified, his will read, and Tiberius, now a middle-aged man at 55, was confirmed as his sole surviving heir.
Emperor (14-37 AD)
Early reign
The Senate convened on 18 September, to validate Tiberius's position as Princeps and, as it had done with Augustus before, extend the powers of the position to him.
These proceedings are fully accounted by Tacitus.
This ended up throwing the entire affair into confusion, and rather than humble, he came across as derisive; rather than seeming to want to serve the state, he seemed obstructive.
He cited his age as a reason why he could not act as Princeps, stated he did not wish the position, and then proceeded to ask for only a section of the state.
This meeting seems to have set the tone for Tiberius's entire rule.
He seems to have wished for the Senate and the state to simply act without him and his direct orders were rather vague, inspiring debate more on what he actually meant than on passing his legislation.
Rise and fall of Germanicus
Problems arose quickly for the new Princeps.
The Roman legions posted in Pannonia and in Germania had not been paid the bonuses promised them by Augustus, and after a short period of time mutinied when it was clear that a response from Tiberius was not forthcoming.
Rather than simply quell the mutiny, however, Germanicus rallied the mutineers and led them on a short campaign across the Rhine into Germanic territory, stating that whatever treasure they could grab would count as their bonus.
Germanicus had managed to deal a significant blow to Rome's enemies, quell an uprising of troops, and returned lost standards to Rome, actions that increased the fame and legend of the already very popular Germanicus with the Roman people.
After being recalled from Germania,
The Pisones had been longtime supporters of the Claudians, and had allied themselves with the young Octavian after his marriage to Livia, the mother of Tiberius.
Germanicus's death and accusations indicted the new Princeps.
Piso was placed on trial and, according to Tacitus, threatened to implicate Tiberius.
Tiberius seems to have tired of politics at this point.
In AD 22, he shared his tribunician authority with his son Drusus,
Tiberius in Capri, with Sejanus in Rome
Lucius Aelius Sejanus had served the imperial family for almost twenty years when he became Praetorian Prefect in AD 15.
As Tiberius became more embittered with the position of Princeps, he began to depend more and more upon the limited secretariat left to him by Augustus, and specifically upon Sejanus and the Praetorians.
In AD 17 or 18, Tiberius had trimmed the ranks of the Praetorian Guard responsible for the defense of the city, and had moved it from encampments outside of the city walls into the city itself, giving Sejanus access to somewhere between 6000 and 9000 troops.
The death of Drusus elevated Sejanus, at least in Tiberius's eyes, who thereafter refers to him as his 'Socius Laborum' .
Tiberius had statues of Sejanus erected throughout the city, and Sejanus became more and more visible as Tiberius began to withdraw from Rome altogether.
Finally, with Tiberius's withdrawal in AD 26, Sejanus was left in charge of the entire state mechanism and the city of Rome.
Sejanus began a series of purge trials of Senators and wealthy equestrians in the city of Rome, removing those capable of opposing his power as well as extending the imperial (and his own) treasury.
Germanicus's widow Agrippina the Elder and two of her sons, Nero Julius Caesar and Drusus Caesar were arrested and exiled in AD 30 and later all died in suspicious circumstances.
In Sejanus's purge of Agrippina the Elder and her family, Caligula, Agrippina the Younger, Julia Drusilla, and Julia Livilla were the only survivors.
Plot by Sejanus against Tiberius
In 31, Sejanus held the consulship with Tiberius was later implicated in this plot, and was revealed to have been Sejanus's lover for a number of years.
The plot seems to have involved the two of them overthrowing Tiberius, with the support of the Julians, and either assuming the Principate themselves, or serving as regent to the young Tiberius Gemellus or possibly even Caligula.
Those who stood in his way were tried for treason and swiftly dealt with.
As commander of the Praetorian Guard, he was replaced by Naevius Sutorius Macro.
However, Tacitus' portrayal of a tyrannical, vengeful emperor has been challenged by some historians: Edward Togo Salmon notes in A history of the Roman world from 30 BC to AD 138: QTEMPLATE |In the whole twenty two years of Tiberius' reign, not more than fifty-two persons were accused of treason, of whom almost half escaped conviction, while the four innocent people to be condemned fell victims to the excessive zeal of the Senate, not to the Emperor's tyranny.|sign
|source
While Tiberius was in Capri, rumours abounded as to what exactly he was doing there.
Suetonius records the rumours of lurid tales of sexual perversity, including graphic depictions of child molestation, and cruelty, and most of all his paranoia.
While heavily sensationalized, Suetonius' stories at least paint a picture of how Tiberius was perceived by the Roman senatorial class, and what his impact on the Principate was during his 23 years of rule.
Final years
The affair of Sejanus and the final years of treason trials permanently damaged Tiberius' image and reputation.
After Sejanus's fall, Tiberius' withdrawal from Rome was complete; the empire continued to run under the inertia of the bureaucracy established by Augustus, rather than through the leadership of the Princeps.
Suetonius records that he became paranoid,
Little was done to either secure his succession or indicate how it was to take place; the Julians and their supporters had fallen to the wrath of Sejanus, and his own sons and immediate family were dead.
Two of the candidates were either Caligula, the sole surviving son of Germanicus, or Tiberius' own grandson, Tiberius Gemellus.
Death (37 AD)
Tiberius died in Misenum on 16 March AD 37, in his seventy-seventh year.
Tacitus relates that the emperor appeared to have stopped breathing, and that Caligula, who was at Tiberius' villa, was being congratulated on his succession to the empire, when news arrived that the emperor had revived and was recovering his faculties.
Those who had moments before recognized Caligula as Augustus fled in fear of the emperor's wrath, while Macro took advantage of the chaos to have Tiberius smothered with his own bedclothes.
Suetonius reports several rumours, including that the emperor had been poisoned by Caligula, starved, and smothered with a pillow; that recovering, and finding himself deserted by his attendants, he attempted to rise from his couch, but fell dead.
According to Cassius Dio, Caligula, fearing that the emperor would recover, refused Tiberius' requests for food, insisting that he needed warmth, not food; then assisted by Macro, he smothered the emperor in his bedclothes.
After his death, the Senate refused to vote Tiberius the divine honors that had been paid to Augustus, and mobs filled the streets yelling "To the Tiber with Tiberius!"; the bodies of criminals were typically thrown into the river, instead of being buried or burnt.
However, the emperor was cremated, and his ashes were quietly laid in the Mausoleum of Augustus, later to be scattered in AD 410 during the Sack of Rome.
In his will, Tiberius had left his powers jointly to Caligula and Tiberius Gemellus.
Caligula's first act on becoming Princeps was to void Tiberius' will.
Legacy
Historiography
Had he died before AD 23, he might have been hailed as an exemplary ruler.
Publius Cornelius Tacitus
The most detailed account of this period is handed down to us by Tacitus, whose Annals dedicate the first six books entirely to the reign of Tiberius.
Tacitus was a Roman senator, born during the reign of Nero in AD 56, and consul suffect in AD 97.
His text is largely based on the Acta Senatus (the minutes of the session of the Senate) and the Acta Diurna (a collection of the acts of the government and news of the court and capital), as well as speeches by Tiberius himself, and the histories of contemporaries such as Marcus Cluvius Rufus, Fabius Rusticus and Pliny the Elder (all of which are lost).
he attributes the apparent virtues of Tiberius during his early reign to hypocrisy.
Ultimately, Tacitus' opinion on Tiberius is best illustrated by his conclusion of the sixth book:
QTEMPLATE |His character too had its distinct periods.
It was a bright time in his life and reputation, while under Augustus he was a private citizen or held high offices; a time of reserve and crafty assumption of virtue, as long as Germanicus and Drusus were alive.
Again, while his mother lived, he was a compound of good and evil; he was infamous for his cruelty, though he veiled his debaucheries, while he loved or feared Sejanus.
Finally, he plunged into every wickedness and disgrace, when fear and shame being cast off, he simply indulged his own inclinations.
Velleius Paterculus
One of the few surviving sources contemporary with the rule of Tiberius comes from Velleius Paterculus, who served under Tiberius for eight years (from AD 4) in Germany and Pannonia as praefect of cavalry and legatus.
Paterculus' Compendium of Roman History spans a period from the fall of Troy to the death of Livia in AD 29.
His text on Tiberius lavishes praise on both the emperor and Sejanus.
How much of this is due to genuine admiration or prudence remains an open question, but it has been conjectured that he was put to death in AD 31 as a friend of Sejanus.
Gospels, Jews, and Christians
The Gospels mention that during Tiberius' reign, Jesus of Nazareth preached and was executed under the authority of Pontius Pilate, the Roman governor of Judaea province.
In the Bible, Tiberius is mentioned by name in Luke 3:1, which states that John the Baptist entered on his public ministry in the fifteenth year of his reign.
The city of Tiberias (named after Tiberius) referenced in John 6:23 is located on the Sea of Galilee, which was also known as the Sea of Tiberias and is referenced in John 6:1, .
Many other references to Caesar (or the emperor in some other translations), without further specification, would seem to refer to Tiberius.
Similarly, the "tribute penny" referred to in Matthew and Mark is popularly thought to be a silver denarius coin of Tiberius.
During Tiberius' reign Jews had become more prominent in Rome and Jewish and Gentile followers of Jesus began proselytizing Roman citizens, increasing long-simmering resentments.
Tiberius in 19 AD ordered Jews who were of military age to join the Roman Army.
In fiction
The theft of the Gold Tiberius, an unintentionally unique commemorative coin commissioned by Tiberius which is stated to have achieved legendary status in the centuries hence, from a mysterious triad of occultists drives the plot of the framing story in Arthur Machen's 1895 novel The Three Impostors.
Tiberius has been represented in fiction, in literature, film and television, and in video games, often as a peripheral character in the central storyline.
One such modern representation is in the novel I, Claudius by Robert Graves, and the consequent BBC television series adaptation, where he is portrayed by George Baker.
George R. R. Martin, the author of The Song of Ice and Fire series, has stated that central character Stannis Baratheon is partially inspired by Tiberius Caesar, and particularly the portrayal by Baker.
In the 1968 ITV historical drama The Caesars, Tiberius (by André Morell) is the central character for much of the series and is portrayed in a much more balanced way than in I, Claudius.
He also appears as a minor character in the 2006 film The Inquiry, in which he is played by Max von Sydow.
In addition, Tiberius has prominent roles in Ben-Hur (played by George Relph in his last starring role), and in A.D. (played by James Mason).
Played by Ernest Thesiger, he featured in The Robe (1953).
He was featured in the 1979 film Caligula, portrayed by Peter O'Toole.
He was an important character in Taylor Caldwell's 1958 novel, Dear and Glorious Physician, a biography of St Luke the Evangelist, author of the third canonical Gospel.
He was played by Kenneth Cranham in A.D.
The Bible Continues.
Children and family
Tiberius was married twice, with only his first union producing a child who would survive to adulthood:
* Vipsania Agrippina, daughter of Marcus Vipsanius Agrippa (16-11 BC)
* Julia the Elder, only daughter of Augustus (11-6 BC)
** Infant son, (dubbed "Tiberillus" by modern historians), died in infancy.
Ancestry
*List of biblical figures identified in extra-biblical sources
Notes
Bibliography
Primary sources
* http:/ Thayer Roman Cassius_Dio cgi-bin Thayer Roman Suetonius Tiberius*.html Suetonius, Lives of the Twelve Caesars, Life of Tiberius, Latin text with English translation
* http:/ txt Tacitus Thayer Roman Velleius_Paterculus/home.html Velleius Paterculus, Roman History Book II, Latin text with English translation
Secondary material
* Capes, William Wolfe, Roman History, Longmans, Green, and Co., 1897
* (Ernst Mason was a pseudonym of science fiction author Frederik Pohl)
