Bulgarian (, ; , ) is a South Slavic language spoken in Southeastern Europe, primarily in Bulgaria.
It is the language of Bulgarians.
Along with the closely related Macedonian language (collectively forming the East South Slavic languages), it is a member of the Balkan sprachbund.
The two languages have several characteristics that set it apart from all other Slavic languages: changes include the elimination of case declension, the development of a suffixed definite article and the lack of a verb infinitive, but it retains and has further developed the Proto-Slavic verb system.
One such major development is the innovation of evidential verb forms to encode for the source of information: witnessed, inferred, or reported.
It is the official language of Bulgaria, and since 2007 has been among the official languages of the European Union.
It is also spoken by minorities in several other countries.
History
One can divide the development of the Bulgarian language into several periods.
The Prehistoric period covers the time between the Slavonic migration to the eastern Balkans ( 7th century CE) and the mission of Saints Cyril and Methodius to Great Moravia in the 860s.
* Old Bulgarian (9th to 11th centuries, also referred to as "Old Church Slavonic") - a literary norm of the early southern dialect of the Common Slavic language from which Bulgarian evolved.
Saints Cyril and Methodius and their disciples used this norm when translating the Bible and other liturgical literature from Greek into Slavic.
* Middle Bulgarian (12th to 15th centuries) - a literary norm that evolved from the earlier Old Bulgarian, after major innovations occurred.
A language of rich literary activity, it served as the official administration language of the Second Bulgarian Empire.
* Modern Bulgarian dates from the 16th century onwards, undergoing general grammar and syntax changes in the 18th and 19th centuries.
The present-day written Bulgarian language was standardized on the basis of the 19th-century Bulgarian vernacular.
The historical development of the Bulgarian language can be described as a transition from a highly synthetic language (Old Bulgarian) to a typical analytic language (Modern Bulgarian) with Middle Bulgarian as a midpoint in this transition.
Bulgarian was the first "Slavic" language attested in writing.
As Slavic linguistic unity lasted into late antiquity, the oldest manuscripts initially referred to this language as языкъ словяньскъ, "the Slavic language".
In the Middle Bulgarian period this name was gradually replaced by the name , the "Bulgarian language".
In some cases, this name was used not only with regard to the contemporary Middle Bulgarian language of the copyist but also to the period of Old Bulgarian.
A most notable example of anachronism is the Service of Saint Cyril from Skopje (Скопски миней), a 13th-century Middle Bulgarian manuscript from northern Macedonia according to which St. Cyril preached with "Bulgarian" books among the Moravian Slavs.
The first mention of the language as the "Bulgarian language" instead of the "Slavonic language" comes in the work of the Greek clergy of the Archbishopric of Ohrid in the 11th century, for example in the Greek hagiography of Clement of Ohrid by Theophylact of Ohrid (late 11th century).
During the Middle Bulgarian period, the language underwent dramatic changes, losing the Slavonic case system, but preserving the rich verb system (while the development was exactly the opposite in other Slavic languages) and developing a definite article.
It was influenced by its non-Slavic neighbors in the Balkan language area (mostly grammatically) and later also by Turkish, which was the official language of the Ottoman Empire, in the form of the Ottoman Turkish language, mostly lexically.
As a national revival occurred toward the end of the period of Ottoman rule (mostly during the 19th century), a modern Bulgarian literary language gradually emerged that drew heavily on Church Slavonic/Old Bulgarian (and to some extent on literary Russian, which had preserved many lexical items from Church Slavonic) and later reduced the number of Turkish and other Balkan loans.
Today one difference between Bulgarian dialects in the country and literary spoken Bulgarian is the significant presence of Old Bulgarian words and even word forms in the latter.
Russian loans are distinguished from Old Bulgarian ones on the basis of the presence of specifically Russian phonetic changes, as in оборот (turnover, rev), непонятен (incomprehensible), ядро (nucleus) and others.
Many other loans from French, English and the classical languages have subsequently entered the language as well.
Modern Bulgarian was based essentially on the Eastern dialects of the language, but its pronunciation is in many respects a compromise between East and West Bulgarian (see especially the phonetic sections below).
Following the efforts of some figures of the National awakening of Bulgaria (most notably Neofit Rilski and Ivan Bogorov), there had been many attempts to codify a standard Bulgarian language; however, there was much argument surrounding the choice of norms.
Between 1835 and 1878 more than 25 proposals were put forward and "linguistic chaos" ensued.
Eventually the eastern dialects prevailed,
and in 1899 the Bulgarian Ministry of Education officially codified
*Eastern dialects (informally called мек говор/mek govor - "soft speech")
**the former yat alternates between "ya" and "e": it is pronounced "ya" if it is under stress and the next syllable does not contain a front vowel (e or i) - e.g. мляко (mlyàko), хляб (hlyab), and "e" otherwise - e.g. млекар (mlekàr) - milkman, хлебар (hlebàr) - baker.
This rule obtains in most Eastern dialects, although some have "ya", or a special "open e" sound, in all positions.
The literary language norm, which is generally based on the Eastern dialects, also has the Eastern alternating reflex of yat.
However, it has not incorporated the general Eastern umlaut of all synchronic or even historic "ya" sounds into "e" before front vowels - e.g. поляна (polyana) vs. полени (poleni) "meadow - meadows" or even жаба (zhaba) vs. жеби (zhebi)
"frog - frogs", even though it co-occurs with the yat alternation in almost all Eastern dialects that have it (except a few dialects along the yat border, e.g. in the Pleven region).
More examples of the yat umlaut in the literary language are:
*mlyàko (milk) n. → mlekàr (milkman); mlèchen (milky), etc.
*syàdam (sit) vb. → sedàlka (seat); sedàlishte (seat, e.g. of government), etc.
*svyat (holy) adj.
→ svetètz (saint); svetìlishte (sanctuary), etc. (in this example, ya/e comes not from historical yat but from small yus (ѧ), which normally becomes e in Bulgarian, but the word was influenced by Russian and the yat umlaut)
Until 1945, Bulgarian orthography did not reveal this alternation and used the original Old Slavic Cyrillic letter yat (Ѣ), which was commonly called двойно е (dvoyno e) at the time, to express the historical yat vowel or at least root vowels displaying the ya - e alternation.
The letter was used in each occurrence of such a root, regardless of the actual pronunciation of the vowel: thus, both mlyako and mlekar were spelled with (Ѣ).
Among other things, this was seen as a way to "reconcile" the Western and the Eastern dialects and maintain language unity at a time when much of Bulgaria's Western dialect area was controlled by Serbia and Greece, but there were still hopes and occasional attempts to recover it.
With the 1945 orthographic reform, this letter was abolished and the present spelling was introduced, reflecting the alternation in pronunciation.
This had implications for some grammatical constructions:
*The third person plural pronoun and its derivatives.
Before 1945 the pronoun "they" was spelled тѣ (tě), and its derivatives took this as the root.
After the orthographic change, the pronoun and its derivatives were given an equal share of soft and hard spellings:
**"their (s)" - tehen (masc.)
; tyahna (fem.); tyahno (neut.); tehni (plur.)
**"whole" - tsyal → "the whole...": tseliyat (masc.); tsyalata (fem.); tsyaloto (neut.); tselite (plur.)
Sometimes, with the changes, words began to be spelled as other words with different meanings, e.g.:
*свѣт (svět) - "world" became свят (svyat), spelt and pronounced the same as свят - "holy".
In spite of the literary norm regarding the yat vowel, many people living in Western Bulgaria, including the capital Sofia, will fail to observe its rules.
While the norm requires the realizations vidyal vs. videli (he has seen; they have seen), some natives of Western Bulgaria will preserve their local dialect pronunciation with "e" for all instances of "yat" (e.g. videl, videli).
Others, attempting to adhere to the norm, will actually use the "ya" sound even in cases where the standard language has "e" (e.g. vidyal, vidyali).
The latter hypercorrection is called свръхякане (svrah-yakane ≈"over-ya-ing").
;Shift from to
Bulgarian is the only Slavic language whose literary standard does not naturally contain the iotated sound (or its palatalized variant , except in non-Slavic foreign-loaned words).
The sound is common in all modern Slavic languages (e.g. Czech medvěd "bear", Polish pięć "five", Serbo-Croatian jelen "deer", Ukrainian немає "there is not...", Macedonian пишување "writing", etc.), as well as some Western Bulgarian dialectal forms - e.g. ора̀н’е (standard Bulgarian: оране , "ploughing"), however it is not represented in standard Bulgarian speech or writing.
Even where occurs in other Slavic words, in Standard Bulgarian it is usually transcribed and pronounced as pure - e.g. Boris Yeltsin is "Eltsin" and yus (uppercase Ѫ, lowercase ѫ) were removed from its alphabet, reducing the number of letters to 30.
With the accession of Bulgaria to the European Union on 1 January 2007, Cyrillic became the third official script of the European Union, following the Latin and Greek scripts.
Phonology
Bulgarian possesses a phonology similar to that of the rest of the South Slavic languages, notably lacking Serbo-Croatian's phonemic vowel length and tones and alveo-palatal affricates.
The eastern dialects exhibit palatalization of consonants before front vowels ( and ) and reduction of vowel phonemes in unstressed position (causing mergers of and , and , and ) - both patterns have partial parallels in Russian and lead to a partly similar sound.
The western dialects are like Macedonian and Serbo-Croatian in that they do not have allophonic palatalization and have only little vowel reduction.
Bulgarian has six vowel phonemes, but at least eight distinct phones can be distinguished when reduced allophones are taken into consideration.
Grammar
The parts of speech in Bulgarian are divided in ten types, which are categorized in two broad classes: mutable and immutable.
The difference is that mutable parts of speech vary grammatically, whereas the immutable ones do not change, regardless of their use.
The five classes of mutables are: nouns, adjectives, numerals, pronouns and verbs.
Syntactically, the first four of these form the group of the noun or the nominal group.
The immutables are: adverbs, prepositions, conjunctions, particles and interjections.
Verbs and adverbs form the group of the verb or the verbal group.
Nominal morphology
Nouns and adjectives have the categories grammatical gender, number, case (only vocative) and definiteness in Bulgarian.
Adjectives and adjectival pronouns agree with nouns in number and gender.
Pronouns have gender and number and retain (as in nearly all Indo-European languages) a more significant part of the case system.
Nominal inflection
Gender
There are three grammatical genders in Bulgarian: masculine, feminine and neuter.
The gender of the noun can largely be inferred from its ending: nouns ending in a consonant ("zero ending") are generally masculine ( 'woman', 'daughter', 'street') are normally feminine; and
nouns ending in -е, -о are almost always neuter ( 'child', 'lake'), as are those rare words (usually loanwords) that end in -и, -у, and -ю ( 'tsunami', 'taboo', 'menu').
Perhaps the most significant exception from the above are the relatively numerous nouns that end in a consonant and yet are feminine: these comprise, firstly, a large group of nouns with zero ending expressing quality, degree or an abstraction, including all nouns ending on -ост/-ест - ( 'wisdom', 'vileness', 'loveliness', 'sickness', 'love'), and secondly, a much smaller group of irregular nouns with zero ending which define tangible objects or concepts ( 'blood', 'bone', 'evening', 'night').
There are also some commonly used words that end in a vowel and yet are masculine: 'father', 'grandfather', / 'uncle', and others.
The plural forms of the nouns do not express their gender as clearly as the singular ones, but may also provide some clues to it: the ending (-i) is more likely to be used with a masculine or feminine noun ( 'facts', 'sicknesses'), while one in belongs more often to a neuter noun ( 'lakes').
Also, the plural ending occurs only in masculine nouns.
Number
Two numbers are distinguished in Bulgarian-singular and plural.
A variety of plural suffixes is used, and the choice between them is partly determined by their ending in singular and partly influenced by gender; in addition, irregular declension and alternative plural forms are common.
Words ending in (which are usually feminine) generally have the plural ending , upon dropping of the singular ending.
Of nouns ending in a consonant, the feminine ones also use , whereas the masculine ones usually have for polysyllables and for monosyllables (however, exceptions are especially common in this group).
Nouns ending in (most of which are neuter) mostly use the suffixes (both of which require the dropping of the singular endings) and .
With cardinal numbers and related words such as ('several'), masculine nouns use a special count form in , which stems from the Proto-Slavonic dual: and neuter .
However, a recently developed language norm requires that count forms should only be used with masculine nouns that do not denote persons.
Thus, versus ('these pencils').
Case
Cases exist only in the personal and some other pronouns (as they do in many other modern Indo-European languages), with nominative, accusative, dative and vocative forms.
Vestiges are present in a number of phraseological units and sayings.
The major exception are vocative forms, which are still in use for masculine (with the endings -е, -о and -ю) and feminine nouns (-ь/йо and -е) in the singular.
Definiteness
In modern Bulgarian, definiteness is expressed by a definite article which is postfixed to the noun, much like in the Scandinavian languages or Romanian (indefinite: , 'person'; definite: , "the person") or to the first nominal constituent of definite noun phrases (indefinite: , 'a good person'; definite: , "the good person").
There are four singular definite articles.
Again, the choice between them is largely determined by the noun's ending in the singular.
Nouns that end in a consonant and are masculine use -ът -я elsewhere.
Nouns that end in a consonant and are feminine, as well as nouns that end in -а -о use -то.
The plural definite article is -те for all nouns except for those whose plural form ends in -а -я for masculine gender (again, with the longer form being reserved for grammatical subjects), -та for feminine gender, -то for neuter gender, and -те for plural.
Adjective and numeral inflection
Both groups agree in gender and number with the noun they are appended to.
They may also take the definite article as explained above.
Pronouns
Pronouns may vary in gender, number, and definiteness, and are the only parts of speech that have retained case inflections.
Three cases are exhibited by some groups of pronouns - nominative, accusative and dative.
The distinguishable types of pronouns include the following: personal, relative, reflexive, interrogative, negative, indefinitive, summative and possessive.
Verbal morphology and grammar
The Bulgarian verb can take up to 3,000 distinct forms, as it varies in person, number, voice, aspect, mood, tense and even gender.
Finite verbal forms
Finite verbal forms are simple or compound and agree with subjects in person (first, second and third) and number (singular, plural).
In addition to that, past compound forms using participles vary in gender (masculine, feminine, neuter) and voice (active and passive) as well as aspect (perfective/aorist and imperfective).
Aspect
Bulgarian verbs express lexical aspect: perfective verbs signify the completion of the action of the verb and form past perfective (aorist) forms; imperfective ones are neutral with regard to it and form past imperfective forms.
Most Bulgarian verbs can be grouped in perfective-imperfective pairs (imperfective/perfective: "come", "arrive").
Perfective verbs can be usually formed from imperfective ones by suffixation or prefixation, but the resultant verb often deviates in meaning from the original.
In the pair examples above, aspect is stem-specific and therefore there is no difference in meaning.
In Bulgarian, there is also grammatical aspect.
Three grammatical aspects are distinguishable: neutral, perfect and pluperfect.
The neutral aspect comprises the three simple tenses and the future tense.
The pluperfect is manifest in tenses that use double or triple auxiliary "be" participles like the past pluperfect subjunctive.
Perfect constructions use a single auxiliary "be".
Mood
The traditional interpretation is that in addition to the four moods (наклонения ) shared by most other European languages - indicative (изявително, ) imperative (повелително ), subjunctive ( ) and conditional (условно, ) - in Bulgarian there is one more to describe a general category of unwitnessed events - the inferential (преизказно ) mood.
However, most contemporary Bulgarian linguists usually exclude the subjunctive mood and the inferential mood from the list of Bulgarian moods (thus placing the number of Bulgarian moods at a total of 3: indicative, imperative and conditional) and don't consider them to be moods but view them as verbial morphosyntactic constructs or separate gramemes of the verb class.
The possible existence of a few other moods has been discussed in the literature.
Most Bulgarian school grammars teach the traditional view of 4 Bulgarian moods (as described above, but excluding the subjunctive and including the inferential).
Tense
There are three grammatically distinctive positions in time - present, past and future - which combine with aspect and mood to produce a number of formations.
Normally, in grammar books these formations are viewed as separate tenses - i. e. "past imperfect" would mean that the verb is in past tense, in the imperfective aspect, and in the indicative mood (since no other mood is shown).
There are more than 40 different tenses across Bulgarian's two aspects and five moods.
In the indicative mood, there are three simple tenses:
*Present tense is a temporally unmarked simple form made up of the verbal stem and a complex suffix composed of the thematic vowel , or and the person I am arriving"); only imperfective verbs can stand in the present indicative tense independently;
*Past imperfect is a simple verb form used to express an action which is contemporaneous or subordinate to other past actions; it is made up of an imperfective or a perfective verbal stem and the person/number ending ( , , 'I was arriving');
*Past aorist is a simple form used to express a temporarily independent, specific past action; it is made up of a perfective or an imperfective verbal stem and the person/number ending (, , 'I arrived', , , 'I read');
In the indicative there are also the following compound tenses:
*Future tense is a compound form made of the particle and present tense ( , 'I will study'); negation is expressed by the construction and present tense ( , or the old-fashioned form , 'I will not study');
*Past future tense is a compound form used to express an action which was to be completed in the past but was future as regards another past action; it is made up of the past imperfect of the verb ('will'), the particle ('to') and the present tense of the verb (e.g. , , 'I was going to study');
*Present perfect is a compound form used to express an action which was completed in the past but is relevant for or related to the present; it is made up of the present tense of the verb съм ('be') and the past participle (e.g. , 'I have studied');
*Past perfect is a compound form used to express an action which was completed in the past and is relative to another past action; it is made up of the past tense of the verb съм and the past participle (e.g. , 'I had studied');
*Future perfect is a compound form used to express an action which is to take place in the future before another future action; it is made up of the future tense of the verb съм and the past participle (e.g. , 'I will have studied');
*Past future perfect is a compound form used to express a past action which is future with respect to a past action which itself is prior to another past action; it is made up of the past imperfect of , the particle the present tense of the verb съм and the past participle of the verb (e.g. , , 'I would have studied').
The four perfect constructions above can vary in aspect depending on the aspect of the main-verb participle; they are in fact pairs of imperfective and perfective aspects.
Verbs in forms using past participles also vary in voice and gender.
There is only one simple tense in the imperative mood, the present, and there are simple forms only for the second-person singular, -и/-й , e.g. уча ('to study'): , sg., , pl.; 'to play': , .
There are compound imperative forms for all persons and numbers in the present compound imperative (, ), the present perfect compound imperative (, ) and the rarely used present pluperfect compound imperative (, ).
The conditional mood consists of five compound tenses, most of which are not grammatically distinguishable.
The present, future and past conditional use a special past form of the stem би- (bi - "be") and the past participle (, , 'I would study').
The past future conditional and the past future perfect conditional coincide in form with the respective indicative tenses.
The subjunctive mood is rarely documented as a separate verb form in Bulgarian, , but nevertheless it is used regularly.
The most common form, often mistaken for the present tense, is the present subjunctive ( , 'I had better go').
The difference between the present indicative and the present subjunctive tense is that the subjunctive can be formed by both perfective and imperfective verbs.
It has completely replaced the infinitive and the supine from complex expressions (see below).
It is also employed to express opinion about possible future events.
The past perfect subjunctive ( , 'I'd had better be gone') refers to possible events in the past, which did not take place, and the present pluperfect subjunctive ( ), which may be used about both past and future events arousing feelings of incontinence, suspicion, etc. and has no perfect English translation.
The inferential mood has five pure tenses.
Two of them are simple - past aorist inferential and past imperfect inferential - and are formed by the past participles of perfective and imperfective verbs, respectively.
There are also three compound tenses - past future inferential, past future perfect inferential and past perfect inferential.
All these tenses' forms are gender-specific in the singular.
There are also conditional and compound-imperative crossovers.
The existence of inferential forms has been attributed to Turkic influences by most Bulgarian linguists.
Morphologically, they are derived from the perfect.
Non-finite verbal forms
Bulgarian has the following participles:
*Present active participle (сегашно деятелно причастие) is formed from imperfective stems with the addition of the suffixes -ащ -ящ
(четящ, 'reading') and is used only attributively;
*Present passive participle (сегашно страдателно причастие) is formed by the addition of the suffixes -им уем (четим, 'that can be read, readable');
*Past active aorist participle (минало свършено деятелно причастие) is formed by the addition of the suffix -л- to perfective stems (чел, 'have read');
*Past active imperfect participle (минало несвършено деятелно причастие) is formed by the addition of the suffixes -ел -ял
to imperfective stems (четял, 'have been reading');
*Past passive aorist participle (минало свършено страдателно причастие) is formed from aorist -т (прочетен, 'read'; убит, 'killed'); it is used predicatively and attributively;
*Past passive imperfect participle (минало несвършено страдателно причастие) is formed from imperfective stems with the addition of the suffix -н (прочитан, 'been read'; убиван, 'been being killed'); it is used predicatively and attributively;
*Adverbial participle (деепричастие) is usually formed from imperfective present stems with the suffix - (е)йки (четейки, 'while reading'), relates an action contemporaneous with and subordinate to the main verb and is originally a Western Bulgarian form.
The participles are inflected by gender, number, and definiteness, and are coordinated with the subject when forming compound tenses (see tenses above).
When used in attributive role the inflection attributes are coordinated with the noun that is being attributed.
Reflexive verbs
Bulgarian uses reflexive verbal forms (i.e. actions which are performed by the agent onto him- or herself) which behave in a similar way as they do in many other Indo-European languages, such as French and Spanish.
The reflexive is expressed by the invariable particle se, originally a clitic form of the accusative reflexive pronoun.
Thus -
*miya - I wash, miya se - I wash myself, miesh se - you wash yourself
*pitam - I ask, pitam se - I ask myself, pitash se - you ask yourself
When the action is performed on others, other particles are used, just like in any normal verb, e.g. -
Sometimes, the reflexive verb form has a similar but not necessarily identical meaning to the non-reflexive verb -
*kazvam - I say, kazvam se - my name is (lit.
"I call myself")
*vizhdam - I see, vizhdame se - "we see ourselves" or "we meet each other"
In other cases, the reflexive verb has a completely different meaning from its non-reflexive counterpart -
*karam - to drive, karam se - to have a row with someone
;Indirect actions
When the action is performed on an indirect object, the particles change to si and its derivatives -
*kazvam si - I say to myself, kazvash si - you say to yourself, kazvam ti - I say to you
*peya si - I am singing to myself, pee si - she is singing to herself, pee mu - she is singing to him
*gotvya si - I cook for myself, gotvyat si - they cook for themselves, gotvya im - I cook for them
In some cases, the particle si is ambiguous between the indirect object and the possessive meaning -
*miya si ratsete - I wash my hands, miya ti ratsete - I wash your hands
*pitam si priyatelite - I ask my friends, pitam ti priyatelite - I ask your friends
The difference between transitive and intransitive verbs can lead to significant differences in meaning with minimal change, e.g. -
*haresvash me - you like me, haresvash mi - I like you (lit.
you are pleasing to me)
The particle si is often used to indicate a more personal relationship to the action, e.g. -
*haresvam go - I like him, haresvam si go - no precise translation, roughly translates as "he's really close to my heart"
*stanahme priyateli - we became friends, stanahme si priyateli - same meaning, but sounds friendlier
*mislya - I am thinking (usually about something serious), mislya si - same meaning, but usually about something personal and/or trivial
Adverbs
The most productive way to form adverbs is to derive them from the neuter singular form of the corresponding adjective-e.g. (fast), (hard), (strange)-but adjectives ending in use the masculine singular form (i.e. ending in ), instead-e.g. (heroically), (bravely, like a man), (skillfully).
The same pattern is used to form adverbs from the (adjective-like) ordinal numerals, e.g. (firstly), (secondly), (thirdly), and in some cases from (adjective-like) cardinal numerals, e.g. (twice as/double), (three times as), (five times as).
The remaining adverbs are formed in ways that are no longer productive in the language.
A small number are original (not derived from other words), for example: (here), (there), (inside), (outside), (very/much) etc.
The rest are mostly fossilized case forms, such as:
*Archaic locative forms of some adjectives, e.g. (well), (badly), (too, rather), and nouns (up), (tomorrow), (in the summer)
*Archaic instrumental forms of some adjectives, e.g. (quietly), (furtively), (blindly), and nouns, e.g. (during the day), (during the night), (one next to the other), (spiritually), (in figures), (with words); or verbs: (while running), (while lying), (while standing)
*Archaic accusative forms of some nouns: (today), (tonight), (in the morning), (in winter)
*Archaic genitive forms of some nouns: (tonight), (last night), (yesterday)
*Homonymous and etymologically identical to the feminine singular form of the corresponding adjective used with the definite article: (hard), (gropingly); the same pattern has been applied to some verbs, e.g. (while running), (while lying), (while standing)
*Derived from cardinal numerals by means of a non-productive suffix: (once), (twice), (thrice)
Adverbs can sometimes be reduplicated to emphasize the qualitative or quantitative properties of actions, moods or relations as performed by the subject of the sentence: "" ("rather slowly"), "" ("with great difficulty"), "" ("quite", "thoroughly").
Syntax
Bulgarian employs clitic doubling, mostly for emphatic purposes.
For example, the following constructions are common in colloquial Bulgarian:
: (lit.
"I gave it the present to Maria.")
: (lit.
"I gave her it the present to Maria.")
The phenomenon is practically obligatory in the spoken language in the case of inversion signalling information structure (in writing, clitic doubling may be skipped in such instances, with a somewhat bookish effect):
: (lit.
"The present to her it I-gave to Maria.")
: (lit.
"To Maria to her it I-gave the present.")
Sometimes, the doubling signals syntactic relations, thus:
: (lit.
"Petar and Ivan them ate the wolves.")
:Transl.: "Petar and Ivan were eaten by the wolves".
This is contrasted with:
: (lit.
"Petar and Ivan ate the wolves")
:Transl.: "Petar and Ivan ate the wolves".
In this case, clitic doubling can be a colloquial alternative of the more formal or bookish passive voice, which would be constructed as follows:
: (lit.
"Petar and Ivan were eaten by the wolves.")
Clitic doubling is also fully obligatory, both in the spoken and in the written norm, in clauses including several special expressions that use the short accusative and dative pronouns such as "" (I feel like playing), студено ми е (I am cold), and боли ме ръката (my arm hurts):
: (lit.
"To me to me it-feels-like-sleeping, and to Ivan to him it-feels-like-playing")
:Transl.: "I feel like sleeping, and Ivan feels like playing."
: (lit.
"To us to us it-is cold, and to you-plur.
to you-plur.
it-is warm")
:Transl.: "We are cold, and you are warm."
: (lit.
Ivan him aches the throat, and me me aches the head)
:Transl.:
Ivan has sore throat, and I have a headache.
Except the above examples, clitic doubling is considered inappropriate in a formal context.
Other features
Questions
Questions in Bulgarian which do not use a question word (such as who?
what? etc.) are formed with the particle ли after the verb; a subject is not necessary, as the verbal conjugation suggests who is performing the action:
While the particle generally goes after the verb, it can go after a noun or adjective if a contrast is needed:
A verb is not always necessary, e.g. when presenting a choice:
Rhetorical questions can be formed by adding to a question word, thus forming a "double interrogative" -
The same construction +не ('no') is an emphasized positive -
* - 'Who was there?'
- - 'Nearly everyone!'
(lit.
'I wonder who wasn't there')
Significant verbs
Съм
The verb - 'to be' is also used as an auxiliary for forming the perfect, the passive and the conditional:
Two alternate forms of exist:
* - interchangeable with съм in most tenses and moods, but never in the present indicative - e.g. ('I want to be'), ('I will be here'); in the imperative, only бъда is used - ('be here');
* - slightly archaic, imperfective form of бъда - e.g. ('he used to get threats'); in contemporary usage, it is mostly used in the negative to mean "ought not", e.g. ('you shouldn't smoke').
The impersonal verb (lit.
'it wants') is used to for forming the (positive) future tense:
The negative future is formed with the invariable construction (see below):
The past tense of this verb - щях is conjugated to form the past conditional ('would have' - again, with да, since it is irrealis):
Имам and нямам
The verbs ('to have') and ('to not have'):
*the third person singular of these two can be used impersonally to mean 'there is aren't any,' e.g.
*The impersonal form няма is used in the negative future - (see ще above).
** used on its own can mean simply 'I won't' - a simple refusal to a suggestion or instruction.
Conjunctions and particles
But
In Bulgarian, there are several conjunctions all translating into English as "but", which are all used in distinct situations.
They are (), (), (), (), and () (and () - "however", identical in use to ).
While there is some overlapping between their uses, in many cases they are specific.
For example, is used for a choice - - "not this one, but that one" (compare Spanish ), while is often used to provide extra information or an opinion - - "I said it, but I was wrong".
Meanwhile, provides contrast between two situations, and in some sentences can even be translated as "although", "while" or even "and" - - "I'm working, and he's daydreaming".
Very often, different words can be used to alter the emphasis of a sentence - e.g. while and both mean "I smoke, but I shouldn't", the first sounds more like a statement of fact ("...but I mustn't"), while the second feels more like a judgement ("...but I oughtn't").
Similarly, and both mean "I don't want to, but he does", however the first emphasizes the fact that he wants to, while the second emphasizes the wanting rather than the person.
is interesting in that, while it feels archaic, it is often used in poetry and frequently in children's stories, since it has quite a moral/ominous feel to it.
Some common expressions use these words, and some can be used alone as interjections:
* (lit.
"yes, but no") - means "you're wrong to think so".
* can be tagged onto a sentence to express surprise: - "he's sleeping!"
Vocative particles
Bulgarian has several abstract particles which are used to strengthen a statement.
These have no precise translation in English.
The particles are strictly informal and can even be considered rude by some people and in some situations.
They are mostly used at the end of questions or instructions.
* () - the most common particle.
It can be used to strengthen a statement or, sometimes, to indicate derision of an opinion, aided by the tone of voice.
** - tell me (insistence); - is that so?
(derisive); - you don't say!.
* () (feminine only) - originally simply the feminine counterpart of , but today perceived as rude and derisive (compare the similar evolution of the vocative forms of feminine names).
* (, masculine), (, feminine) - similar to and , but archaic.
Although informal, can sometimes be heard being used by older people.
Modal particles
These are "tagged" on to the beginning or end of a sentence to express the mood of the speaker in relation to the situation.
They are mostly interrogative or slightly imperative in nature.
There is no change in the grammatical mood when these are used (although they may be expressed through different grammatical moods in other languages).
* () - is a universal affirmative tag, like "isn't it"/"won't you", etc. (it is invariable, like the French ).
It can be placed almost anywhere in the sentence, and does not always require a verb:
** - you are coming, aren't you?; - didn't they want to?; - that one, right?;
**it can express quite complex thoughts through simple constructions - - "I thought you weren't going to!"
or "I thought there weren't any!"
(depending on context - the verb presents general negation/lacking, see "nyama", above).
* () - expresses uncertainty (if in the middle of a clause, can be translated as "whether") - e.g. - "do you think he will come?"
* () - presents disbelief ~"don't tell me that..." - e.g. - "don't tell me you want to!".
It is slightly archaic, but still in use.
Can be used on its own as an interjection -
* () - expresses hope - - "he will come"; - "I hope he comes" (compare Spanish ).
Grammatically, is entirely separate from the verb - "to hope".
* () - means "let ('s)" - e.g. - "let him come"; when used in the first person, it expresses extreme politeness: - "let us go" (in colloquial situations, , below, is used instead).
**, as an interjection, can also be used to express judgement or even schadenfreude - - "he deserves it!".
Intentional particles
These express intent or desire, perhaps even pleading.
They can be seen as a sort of cohortative side to the language.
They are also highly informal.
* () - "let me" - exclusively when asking someone else for something.
It can even be used on its own as a request or instruction (depending on the tone used), indicating that the speaker wants to partake in or try whatever the listener is doing.
* () (plural ) - can be used to issue a negative instruction - e.g. - "don't come" ( + subjunctive).
In some dialects, the construction ( + preterite) is used instead.
As an interjection - - "don't!"
(See section on imperative mood).
These particles can be combined with the vocative particles for greater effect, e.g. (let me see), or even exclusively in combinations with them, with no other elements, e.g. (come on!); (I told you not to!).
Pronouns of quality
Bulgarian has several pronouns of quality which have no direct parallels in English - kakav (what sort of); takuv (this sort of); onakuv (that sort of - colloq.); nyakakav (some sort of); nikakav (no sort of); vsyakakav (every sort of); and the relative pronoun kakavto (the sort of ... that ... ).
The adjective ednakuv ("the same") derives from the same radical.
Example phrases include:
*kakav chovek?!
- "what person?!
"; kakav chovek e toy?
- what sort of person is he?
*ne poznavam takuv - "I don't know any (people like that)" (lit.
"I don't know this sort of (person)")
*nyakakvi hora - lit.
"some type of people", but the understood meaning is "a bunch of people I don't know"
*kakav iskash?
- "which type do you want?
"; nikakav! - "I don't want any!"/"none!"
An interesting phenomenon is that these can be strung along one after another in quite long constructions, e.g.
An extreme (colloquial) sentence, with almost no physical meaning in it whatsoever - yet which does have perfect meaning to the Bulgarian ear - would be :
*inferred translation - "what kind of no-good person is she?"
*literal translation: "what kind of - is - this one here (she) - this sort of - one - some sort of - no sort of"
-Note: the subject of the sentence is simply the pronoun "taya" (lit.
"this one here"; colloq.
"she").
Another interesting phenomenon that is observed in colloquial speech is the use of takova (neuter of takyv) not only as a substitute for an adjective, but also as a substitute for a verb.
In that case the base form takova is used as the third person singular in the present indicative and all other forms are formed by analogy to other verbs in the language.
Sometimes the "verb" may even acquire a derivational prefix that changes its meaning.
Examples:
* takovah ti shapkata - I did something to your hat (perhaps: I took your hat)
* takovah si ochilata - I did something to my glasses (perhaps: I lost my glasses)
* takovah se - I did something to myself (perhaps: I hurt myself)
Another use of takova in colloquial speech is the word takovata, which can be used as a substitution for a noun, but also, if the speaker doesn't remember or is not sure how to say something, they might say takovata and then pause to think about it:
* i posle toy takovata... - and then he no translation ...
* izyadoh ti takovata - I ate something of yours (perhaps: I ate your dessert).
Here the word takovata is used as a substitution for a noun.
Similar "meaningless" expressions are extremely common in spoken Bulgarian, especially when the speaker is finding it difficult to describe something.
Miscellaneous
*The commonly cited phenomenon of Bulgarian people shaking their head for "yes" and nodding for "no" is true but, with the influence of Western culture, ever rarer, and almost non-existent among the younger generation.
(The shaking and nodding are not identical to the Western gestures.
The "nod" for no is actually an upward movement of the head rather than a downward one, while the shaking of the head for yes is not completely horizontal, but also has a slight "wavy" aspect to it.)
**A dental click (similar to the English "tsk") also means "no" (informal), as does ъ-ъ (the only occurrence in Bulgarian of the glottal stop).
The two are often said with the upward 'nod'.
*Bulgarian has an extensive vocabulary covering family relationships.
The biggest range of words is for uncles and aunts, e.g. chicho (your father's brother), vuicho (your mother's brother), svako (your aunt's husband); an even larger number of synonyms for these three exists in the various dialects of Bulgarian, including kaleko, lelincho, tetin, etc.
The words do not only refer to the closest members of the family (such as brat - brother, but batko/bate - older brother, sestra - sister, but kaka - older sister), but extend to its furthest reaches, e.g. badzhanak from Turkish bacanak (the relationship of the husbands of two sisters to each other) and etarva (the relationships of two brothers' wives to each other).
For all in-laws, there are specific names, e.g. a woman's husband's brother is her dever and her husband's sister is her zalva.
In the traditional rural extended family before 1900, there existed separate subcategories for different brothers-in-law/sisters-in-law of a woman with regard to their age relative to hers, e.g. instead of simply a dever there could be a braino (older), a draginko (younger), or an ubavenkyo (who is still a child).
*As with many Slavic languages, the double negative in Bulgarian is grammatically correct, while some forms of it, when used instead of a single negative form, are grammatically incorrect.
The following are literal translations of grammatically correct Bulgarian sentences that utilize a double or multiple negation: "Никой никъде никога нищо не е направил."
(multiple negation without the use of a compound double negative form, i.e. using a listing of several successive single negation words) - "Nobody never nowhere nothing did not do." (translated as "nobody has ever done anything, anywhere"); "Никога не съм бил там."
(double negation without the use of a compound double negative form, i.e. using a listing of several successive single negation words) - I never did not go there ("I have never been there"); Никога никакви чувства не съм имал!
- I never no feelings had not have!
(I have never had any feelings!).
The same applies for Macedonian.
Vocabulary
Most of the vocabulary of modern Bulgarian consists of terms inherited from Proto-Slavic and local Bulgarian innovations and formations of those through the mediation of Old and Middle Bulgarian.
The native terms in Bulgarian account for 70% to 80% of the lexicon.
The remaining 25% to 30% are loanwords from a number of languages, as well as derivations of such words.
Bulgarian adopted also a few words of Thracian and Bulgar origin.
The languages which have contributed most to Bulgarian are Russian, French and to a lesser extent English and Ottoman Turkish.
Also Latin and Greek are the source of many words, used mostly in international terminology.
Many Latin terms entered the language through Romanian, Aromanian, and Megleno-Romanian during Bulgarian Empires , loanwords of Greek origin in Bulgarian are a product of the influence of the liturgical language of the Orthodox Church.
Many of the numerous loanwords from another Turkic language, Ottoman Turkish (and, via Ottoman Turkish, from Arabic and Persian) which were adopted into Bulgarian during the long period of Ottoman rule, have been replaced with native terms.
In addition, both specialized (usually coming from the field of science) and commonplace English words (notably abstract, commodity/service-related or technical terms) have also penetrated Bulgarian since the second half of the 20th century, especially since 1989.
A noteworthy portion of this English-derived terminology has attained some unique features in the process of its introduction to native speakers, and this has resulted in peculiar derivations that set the newly formed loanwords apart from the original words (mainly in pronunciation), although many loanwords are completely identical to the source words.
A growing number of international neologisms are also being widely adopted, causing controversy between younger generations who, in general, are raised in the era of digital globalization, and the older, more conservative educated purists.
Prior to standardization in the 19th century, after a period of Ottoman Turkish as a lingua franca for about 5 centuries, vernacular Bulgarian is estimated to have been consisted of 50% Ottoman vocabulary, which contained predominantly (up to 80%) Arabic and Persian words.
Notes
Bibliography
*Бояджиев и др.
Граматика на съвременния български книжовен език.
Том 1.
Фонетика
*Жобов, Владимир (2004) Звуковете в българския език
