The Central African Republic (CAR; Sango: Ködörösêse tî Bêafrîka ; , or ) is a landlocked country in Central Africa.
It is bordered by Chad to the north, Sudan to the northeast, South Sudan to the east, the Democratic Republic of the Congo to the south, the Republic of the Congo to the southwest and Cameroon to the west.
The CAR covers a land area of about and had an estimated population of around million .
, the CAR is the scene of a civil war, ongoing since 2012.
Most of the CAR consists of Sudano-Guinean savannas, but the country also includes a Sahelo-Sudanian zone in the north and an equatorial forest zone in the south.
Two thirds of the country is within the Ubangi River basin (which flows into the Congo), while the remaining third lies in the basin of the Chari, which flows into Lake Chad.
What is today the Central African Republic has been inhabited for millennia; however, the country's current borders were established by France, which ruled the country as a colony starting in the late 19th century.
After gaining independence from France in 1960, the Central African Republic was ruled by a series of autocratic leaders, including an abortive attempt at a monarchy; by the 1990s, calls for democracy led to the first multi-party democratic elections in 1993.
Ange-Félix Patassé became president, but was later removed by General François Bozizé in the 2003 coup.
The Central African Republic Bush War began in 2004 and, despite a peace treaty in 2007 and another in 2011, civil war resumed in 2012.
Despite its significant mineral deposits and other resources, such as uranium reserves, crude oil, gold, diamonds, cobalt, lumber, and hydropower, , according to the Human Development Index (HDI), the country had the second lowest level of human development, ranking 188th out of 189 countries.
as well as the worst country in which to be young.
The Central African Republic is a member of the United Nations, the African Union, the Economic Community of Central African States, the Organisation internationale de la Francophonie and the Non-Aligned Movement.
History
Early history
Approximately 10,000 years ago, desertification forced hunter-gatherer societies south into the Sahel regions of northern Central Africa, where some groups settled.
Farming began as part of the Neolithic Revolution.
Initial farming of white yam progressed into millet and sorghum, and before 3000 BC the domestication of African oil palm improved the groups' nutrition and allowed for expansion of the local populations.
This Agricultural Revolution, combined with a "Fish-stew Revolution", in which fishing began to take place, and the use of boats, allowed for the transportation of goods.
Products were often moved in ceramic pots, which are the first known examples of artistic expression from the region's inhabitants.
The Bouar Megaliths in the western region of the country indicate an advanced level of habitation dating back to the very late Neolithic Era (c. 3500-2700 BC).
Ironworking arrived in the region around 1000 BC.
Central Sudanic-speaking people settled along the Ubangi River in what is today Central and East CAR.
while Bantoid peoples migrated from the southwest from Cameroon.
Bananas arrived in the region and added an important source of carbohydrates to the diet; they were also used in the production of alcoholic beverages.
Production of copper, salt, dried fish, and textiles dominated the economic trade in the Central African region.
16th-19th century
During the 16th and 17th centuries slave traders began to raid the region as part of the expansion of the Saharan and Nile River slave routes.
Their captives were enslaved and shipped to the Mediterranean coast, Europe, Arabia, the Western Hemisphere, or to the slave ports and factories along the West and North Africa or South along the Ubanqui and Congo rivers.
In the mid 19th century, the Bobangi people became major slave traders and sold their captives to the Americas using the Ubangi river to reach the coast.
During the 18th century Bandia-Nzakara peoples established the Bangassou Kingdom along the Ubangi River.
Europeans, primarily the French, Germans, and Belgians, arrived in the area in 1885.
France seized and colonized Ubangi-Shari territory in 1894.
In 1911 at the Treaty of Fez, France ceded a nearly 300,000 km² portion of the Sangha and Lobaye basins to the German Empire which ceded a smaller area (in present-day Chad) to France.
After World War I France again annexed the territory.
Modeled on King Leopold's Congo Free State, concessions were doled out to private companies that endeavored to strip the region's assets as quickly and cheaply as possible before depositing a percentage of their profits into the French treasury.
The concessionary companies forced local people to harvest rubber, coffee, and other commodities without pay and held their families hostage until they met their quotas.
Between 1890, a year after the French first arrived, and 1940, the population declined by half due to diseases, famine and exploitation by private companies.
In 1920 French Equatorial Africa was established and Ubangi-Shari was administered from Brazzaville.
During the 1920s and 1930s the French introduced a policy of mandatory cotton cultivation, In 1928, a major insurrection, the Kongo-Wara rebellion or 'war of the hoe handle', broke out in Western Ubangi-Shari and continued for several years.
The extent of this insurrection, which was perhaps the largest anti-colonial rebellion in Africa during the interwar years, was carefully hidden from the French public because it provided evidence of strong opposition to French colonial rule and forced labor.
In September 1940, during the Second World War, pro-Gaullist French officers took control of Ubangi-Shari and General Leclerc established his headquarters for the Free French Forces in (Mouvement pour l'évolution sociale de l'Afrique noire, MESAN) in 1950.
Since independence (1960-present)
In the Ubangi-Shari Territorial Assembly election in 1957, MESAN captured 347,000 out of the total 356,000 votes, and won every legislative seat, which led to Boganda being elected president of the Grand Council of French Equatorial Africa and vice-president of the Ubangi-Shari Government Council.
Within a year, he declared the establishment of the Central African Republic and served as the country's first prime minister.
MESAN continued to exist, but its role was limited.
After Boganda's death in a plane crash on 29 March 1959, his cousin, David Dacko, took control of MESAN and became the country's first president after the CAR had formally received independence from France.
Dacko threw out his political rivals, including former Prime Minister and Mouvement d'évolution démocratique de l'Afrique centrale (MEDAC), leader Abel Goumba, whom he forced into exile in France.
With all opposition parties suppressed by November 1962, Dacko declared MESAN as the official party of the state.
Bokassa and the Central African Empire (1965-1979)
On 31 December 1965, Dacko was overthrown in the Saint-Sylvestre coup d'état by Colonel Jean-Bédel Bokassa, who suspended the constitution and dissolved the National Assembly.
President Bokassa declared himself President for Life in 1972, and named himself Emperor Bokassa I of the Central African Empire (as the country was renamed) on 4 December 1976.
A year later, Emperor Bokassa crowned himself in a lavish and expensive ceremony that was ridiculed by much of the world.
In September 1979, France overthrew Bokassa and restored Dacko to power (subsequently restoring the name of the country and the original government to the Central African Republic).
Dacko, in turn, was again overthrown in a coup by General André Kolingba on 1 September 1981.
Central African Republic under Kolingba
Kolingba suspended the constitution and ruled with a military junta until 1985.
He introduced a new constitution in 1986 which was adopted by a nationwide referendum.
Membership in his new party, the Rassemblement Démocratique Centrafricain (RDC), was voluntary.
In 1987 and 1988, semi-free elections to parliament were held, but Kolingba's two major political opponents, Abel Goumba and Ange-Félix Patassé, were not allowed to participate.
By 1990, inspired by the fall of the Berlin Wall, a pro-democracy movement arose.
Pressure from the United States, France, and from a group of locally represented countries and agencies called GIBAFOR (France, the US, Germany, Japan, the EU, the World Bank, and the UN) finally led Kolingba to agree, in principle, to hold free elections in October 1992 with help from the UN Office of Electoral Affairs.
After using the excuse of alleged irregularities to suspend the results of the elections as a pretext for holding on to power, President Kolingba came under intense pressure from GIBAFOR to establish a "Conseil National Politique Provisoire de la République" (Provisional National Political Council, CNPPR) and to set up a "Mixed Electoral Commission", which included representatives from all political parties.
In the aftermath of the failed coup, militias loyal to Patassé sought revenge against rebels in many neighborhoods of Bangui and incited unrest including the murder of many political opponents.
Eventually, Patassé came to suspect that General François Bozizé was involved in another coup attempt against him, which led Bozizé to flee with loyal troops to Chad.
In March 2003, Bozizé launched a surprise attack against Patassé, who was out of the country.
Libyan troops and some 1,000 soldiers of Bemba's Congolese rebel organization failed to stop the rebels and Bozizé's forces succeeded in overthrowing Patassé.
Civil wars
François Bozizé suspended the constitution and named a new cabinet, which included most opposition parties.
Abel Goumba was named vice-president, which gave Bozizé's new government a positive image.
Bozizé established a broad-based National Transition Council to draft a new constitution, and announced that he would step down and run for office once the new constitution was approved.
In 2004, the Central African Republic Bush War began, as forces opposed to Bozizé took up arms against his government.
In May 2005, Bozizé won the presidential election, which excluded Patassé, and in 2006 fighting continued between the government and the rebels.
In November 2006, Bozizé's government requested French military support to help them repel rebels who had taken control of towns in the country's northern regions.
Though the initially public details of the agreement pertained to logistics and intelligence, the French assistance eventually included strikes by Dassault Mirage 2000 fighters against rebel positions.
The Syrte Agreement in February and the Birao Peace Agreement in April 2007 called for a cessation of hostilities, the billeting of FDPC fighters and their integration with FACA, the liberation of political prisoners, integration of FDPC into government, an amnesty for the UFDR, its recognition as a political party, and the integration of its fighters into the national army.
Several groups continued to fight but other groups signed on to the agreement, or similar agreements with the government (e.g. UFR on 15 December 2008).
The only major group not to sign an agreement at the time was the CPJP, which continued its activities and signed a peace agreement with the government on 25 August 2012.
In 2011, Bozizé was reelected in an election which was widely considered fraudulent.
Michel Djotodia took over as president.
Prime Minister Nicolas Tiangaye requested a UN peacekeeping force from the UN Security Council and on 31 May former President Bozizé was indicted for crimes against humanity and incitement of genocide.
By the end of the year there were international warnings of a "genocide" and fighting was largely from reprisal attacks on civilians from Seleka's predominantly Muslim fighters and Christian militias called "anti-balaka."
French President François Hollande called on the UN Security Council and African Union to increase their efforts to stabilize the country.
On 18 February 2014, United Nations Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon called on the UN Security Council to immediately deploy 3,000 troops to the country, bolstering the 6,000 African Union soldiers and 2,000 French troops already in the country, to combat civilians being murdered in large numbers.
The Séléka government was said to be divided.
and in September 2013, Djotodia officially disbanded Seleka, but many rebels refused to disarm, becoming known as ex-Seleka, and veered further out of government control.
It is argued that the focus of the initial disarmament efforts exclusively on the Seleka inadvertently handed the anti-Balaka the upper hand, leading to the forced displacement of Muslim civilians by anti-Balaka in Bangui and western CAR.
Catherine Samba-Panza was elected as interim president by the National Transitional Council, becoming the first ever female Central African president.
On 23 July 2014, following Congolese mediation efforts, Séléka and anti-balaka representatives signed a ceasefire agreement in .
Geography
The Central African Republic is a landlocked nation within the interior of the African continent.
It is bordered by Cameroon, Chad, Sudan, South Sudan, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, and the Republic of the Congo.
The country lies between latitudes 2° and 11°N, and longitudes 14° and 28°E.
Much of the country consists of flat or rolling plateau savanna approximately above sea level.
Most of the northern half lies within the World Wildlife Fund's East Sudanian savanna ecoregion.
In addition to the Fertit Hills in the northeast of the CAR, there are scattered hills in the southwest regions.
In the northwest is the Yade Massif, a granite plateau with an altitude of .
At , the Central African Republic is the world's 45th-largest country.
It is comparable in size to Ukraine.
Much of the southern border is formed by tributaries of the Congo River; the Mbomou River in the east merges with the Uele River to form the Ubangi River, which also comprises portions of the southern border.
The Sangha River flows through some of the western regions of the country, while the eastern border lies along the edge of the Nile River watershed.
It has been estimated that up to 8% of the country is covered by forest, with the densest parts generally located in the southern regions.
The forests are highly diverse and include commercially important species of Ayous, Sapelli and Sipo.
The deforestation rate is about 0.4% per annum, and lumber poaching is commonplace.
In 2008, Central African Republic was the world's least light pollution affected country.
The Central African Republic is the focal point of the Bangui Magnetic Anomaly, one of the largest magnetic anomalies on Earth.
Wildlife
In the southwest, the Dzanga-Sangha National Park is located in a rain forest area.
The country is noted for its population of forest elephants and western lowland gorillas.
In the north, the Manovo-Gounda St Floris National Park is well-populated with wildlife, including leopards, lions, cheetahs and rhinos, and the Bamingui-Bangoran National Park is located in the northeast of CAR.
The parks have been seriously affected by the activities of poachers, particularly those from Sudan, over the past two decades.
Climate
The climate of the Central African Republic is generally tropical, with a wet season that lasts from June to September in the northern regions of the country, and from May to October in the south.
During the wet season, rainstorms are an almost daily occurrence, and early morning fog is commonplace.
Maximum annual precipitation is approximately in the upper Ubangi region.
The northern areas are hot and humid from February to May, but can be subject to the hot, dry, and dusty trade wind known as the Harmattan.
The southern regions have a more equatorial climate, but they are subject to desertification, while the extreme northeast regions of the country are already desert.
Prefectures and sub-prefectures
The Central African Republic is divided into 16 administrative prefectures (préfectures), two of which are economic prefectures (préfectures economiques), and one an autonomous commune; the prefectures are further divided into 71 sub-prefectures (sous-préfectures).
The prefectures are Bamingui-Bangoran, Basse-Kotto, Haute-Kotto, Haut-Mbomou, Kémo, Lobaye, Mambéré-Kadéï, Mbomou, Nana-Mambéré, Ombella-M'Poko, Ouaka, Ouham, Ouham-Pendé and Vakaga.
The economic prefectures are Nana-Grébizi and Sangha-Mbaéré, while the commune is the capital city of Bangui.
Demographics
The population of the Central African Republic has almost quadrupled since independence.
In 1960, the population was 1,232,000; as of a UN estimate, it is approximately .
The United Nations estimates that approximately 4% of the population aged between 15 and 49 is HIV positive.
Only 3% of the country has antiretroviral therapy available, compared to a 17% coverage in the neighbouring countries of Chad and the Republic of the Congo.
The nation is divided into over 80 ethnic groups, each having its own language.
The largest ethnic groups are the Baggara Arabs, Baka, Banda, Bayaka, Fula, Gbaya, Kara, Kresh, Mbaka, Mandja, Ngbandi, Sara, Vidiri, Wodaabe, Yakoma, Yulu, Zande, with others including Europeans of mostly French descent.
Religion
According to the 2003 national census, 80.3% of the population was Christian-51.4% Protestant and 28.9% Roman Catholic-, 10% is Muslim and 4.5 percent other religious groups, with 5.5 percent having no religious beliefs.
More recent work from the Pew Research Center estimated that, as of 2010, Christians constituted 89.8% of the population (with Protestantism at 60.7% and Catholicism 28.5%) while Muslims make up 8.9%.
The Catholic Church claims over 1.5 million adherents, approximately one-third of the population.
Indigenous belief (animism) is also practiced, and many indigenous beliefs are incorporated into Christian and Islamic practice.
A UN director described religious tensions between Muslims and Christians as being high.
There are many missionary groups operating in the country, including Lutherans, Baptists, Catholics, Grace Brethren, and Jehovah's Witnesses.
While these missionaries are predominantly from the United States, France, Italy, and Spain, many are also from Nigeria, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, and other African countries.
Large numbers of missionaries left the country when fighting broke out between rebel and government forces in 2002-3, but many of them have now returned to continue their work.
According to Overseas Development Institute research, during the crisis ongoing since 2012, religious leaders have mediated between communities and armed groups; they also provided refuge for people seeking shelter.
Languages
The Central African Republic's two official languages are French and Sango (also spelled Sangho), a creole developed as an inter-ethnic lingua franca based on the local Ngbandi language.
CAR is one of the few African countries to have an African language as their official language.
Culture
Media
Sports
Basketball is the country's most popular sport and a good way to connect with its people.
Its national team won the African Championship twice and was the first Sub-Saharan African team to qualify for the Basketball World Cup.
The country also has a national football team, which is governed by the Central African Football Federation, and stages matches at the Barthélemy Boganda Stadium.
Government and politics
Politics in the Central African Republic formally take place in a framework of a semi-presidential republic.
In this system, the President is the head of state, with a Prime Minister as head of government.
Executive power is exercised by the government.
Legislative power is vested in both the government and parliament.
Changes in government have occurred in recent years by three methods: violence, negotiations, and elections.
A new constitution was approved by voters in a referendum held on 5 December 2004.
The government was rated 'Partly Free' from 1991 to 2001 and from 2004 to 2013.
Executive branch
The president is elected by popular vote for a six-year term, and the prime minister is appointed by the president.
The president also appoints and presides over the Council of Ministers, which initiates laws and oversees government operations.
However, as of 2018 the official government is not in control of large parts of the country, which are governed by rebel groups.
Acting president since April 2016 is Faustin Archange Touadera who followed the interim government under Catherine Samba-Panza, interim prime minister André Nzapayeké.
Legislative branch
The National Assembly (Assemblée Nationale) has 105 members, elected for a five-year term using the two-round (or Run-off) system.
Judicial branch
As in many other former French colonies, the Central African Republic's legal system is based on French law.
The Supreme Court, or Cour Supreme, is made up of judges appointed by the president.
There is also a Constitutional Court, and its judges are also appointed by the president.
Foreign relations
The Central African Republic relies heavily on Russian mercenaries for the protection of its diamond mines.
Foreign aid and UN Involvement
The Central African Republic is heavily dependent upon foreign aid and numerous NGOs provide services that the government does not provide.
In 2006, due to ongoing violence, over 50,000 people in the country's northwest were at risk of starvation but this was averted due to assistance from the United Nations.
On 8 January 2008, the UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-Moon declared that the Central African Republic was eligible to receive assistance from the Peacebuilding Fund.
Three priority areas were identified: first, the reform of the security sector; second, the promotion of good governance and the rule of law; and third, the revitalization of communities affected by conflicts.
On 12 June 2008, the Central African Republic requested assistance from the UN Peacebuilding Commission, which was set up in 2005 to help countries emerging from conflict avoid devolving back into war or chaos.
In response to concerns of a potential genocide, a peacekeeping force - the International Support Mission to the Central African Republic (MISCA) - was authorized in December 2013.
This African Union force of 6,000 personnel was accompanied by the French Operation Sangaris.
Economy
The per capita income of the Republic is often listed as being approximately $400 a year, one of the lowest in the world, but this figure is based mostly on reported sales of exports and largely ignores the unregistered sale of foods, locally produced alcoholic beverages, diamonds, ivory, bushmeat, and traditional medicine.
The currency of Central African Republic is the CFA franc, which is accepted across the former countries of French West Africa and trades at a fixed rate to the euro.
Diamonds constitute the country's most important export, accounting for 40-55% of export revenues, but it is estimated that between 30% and 50% of those produced each year leave the country clandestinely.
Agriculture is dominated by the cultivation and sale of food crops such as cassava, peanuts, maize, sorghum, millet, sesame, and plantain.
The annual real GDP growth rate is just above 3%.
The importance of food crops over exported cash crops is indicated by the fact that the total production of cassava, the staple food of most Central Africans, ranges between 200,000 and 300,000 tonnes a year, while the production of cotton, the principal exported cash crop, ranges from 25,000 to 45,000 tonnes a year.
Food crops are not exported in large quantities, but still constitute the principal cash crops of the country, because Central Africans derive far more income from the periodic sale of surplus food crops than from exported cash crops such as cotton or coffee.
Much of the country is self-sufficient in food crops; however, livestock development is hindered by the presence of the tsetse fly.
The Republic's primary import partner is the Netherlands (19.5%).
Other imports come from Cameroon (9.7%), France (9.3%), and South Korea (8.7%).
Its largest export partner is Belgium (31.5%), followed by China (27.7%), the Democratic Republic of Congo (8.6%), Indonesia (5.2%), and France (4.5%).
Infrastructure
Transportation
Bangui is the transport hub of the Central African Republic.
As of 1999, eight roads connected the city to other main towns in the country, Cameroon, Chad and South Sudan; of these, only the toll roads are paved.
During the rainy season from July to October, some roads are impassable.
River ferries sail from the river port at Bangui to Brazzaville and Zongo.
The river can be navigated most of the year between Bangui and Brazzaville.
From Brazzaville, goods are transported by rail to Pointe-Noire, Congo's Atlantic port.
The river port handles the overwhelming majority of the country's international trade and has a cargo handling capacity of 350,000 tons; it has length of wharfs and of warehousing space.
Energy
The Central African Republic primarily uses hydroelectricity as there are few other resources for energy and power.
Communications
Presently, the Central African Republic has active television services, radio stations, internet service providers, and mobile phone carriers; Socatel is the leading provider for both internet and mobile phone access throughout the country.
The primary governmental regulating bodies of telecommunications are the Ministère des Postes and Télécommunications et des Nouvelles Technologies.
In addition, the Central African Republic receives international support on telecommunication related operations from ITU Telecommunication Development Sector (ITU-D) within the International Telecommunication Union to improve infrastructure.
Education
Public education in the Central African Republic is free and is compulsory from ages 6 to 14.
However, approximately half of the adult population of the country is illiterate.
Higher education
The University of Bangui, a public university located in Bangui, includes a medical school, and Euclid University, an international university in Bangui, are the two institutions of higher education in the Central African Republic.
Healthcare
The largest hospitals in the country are located in the Bangui district.
As a member of the World Health Organization, the Central African Republic receives vaccination assistance, such as a 2014 intervention for the prevention of a measles epidemic.
In 2007, female life expectancy at birth was 48.2 years and male life expectancy at birth was 45.1 years.
Women's health is poor in the Central African Republic.
, the country had the 4th highest maternal mortality rate in the world.
The total fertility rate in 2014 was estimated at 4.46 children born/woman.
Many births in the country are guided by traditional birth attendants, who often have little or no formal training.
Malaria is endemic in the Central African Republic, and one of the leading causes of death.
According to 2009 estimates, the HIV/AIDS prevalence rate is about 4.7% of the adult population (ages 15-49).
This is in general agreement with the 2016 United Nations estimate of approximately 4%.
Government expenditure on health was US$20 (PPP) per person in 2006
Human rights
The 2009 Human Rights Report by the United States Department of State noted that human rights in CAR were poor and expressed concerns over numerous government abuses.
The U.S. State Department alleged that major human rights abuses such as extrajudicial executions by security forces, torture, beatings and rape of suspects and prisoners occurred with impunity.
It also alleged harsh and life-threatening conditions in prisons and detention centers, arbitrary arrest, prolonged pretrial detention and denial of a fair trial, restrictions on freedom of movement, official corruption, and restrictions on workers' rights.
Freedom of movement is limited in the northern part of the country "because of actions by state security forces, armed bandits, and other nonstate armed entities", and due to fighting between government and anti-government forces, many persons have been internally displaced.
Violence against children and women in relation to accusations of witchcraft has also been cited as a serious problem in the country.
Witchcraft is a criminal offense under the penal code.
and the United Nations' Human Development Index ranked the country 188 out of 188 countries surveyed.
The Bureau of International Labor Affairs has also mentioned it in its last edition of the List of Goods Produced by Child Labor or Forced Labor.
Bibliography
* Balogh, Besenyo, Miletics, Vogel: https:/ 24965665/La_R%C3%A9publique_Centrafricaine La République Centrafricaine
Further reading
* Doeden, Matt, Central African Republic in Pictures (Twentyfirst Century Books, 2009).
* Petringa, Maria, Brazza, A Life for Africa (2006). .
* Titley, Brian, Dark Age: The Political Odyssey of Emperor Bokassa, 2002.
* Woodfrok, Jacqueline, Culture and Customs of the Central African Republic (Greenwood Press, 2006).
