The Wonderful Wizard of Oz () is an American children's novel written by author L. Frank Baum and illustrated by W.W. Denslow, originally published by the George M. Hill Company in Chicago on May 17, 1900.
It has since seen several reprints, most often under the title The Wizard of Oz, which is the title of the popular 1902 Broadway musical adaptation as well as the iconic 1939 live-action film.
The story chronicles the adventures of a young farm girl named Dorothy in the magical Land of Oz, after she and her pet dog Toto are swept away from their Kansas home by a cyclone.
The book is one of the best-known stories in American literature and has been widely translated.
The Library of Congress has declared it "America's greatest and best-loved homegrown fairytale."
Its groundbreaking success and the success of the Broadway musical adapted from the novel led Baum to write thirteen additional Oz books that serve as official sequels to the first story.
Baum dedicated the book "to my good friend & comrade, My Wife," Maud Gage Baum.
In January 1901, George M. Hill Company completed printing the first edition, a total of 10,000 copies, which quickly sold out.
It sold three million copies by the time it entered the public domain in 1956.
Publication
The book was published by Serenity N N potteiger.
The first edition had a printing of 10,000 copies and was sold in advance of the publication date of September 1, 1900.
On May 17, 1900, the first copy came off the press; Baum assembled it by hand and presented it to his sister, Mary Louise Baum Brewster.
The public saw it for the first time at a book fair at the Palmer House in Chicago, July 5-20.
Its copyright was registered on August 1; full distribution followed in September.
By October 1900, it had already sold out and the second edition of 15,000 copies was nearly depleted.
In a letter to his brother, Harry, Baum wrote that the book's publisher, George M. Hill, predicted a sale of about 250,000 copies.
In spite of this favorable conjecture, Hill did not initially predict that the book would be phenomenally successful.
He agreed to publish the book only when the manager of the Chicago Grand Opera House, Fred R. Hamlin, committed to making it into a musical stage play to publicize the novel.
The play The Wizard of Oz debuted on June 16, 1902.
It was revised to suit adult preferences and was crafted as a "musical extravaganza," with the costumes modeled after Denslow's drawings.
Hill's publishing company became bankrupt in 1901, so Baum and Denslow agreed to have the Indianapolis-based Bobbs-Merrill Company resume publishing the novel.
Baum's son, Harry Neal, told the Chicago Tribune in 1944 that Baum told his children "whimsical stories before they became material for his books."
Harry called his father the "swellest man I knew," a man who was able to give a decent reason as to why black birds cooked in a pie could afterwards get out and sing.
By 1938, more than one million copies of the book had been printed.
By 1956, the sales of it had grown to three million copies in print.
ΑPlot
Plot
Dorothy is a young girl who lives with her Aunt Em, Uncle Henry, and dog, Toto, on a farm on the Kansas prairie.
One day, she and Toto are caught up in a cyclone that deposits them and the farmhouse into Munchkin Country in the magical Land of Oz.
The falling house has killed the Wicked Witch of the East, the evil ruler of the Munchkins.
The Good Witch of the North arrives with three grateful Munchkins and gives Dorothy the magical silver shoes that once belonged to the Wicked Witch.
The Good Witch tells Dorothy that the only way she can return home is to follow the yellow brick road to the Emerald City and ask the great and powerful Wizard of Oz to help her.
As Dorothy embarks on her journey, the Good Witch of the North kisses her on the forehead, giving her magical protection from harm.
On her way down the yellow brick road, Dorothy attends a banquet held by a Munchkin named Boq.
The next day, she frees a Scarecrow from the pole on which he is hanging, applies oil from a can to the rusted joints of a Tin Woodman, and meets a Cowardly Lion.
The Scarecrow wants a brain, the Tin Woodman wants a heart, and the Cowardly Lion wants courage, so Dorothy encourages them to journey with her and Toto to the Emerald City to ask for help from the Wizard.
After several adventures, the travelers arrive at the Emerald City and meet the Guardian of the Gates, who asks them to wear green tinted spectacles to keep their eyes from being blinded by the city's brilliance.
Each one is called to see the Wizard.
He appears to Dorothy as a giant head, to the Scarecrow as a lovely lady, to the Tin Woodman as a terrible beast, and to the Cowardly Lion as a ball of fire.
He agrees to help them all if they kill the Wicked Witch of the West, who rules over Winkie Country.
The Guardian warns them that no one has ever managed to defeat the witch.
The Wicked Witch of the West sees the travelers approaching with her one telescopic eye.
She sends a pack of wolves to tear them to pieces, but the Tin Woodman kills them with his axe.
She sends wild crows to peck their eyes out, but the Scarecrow kills them by breaking their necks.
She summons a swarm of black bees to sting them, but they are killed while trying to sting the Tin Woodman while the Scarecrow's straw hides the others.
She sends a dozen of her Winkie slaves to attack them, but the Cowardly Lion stands firm to repel them.
Finally, she uses the power of her Golden Cap to send the Winged Monkeys to capture Dorothy, Toto, and the Cowardly Lion, unstuff the Scarecrow, and dent the Tin Woodman.
Dorothy is forced to become the witch's personal slave, while the witch schemes to steal her silver shoes.
The witch successfully tricks Dorothy out of one of her silver shoes.
Angered, she throws a bucket of water at the witch and is shocked to see her melt away.
The Winkies rejoice at being freed from her tyranny and help restuff the Scarecrow and mend the Tin Woodman.
They ask the Tin Woodman to become their ruler, which he agrees to do after helping Dorothy return to Kansas.
Dorothy finds the witch's Golden Cap and summons the Winged Monkeys to carry her and her friends back to the Emerald City.
The King of the Winged Monkeys tells how he and his band are bound by an enchantment to the cap by the sorceress Gayelette from the North, and that Dorothy may use it to summon them two more times.
When Dorothy and her friends meet the Wizard of Oz again, Toto tips over a screen in a corner of the throne room that reveals the Wizard.
He sadly explains he is a humbug-an ordinary old man who, by a hot air balloon, came to Oz long ago from Omaha.
He provides the Scarecrow with a head full of bran, pins, and needles ("a lot of bran-new brains"), the Tin Woodman with a silk heart stuffed with sawdust, and the Cowardly Lion a potion of "courage".
Their faith in his power gives these items a focus for their desires.
He decides to take Dorothy and Toto home and then go back to Omaha in his balloon.
At the send-off, he appoints the Scarecrow to rule in his stead, which he agrees to do after helping Dorothy return to Kansas.
Toto chases a kitten in the crowd and Dorothy goes after him, but the ropes holding the balloon break and the Wizard floats away.
Dorothy summons the Winged Monkeys and tells them to carry her and Toto home, but they explain they can't cross the desert surrounding Oz.
The Soldier with the Green Whiskers informs Dorothy that Glinda, the Good Witch of the South may be able to help her return home, so the travelers begin their journey to see Glinda's castle in Quadling Country.
On the way, the Lion kills a giant spider who is terrorizing the animals in a forest.
They ask him to become their king, which he agrees to do after helping Dorothy return to Kansas.
Dorothy summons the Winged Monkeys a third time to fly them over a hill to Glinda's castle.
Glinda greets them and reveals that Dorothy's silver shoes can take her anywhere she wishes to go.
She embraces her friends, all of whom will be returned to their new kingdoms through Glinda's three uses of the Golden Cap: the Scarecrow to the Emerald City, the Tin Woodman to Winkie Country, and the Lion to the forest; after which the cap will be given to the King of the Winged Monkeys, freeing him and his band.
Dorothy takes Toto in her arms, knocks her heels together three times, and wishes to return home.
Instantly, she begins whirling through the air and rolling on the grass of the Kansas prairie, up to the farmhouse.
She runs to Aunt Em, saying "I'm so glad to be home again!"
Illustration and design
The book was illustrated by Baum's friend and collaborator W. W. Denslow, who also co-held the copyright.
The design was lavish for the time, with illustrations on many pages, backgrounds in different colors, and several color plate illustrations.
In September 1900, The Grand Rapids Herald wrote that Denslow's illustrations are "quite as much of the story as in the writing".
The editorial opined that had it not been for Denslow's pictures, the readers would be unable to picture precisely the figures of Dorothy, Toto, and the other characters.
The distinctive look led to imitators at the time, most notably Eva Katherine Gibson's Zauberlinda, the Wise Witch, which mimicked both the typography and the illustration design of Oz.
The typeface was the newly designed Monotype Old Style.
Denslow's illustrations were so well known that merchants of many products obtained permission to use them to promote their wares.
The forms of the Scarecrow, the Tin Woodman, the Cowardly Lion, the Wizard, and Dorothy were made into rubber and metal sculptures.
Costume jewelry, mechanical toys, and soap were also designed using their figures.
A new edition of the book appeared in 1944, with illustrations by Evelyn Copelman.
Although it was claimed that the new illustrations were based on Denslow's originals, they more closely resemble the characters as seen in the famous 1939 film version of Baum's book.
Sources of images and ideas
Baum acknowledged the influence of the Brothers Grimm and Hans Christian Andersen, which he was deliberately revising in his "American fairy tales" to include the wonder without the horrors.
The Land of Oz and other locations
Local legend has it that Oz, also known as The Emerald City, was inspired by a prominent castle-like building in the community of Castle Park near Holland, Michigan, where Baum lived during the summer.
The yellow brick road was derived from a road at that time paved by yellow bricks, located in Peekskill, New York, where Baum attended the Peekskill Military Academy.
Baum scholars often refer to the 1893 Chicago World's Fair (the "White City") as an inspiration for the Emerald City.
Other legends suggest that the inspiration came from the Hotel Del Coronado near San Diego, California.
Baum was a frequent guest at the hotel and had written several of the Oz books there.
In a 1903 interview with Publishers Weekly, Baum said that the name "OZ" came from his file cabinet labeled "O-Z".
Some critics have suggested that Baum may have been inspired by Australia, a relatively new country at the time of the book's original publication.
Australia is often colloquially spelled or referred to as "Oz".
Furthermore, in Ozma of Oz (1907), Dorothy gets back to Oz as the result of a storm at sea while she and Uncle Henry are traveling by ship to Australia.
Like Australia, Oz is an island continent somewhere to the west of California with inhabited regions bordering on a great desert.
One might imagine that Baum intended Oz to be Australia, or perhaps a magical land in the center of the great Australian desert.
Alice's Adventures in Wonderland
Another influence lay in Lewis Carroll's Alice's Adventures in Wonderland.
A September 1900 review in the Grand Rapids Herald called The Wonderful Wizard of Oz a "veritable Alice in Wonderland brought up to the present day standard of juvenile literature".
American fantasy story
The Wonderful Wizard of Oz is considered by some to be the first American fairy tale because of its references to clear American locations such as Kansas and Omaha.
Baum agreed with authors such as Carroll that fantasy literature was important for children, along with numerous illustrations, but he also wanted to create a story that had recognizable American elements in it, such as farming and industrialization.
While that sentiment is worthy, it overlooks several American fairy tales written by Washington Irving about the Catskills region of New York State.
Stories such as "Rip Van Winkle", published in 1819, and "The Legend of Sleepy Hollow", published in 1820, predate the Oz tales by several decades.
Baum's personal life
Many of the characters, props, and ideas in the novel were drawn from Baum's experiences.
As a child, Baum frequently had nightmares of a scarecrow pursuing him across a field.
Moments before the scarecrow's "ragged hay fingers" nearly gripped his neck, it would fall apart before his eyes.
Decades later, as an adult, Baum integrated his tormentor into the novel as the Scarecrow.
According to his son Harry, the Tin Woodman was born from Baum's attraction to window displays.
He wished to make something captivating for the window displays, so he used an eclectic assortment of scraps to craft a striking figure.
From a washboiler he made a body, from bolted stovepipes he made arms and legs, and from the bottom of a saucepan he made a face.
Baum then placed a funnel hat on the figure, which ultimately became the Tin Woodman.
John D. Rockefeller was the nemesis of Baum's father, an oil baron who declined to purchase Standard Oil shares in exchange for selling his own oil refinery.
Baum scholar Evan I. Schwartz posited that Rockefeller inspired one of the Wizard's numerous faces.
In one scene in the novel, the Wizard is seen as a "tyrannical, hairless head".
When Rockefeller was 54 years old, the medical condition alopecia caused him to lose every strand of hair on his head, making people fearful of speaking to him.
In the early 1880s, Baum's play Matches was being performed when a "flicker from a kerosene lantern sparked the rafters", causing the Baum opera house to be consumed by flames.
Scholar Evan I. Schwartz suggested that this might have inspired the Scarecrow's severest terror: "There is only one thing in the world I am afraid of.
A lighted match."
In 1890, Baum lived in Aberdeen, Dakota Territory, which was experiencing a drought, and he wrote a witty story in his "Our Landlady" column in Aberdeen's The Saturday Pioneer about a farmer who gave green goggles to his horses, causing them to believe that the wood chips that they were eating were pieces of grass.
Similarly, the Wizard made the people in the Emerald City wear green goggles so that they would believe that their city was built from emeralds.
During Baum's short stay in Aberdeen, the dissemination of myths about the plentiful West continued.
However, the West, instead of being a wonderland, turned into a wasteland because of a drought and a depression.
In 1891, Baum moved his family from South Dakota to Chicago.
At that time, Chicago was getting ready for the World's Columbian Exposition in 1893.
Scholar Laura Barrett stated that Chicago was "considerably more akin to Oz than to Kansas".
After discovering that the myths about the West's incalculable riches were baseless, Baum created "an extension of the American frontier in Oz".
In many respects, Baum's creation is similar to the actual frontier save for the fact that the West was still undeveloped at the time.
The Munchkins Dorothy encounters at the beginning of the novel represent farmers, as do the Winkies she later meets.
Baum's wife frequently visited her niece, Dorothy Louise Gage.
The infant became gravely sick and died on November 11, 1898, from "congestion of the brain" at exactly five months.
When the baby, whom Maud adored as the daughter she never had, died, she was devastated and needed to consume medicine.
To assuage her distress, Frank made his protagonist of The Wonderful Wizard of Oz a female named Dorothy.
Uncle Henry was modeled after Henry Gage, his wife Maud's father.
Bossed around by his wife Matilda, Henry rarely dissented with her.
He flourished in business, though, and his neighbors looked up to him.
Likewise, Uncle Henry was a "passive but hard-working man" who "looked stern and solemn, and rarely spoke".
The witches in the novel were influenced by witch-hunting research gathered by Baum's mother-in-law, Matilda.
The stories of barbarous acts against accused witches scared Baum.
Two key events in the novel involve wicked witches who both meet their death through metaphorical means.
Baum held different jobs, moved a lot, and was exposed to many people, so the inspiration for the story could have been taken from many different aspects of his life.
In the introduction to the story, Baum writes that "it aspires to being a modernized fairy tale, in which the wonderment and joy are retained and the heart-aches and nightmares are left out."
This is one of the explanations that he gives for the inspiration for The Wonderful Wizard of Oz.
Baum, a former salesman of china, wrote in about china that had sprung to life.
Allusions to 19th-century America
Baum did not offer any conclusive proof that he intended his novel to be a political allegory.
Historian Ranjit S. Dighe wrote that for 60 years after the book's publication, "virtually nobody" had such an interpretation until Henry Littlefield, a high-school teacher.
In his 1964 American Quarterly article, "The Wizard of Oz: Parable on Populism", Littlefield posited that the book contained an allegory of the late 19th-century bimetallism debate regarding monetary policy.
Littlefield's thesis achieved some support, but has been strenuously attacked by others.
Cultural impact
The Wonderful Wizard of Oz has become an established part of multiple cultures, spreading from its early young American readership to becoming known throughout the world.
It has been translated or adapted into well over fifty languages, at times being modified in local variations.
For instance, in some abridged Indian editions, the Tin Woodman was replaced with a horse.
In Russia, a translation by Alexander Melentyevich Volkov produced six books, The Wizard of the Emerald City series, which became progressively distanced from the Baum version, as Ellie and her dog Totoshka travel throughout the Magic Land.
The 1939 film adaptation has become a classic of popular culture, shown annually on American television from 1959 to 1991 and then several times a year every year beginning in 1999.
More recently, the story has become an American stage production with an all-black cast, set in the context of modern African-American culture.
There were several Hebrew translations published in Israel.
As established in the first translation and kept in later ones, the book's Land of Oz was rendered in Hebrew as Eretz Uz (ארץ עוץ) - i.e. the same as the original Hebrew name of the Biblical Land of Uz, homeland of Job.
Thus, for Hebrew readers, this translators' choice added a layer of Biblical connotations absent from the English original.
Critical response
QTEMPLATE box |quoted
true |bgcolor
#FFFFF0 |salign
center align
right| width
33% | quote
This last story of The Wizard is ingeniously woven out of commonplace material.
It is, of course, an extravaganza, but will surely be found to appeal strongly to child readers as well as to the younger children, to whom it will be read by mothers or those having charge of the entertaining of children.
There seems to be an inborn love of stories in child minds, and one of the most familiar and pleading requests of children is to be told another story.
The drawing as well as the introduced color work vies with the texts drawn, and the result has been a book that rises far above the average children's book of today, high as is the present standard....
The book has a bright and joyous atmosphere, and does not dwell upon killing and deeds of violence.
Enough stirring adventure enters into it, however, to flavor it with zest, and it will indeed be strange if there be a normal child who will not enjoy the story.|source = The New York Times, September 8, 1900
The Wonderful Wizard of Oz received positive critical reviews upon release.
In a September 1900 review, The New York Times praised the novel, writing that it would appeal to child readers and to younger children who could not read yet.
The review also praised the illustrations for being a pleasant complement to the text.
It has frequently come under fire over the years.
In 1957, the director of Detroit's libraries banned The Wonderful Wizard of Oz for having "no value" for children of his day, for supporting "negativism", and for bringing children's minds to a "cowardly level".
Professor Russel B. Nye of Michigan State University countered that "if the message of the Oz books-love, kindness, and unselfishness make the world a better place-seems of no value today", then maybe the time is ripe for "reassessing a good many other things besides the Detroit library's approved list of children's books".
In 1986, seven Fundamentalist Christian families in Tennessee opposed the novel's inclusion in the public school syllabus and filed a lawsuit.
They based their opposition to the novel on its depicting benevolent witches and promoting the belief that integral human attributes were "individually developed rather than God given".
Other reasons included the novel's teaching that females are equal to males and that animals are personified and can speak.
The judge ruled that when the novel was being discussed in class, the parents were allowed to have their children leave the classroom.
In a 2002 review, Bill Delaney of Salem Press praised Baum for giving children the opportunity to discover magic in the mundane things in their everyday lives.
He further commended Baum for teaching "millions of children to love reading during their crucial formative years".
Editions
After George M. Hill's bankruptcy in 1902, copyright in the book passed to the Bobbs-Merrill Company.
The editions they published lacked most of the in-text color and color plates of the original.
It was not until the book entered the public domain in 1956 that new editions, either with the original color plates, or new illustrations, proliferated.
Notable among them are the 1986 Pennyroyal edition illustrated by Barry Moser, which was reprinted by the University of California Press, and the 2000 Annotated Wizard of Oz edited by Michael Patrick Hearn, which was published by W.W. Norton and included all the original color illustrations, as well as supplemental artwork by Denslow.
Other centennial editions included University Press of Kansas's Kansas Centennial Edition, illustrated by Michael McCurdy with black-and-white illustrations, and Robert Sabuda's pop-up book.
Sequels
Baum wrote The Wonderful Wizard of Oz without any thought of a sequel.
After reading the novel, thousands of children wrote letters to him, requesting that he craft another story about Oz.
In 1904, he wrote and published the first sequel, The Marvelous Land of Oz, explaining that he grudgingly wrote the sequel to address the popular demand.
Baum also wrote sequels in 1907, 1908, and 1909.
In his 1911 The Emerald City of Oz, he wrote that he could not continue writing sequels because Ozland had lost contact with the rest of the world.
The children refused to accept this story, so Baum, in 1913 and every year thereafter until his death in May 1919, wrote an Oz book, ultimately writing 13 sequels.
The Chicago Tribunes Russell MacFall wrote that Baum explained the purpose of his novels in a note he penned to his sister, Mary Louise Brewster, in a copy of Mother Goose in Prose (1897), his first book.
He wrote, "To please a child is a sweet and a lovely thing that warms one's heart and brings its own reward."
By 1956, five million copies of the Oz books had been published in the English language, while hundreds of thousands had been published in eight foreign languages.
The story has been translated into other languages (at least once without permission) and adapted into comics several times.
Following the lapse of the original copyright, the characters have been adapted and reused in spin-offs, unofficial sequels, and reinterpretations, some of which have been controversial in their treatment of Baum's characters.
Notes and references
;Notes
;Footnotes
;Bibliography
* Aycock, Colleen and Mark Scott (2008).
Joe Gans: A Biography of the First African American World Boxing Champion.
McFarland & Co, 133-139.
* Baum, Frank Joslyn; MacFall, Russell P. (1961).
To Please a Child.
Chicago:
Reilly & Lee Co.
* Culver, Stuart.
"Growing Up in Oz."
American Literary History 4 (1992) 607-28.
* Gardner, Martin; Nye, Russel B. (1994).
The Wizard of Oz and Who He Was.
East Lansing: Michigan State University Press
* https:/ 20130416002454 OZ/Responses.php Gardner, Todd.
"Responses to Littlefield" (2004), online
* Greene, David L.; Martin, Dick (1977).
The Oz Scrapbook.
Random House.
* Hanff, Peter E and Douglas G. Greene (1988).
Bibliographia Oziana: A Concise Bibliographical Checklist.
The International Wizard of Oz Club.
* Hearn, Michael Patrick (ed).
The Annotated Wizard of Oz.
W. W. Norton & Co.
* http:/ piglet/Populism.htm Parker, David B. (1994)
"The Rise and Fall of The Wonderful Wizard of Oz as a 'Parable on Populism'."
Journal of the Georgia Association of Historians. 16 (1994): 49-63
* Riley, Michael O. (1997) Oz and Beyond: The Fantasy World of L. Frank Baum.
University of Kansas Press
* Ritter, Gretchen.
"Silver slippers and a golden cap: L. Frank Baum's The Wonderful Wizard of Oz and historical memory in American politics."
Journal of American Studies (August 1997) vol. 31, no. 2, 171-203.
* Rockoff, Hugh.
"The 'Wizard of Oz' as a Monetary Allegory," Journal of Political Economy 98 (1990): 739-60 online at JSTOR
* Sherman, Fraser A. (2005).
The Wizard of Oz catalog: L. Frank Baum's novel, its sequels and their adaptations for stage, television, movies, radio, music videos, comic books, commercials and more.
Jefferson, N.C.:
McFarland & Co.
* Swartz, Mark Evan.
Oz Before the Rainbow: L. Frank Baum's "The Wonderful Wizard of Oz" on Stage and Screen to 1939 (2000).
* https:/ PM.qst?a
o&d
5000776148 Velde, Francois R. "Following the Yellow Brick Road: How the United States Adopted the Gold Standard" Economic Perspectives.
Volume: 26.
Issue: 2. 2002.
http:/ sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=377760 also online here
