Albrecht Dürer , are more Gothic than the rest of his work.
His well-known engravings include the Knight, Death and the Devil (1513), Saint Jerome in his Study (1514) and Melencolia I (1514), which has been the subject of extensive analysis and interpretation.
His watercolours also mark him as one of the first European landscape artists, while his ambitious woodcuts revolutionized the potential of that medium.
Dürer's introduction of classical motifs into Northern art, through his knowledge of Italian artists and German humanists, has secured his reputation as one of the most important figures of the Northern Renaissance.
This is reinforced by his theoretical treatises, which involve principles of mathematics, perspective, and ideal proportions.
Albrecht Dürer has been credited with inventing the basic principle of ray tracing, a technique used in modern computer graphics.
Biography
Early life (1471-1490)
Dürer was born on 21 May 1471, third child and second son of his parents, who had at least fourteen and possibly as many as eighteen children.
His father, Albrecht Dürer the Elder (originally Albrecht Ajtósi), was a successful goldsmith who in 1455 had moved to Nuremberg from , near Gyula in Hungary.
One of Albrecht's brothers, Hans Dürer, was also a painter and trained under him.
Another of Albrecht's brothers, Endres Dürer, took over their father's business and was a master goldsmith.
The German name "Dürer" is a translation from the Hungarian, "Ajtósi".
Dürer's godfather was Anton Koberger, who left goldsmithing to become a printer and publisher in the year of Dürer's birth, and became the most successful publisher in Germany, eventually owning twenty-four printing-presses and built a number of offices in Germany and abroad.
Koberger's most famous publication was the Nuremberg Chronicle, published in 1493 in German and Latin editions.
It contained an unprecedented 1,809 woodcut illustrations (albeit with many repeated uses of the same block) by the Wolgemut workshop.
Dürer may have worked on some of these, as the work on the project began while he was with Wolgemut.
Because Dürer left autobiographical writings and became very famous by his mid-twenties, his life is well documented by several sources.
After a few years of school, Dürer started to learn the basics of goldsmithing and drawing from his father.
Though his father wanted him to continue his training as a goldsmith, he showed such a precocious talent in drawing that he started as an apprentice to Michael Wolgemut at the age of fifteen in 1486.
A self-portrait, a drawing in silverpoint, is dated 1484 (Albertina, Vienna)
"when I was a child", as his later inscription says.
Wolgemut was the leading artist in Nuremberg at the time, with a large workshop producing a variety of works of art, in particular woodcuts for books.
Nuremberg was then an important and prosperous city, a centre for publishing and many luxury trades.
It had strong links with Italy, especially Venice, a relatively short distance across the Alps.
Very soon after his return to Nuremberg, on 7 July 1494, at the age of 23, Dürer was married to Agnes Frey following an arrangement made during his absence.
Agnes was the daughter of a prominent brass worker (and amateur harpist) in the city.
However, no children resulted from the marriage, and with Albrecht the Dürer name died out.
The marriage between Agnes and Albrecht was not a generally happy one, as indicated by the letters of Dürer in which he quipped to Willibald Pirckheimer in an extremely rough tone about his wife.
He called her an "old crow" and made other vulgar remarks.
Pirckheimer also made no secret of his antipathy towards Agnes, describing her as a miserly shrew with a bitter tongue, who helped cause Dürer's death at a young age.
It is speculated by many scholars Albrecht was bisexual, if not homosexual, due to several of his works containing themes of homosexual desire, as well as the intimate nature of his correspondence with certain very close male friends.
First journey to Italy (1494-1495)
Within three months of his marriage, Dürer left for Italy, alone, perhaps stimulated by an outbreak of plague in Nuremberg.
He made watercolour sketches as he traveled over the Alps.
Some have survived and others may be deduced from accurate landscapes of real places in his later work, for example his engraving Nemesis.
In Italy, he went to Venice to study its more advanced artistic world.
Through Wolgemut's tutelage, Dürer had learned how to make prints in drypoint and design woodcuts in the German style, based on the works of Martin Schongauer and the Housebook Master.
Dürer probably also visited Padua and Mantua on this trip.
Return to Nuremberg (1495-1505)
On his return to Nuremberg in 1495, Dürer opened his own workshop (being married was a requirement for this).
Over the next five years his style increasingly integrated Italian influences into underlying Northern forms.
Arguably his best works in the first years of the workshop were his woodcut prints, mostly religious, but including secular scenes such as The Men's Bath House (ca. 1496).
These were larger and more finely cut than the great majority of German woodcuts hitherto, and far more complex and balanced in composition.
It is now thought unlikely that Dürer cut any of the woodblocks himself; this task would have been performed by a specialist craftsman.
However, his training in Wolgemut's studio, which made many carved and painted altarpieces and both designed and cut woodblocks for woodcut, evidently gave him great understanding of what the technique could be made to produce, and how to work with block cutters.
Dürer either drew his design directly onto the woodblock itself, or glued a paper drawing to the block.
Either way, his drawings were destroyed during the cutting of the block.
His famous series of sixteen great designs for the Apocalypse is dated 1498, as is his engraving of St. Michael Fighting the Dragon.
He made the first seven scenes of the Great Passion in the same year, and a little later, a series of eleven on the Holy Family and saints.
The Seven Sorrows Polyptych, commissioned by Frederick III of Saxony in 1496, was executed by Dürer and his assistants c. 1500.
In 1502, Dürer's father died.
Around 1503-1505 Dürer produced the first 17 of a set illustrating the Life of the Virgin, which he did not finish for some years.
Neither these nor the Great Passion were published as sets until several years later, but prints were sold individually in considerable numbers.
creating a mid-tone throughout the print to which the highlights and shadows can be contrasted.
Other works from this period include the thirty-seven woodcut subjects of the Little Passion, published first in 1511, and a set of fifteen small engravings on the same theme in 1512.
Indeed, complaining that painting did not make enough money to justify the time spent when compared to his prints, he produced no paintings from 1513 to 1516.
However, in 1513 and 1514 Dürer created his three most famous .
In 1515, he created his woodcut of a Rhinoceros which had arrived in Lisbon from a written description and sketch by another artist, without ever seeing the animal himself.
An image of the Indian rhinoceros, the image has such force that it remains one of his best-known and was still used in some German school science text-books as late as last century.
and portraits in tempera on linen in 1516.
His only experiments with etching came in this period, producing five 1515-1516 and a sixth 1518; a technique he may have abandoned as unsuited to his aesthetic of methodical, classical form.
Patronage of Maximilian I
From 1512, Maximilian I became Dürer's major patron.
His commissions included The Triumphal Arch, a vast work printed from 192 separate blocks, the symbolism of which is partly informed by Pirckheimer's translation of Horapollo's Hieroglyphica.
The design program and explanations were devised by Johannes Stabius, the architectural design by the master builder and court-painter Jörg Kölderer and the woodcutting itself by Hieronymous Andreae, with Dürer as designer-in-chief.
The Arch was followed by The Triumphal Procession, the program of which was worked out in 1512 by , as well as Dürer.
Dürer worked with pen on the marginal images for an edition of the Emperor's printed Prayer-Book; these were quite unknown until facsimiles were published in 1808 as part of the first book published in lithography.
Dürer's work on the book was halted for an unknown reason, and the decoration was continued by artists including Lucas Cranach the Elder and Hans Baldung.
Dürer also made several portraits of the Emperor, including one shortly before Maximilian's death in 1519.
Journey to the Netherlands (1520-1521)
Maximilian's death came at a time when Dürer was concerned he was losing "my sight and freedom of hand" and increasingly affected by the writings of Martin Luther.
In July 1520 Dürer made his fourth and last major journey, to renew the Imperial pension Maximilian had given him and to secure the patronage of the new emperor, Charles V, who was to be crowned at Aachen.
Dürer journeyed with his wife and her maid via the Rhine to Cologne and then to Antwerp, where he was well received and produced numerous drawings in silverpoint, chalk and charcoal.
In addition to going to the coronation, he made excursions to Cologne (where he admired the painting of Stefan Lochner), Nijmegen, 's-Hertogenbosch, Bruges (where he saw Michelangelo's Madonna of Bruges), Ghent (where he admired van Eyck's altarpiece), and Zeeland.
Dürer took a large stock of prints with him and wrote in his diary to whom he gave, exchanged or sold them, and for how much.
This provides rare information of the monetary value placed on prints at this time.
Unlike paintings, their sale was very rarely documented.
While providing valuable documentary evidence, Dürer's Netherlandish diary also reveals that the trip was not a profitable one.
For example, Dürer offered his last portrait of Maximilian to his daughter, Margaret of Austria, but eventually traded the picture for some white cloth after Margaret disliked the portrait and declined to accept it.
During this trip he also met Bernard van Orley, Jan Provoost, Gerard Horenbout, Jean Mone, Joachim Patinir and Tommaso Vincidor, though he did not, it seems, meet Quentin Matsys.
At the request of Christian II of Denmark, Dürer went to Brussels to paint the King's portrait.
There he saw "the things which have been sent to the king from the golden land"-the Aztec treasure that Hernán Cortés had sent home to Holy Roman Emperor Charles V following the fall of Mexico.
Dürer wrote that this treasure "was much more beautiful to me than miracles.
These things are so precious that they have been valued at 100,000 florins".-which afflicted him for the rest of his life, and greatly reduced his rate of work.
This may have been due in part to his declining health, but perhaps also because of the time he gave to the preparation of his theoretical works on geometry and perspective, the proportions of men and horses, and fortification.
However, one consequence of this shift in emphasis was that during the last years of his life, Dürer produced comparatively little as an artist.
In painting, there was only a portrait of , was given by Dürer to the City of Nuremberg-although he was given 100 guilders in return.
He also derived great satisfaction from his friendships and correspondence with Erasmus and other scholars.
Dürer succeeded in producing two books during his lifetime.
"The Four Books on Measurement" were published at Nuremberg in 1525 and was the first book for adults on mathematics in German, In a letter to Nicholas Kratzer in 1524, Dürer wrote "because of our Christian faith we have to stand in scorn and danger, for we are reviled and called heretics".
Most tellingly, Pirckheimer wrote in a letter to Johann Tscherte in 1530: "I confess that in the beginning I believed in Luther, like our Albert of blessed memory ...
but as anyone can see, the situation has become worse."
Dürer may even have contributed to the Nuremberg City Council's mandating Lutheran sermons and services in March 1525.
Notably, Dürer had contacts with various reformers, such as Zwingli, Andreas Karlstadt, Melanchthon, Erasmus and Cornelius Grapheus from whom Dürer received Luther's Babylonian Captivity in 1520.
From 1525, however, "the year that saw the peak and collapse of the Peasants' War, the artist can be seen to distance himself somewhat from the Lutheran movement...."
Dürer's later works have also been claimed to show Protestant sympathies.
For example, his woodcut of The Last Supper of 1523 has often been understood to have an evangelical theme, focusing as it does on Christ espousing the Gospel, as well the inclusion of the Eucharistic cup, an expression of Protestant utraquism, although this interpretation has been questioned.
The delaying of the engraving of St Philip, completed in 1523 but not distributed until 1526, may have been due to Dürer's uneasiness with images of Saints; even if Dürer was not an iconoclast, in his last years he evaluated and questioned the role of art in religion.
Legacy and influence
Dürer exerted a huge influence on the artists of succeeding generations, especially in printmaking, the medium through which his contemporaries mostly experienced his art, as his paintings were predominantly in private collections located in only a few cities.
His success in spreading his reputation across Europe through prints was undoubtedly an inspiration for major artists such as Raphael, Titian, and Parmigianino, all of whom collaborated with printmakers in order to promote and distribute their work.
His work in engraving seems to have had an intimidating effect upon his German successors, the "Little Masters" who attempted few large engravings but continued Dürer's themes in small, rather cramped compositions.
Lucas van Leyden was the only Northern European engraver to successfully continue to produce large engravings in the first third of the 16th century.
The generation of Italian engravers who trained in the shadow of Dürer all either directly copied parts of his landscape backgrounds (Giulio Campagnola, Giovanni Battista Palumba, Benedetto Montagna and Cristofano Robetta), or whole prints (Marcantonio Raimondi and Agostino Veneziano).
However, Dürer's influence became less dominant after 1515, when Marcantonio perfected his new engraving style, which in turn travelled over the Alps to dominate Northern engraving also.
In painting, Dürer had relatively little influence in Italy, where probably only his altarpiece in Venice was seen, and his German successors were less effective in blending German and Italian styles.
His intense and self-dramatizing self-portraits have continued to have a strong influence up to the present, especially on painters in the 19th and 20th century who desired a more dramatic portrait style.
Dürer has never fallen from critical favour, and there have been significant revivals of interest in his works in Germany in the Dürer Renaissance of about 1570 to 1630, in the early nineteenth century, and in German nationalism from 1870 to 1945.
In 1498, Dürer painted a series of self-portraits, quite possibly the first examples of an artist depicting himself.
His 1507 panel paintings of Adam and Eve are the first full-size nudes in Northern European art.
The Lutheran Church remembers Dürer as a great Christian annually on 6 April, along with Lucas Cranach the Elder and Hans Burgkmair.
The liturgical calendar of the Episcopal Church (United States) remembers him, Cranach and Matthias Grünewald on 5 August.
Theoretical works
In all his theoretical works, in order to communicate his theories in the German language rather than in Latin, Dürer used graphic expressions based on a vernacular, craftsmen's language.
For example, "Schneckenlinie" ("snail-line") was his term for a spiral form.
Thus, Dürer contributed to the expansion in German prose which Martin Luther had begun with his translation of the Bible.
Four Books on Measurement
Dürer's work on geometry is called the Four Books on Measurement (Underweysung der Messung mit dem Zirckel und Richtscheyt or Instructions for Measuring with Compass and Ruler).
The first book focuses on linear geometry.
Dürer's geometric constructions include helices, conchoids and epicycloids.
He also draws on Apollonius, and Johannes Werner's 'Libellus super viginti duobus elementis conicis' of 1522.
The second book moves onto two dimensional geometry, i.e. the construction of regular polygons.
Here Dürer favours the methods of Ptolemy over Euclid.
The third book applies these principles of geometry to architecture, engineering and typography.
In architecture Dürer cites Vitruvius but elaborates his own classical designs and columns.
In typography, Dürer depicts the geometric construction of the Latin alphabet, relying on Italian precedent.
However, his construction of the Gothic alphabet is based upon an entirely different modular system.
The fourth book completes the progression of the first and second by moving to three-dimensional forms and the construction of polyhedra.
Here Dürer discusses the five Platonic solids, as well as seven Archimedean semi-regular solids, as well as several of his own invention.
In all these, Dürer shows the objects as nets.
Finally, Dürer discusses the Delian Problem and moves on to the 'construzione legittima', a method of depicting a cube in two dimensions through linear perspective.
He is though to be the first to describe a visualization technique used in modern computers, ray tracing.
It was in Bologna that Dürer was taught (possibly by Luca Pacioli or Bramante)
the principles of linear perspective, and evidently became familiar with the 'costruzione legittima' in a written description of these principles found only, at this time, in the unpublished treatise of Piero della Francesca.
He was also familiar with the 'abbreviated construction' as described by Alberti and the geometrical construction of shadows, a technique of Leonardo da Vinci.
Although Dürer made no innovations in these areas, he is notable as the first Northern European to treat matters of visual representation in a scientific way, and with understanding of Euclidean principles.
In addition to these geometrical constructions, Dürer discusses in this last book of Underweysung der Messung an assortment of mechanisms for drawing in perspective from models and provides woodcut illustrations of these methods that are often reproduced in discussions of perspective.
Four Books on Human Proportion
Dürer's work on human proportions is called the Four Books on Human Proportion (Vier Bücher von Menschlicher Proportion) of 1528.
The first book was mainly composed by 1512/13 and completed by 1523, showing five differently constructed types of both male and female figures, all parts of the body expressed in fractions of the total height.
Dürer based these constructions on both Vitruvius and empirical observations of "two to three hundred living persons",
File:AlbrechtDürer01.jpg|Title page of Vier Bücher von menschlicher
Proportion showing the monogram signature of artist
File:Durer foot.jpg|Dürer often used multiview orthographic projections
File:Durer face transforms.jpg|Dürer's study of human proportions
Exhibitions
An important exhibition runs at the Albertina in Vienna (Austria) from 20 September 2019 to 6 January 2020.
The Albertina has the largest collection in the world of Dürer drawings with more than 140 works.
With loans, over 200 works will be exhibited.
Other exhibitions include: Paris Autumn-Winter 2012-2013 Exhibition "Albrecht Dürer and his time: From the Reformation to the Thirty Years' War", from the collection of the Beaux-arts de Paris, October 24, 2012 to January 13, 2013.
Exhibition in Liege, 25 March - 21 May 2011, based on the collections of the University of Liege.
The question of copies is also raised through a selection of engravings made by anonymous artists or by copists such as Marcantonio Raimondi (1480-1534).
Gallery
File:Albrecht Dürer - Ritratto del padre - Google Art Project.jpg|Albrecht Dürer the Elder with a Rosary, 1490, Galleria degli Uffizi, Florence
File:Albrecht Dürer 012.jpg|St Jerome in the Wilderness, 1495, oil on panel, National Gallery, London
File:Madonna Haller.jpg|Detail, Haller Madonna, 1505, National Gallery
File:Albrecht Dürer - Virgin and child with a pear - Google Art Project.jpg|Madonna of the Pear, 1512, oil on panel, Kunsthistorisches Museum
File:Albrecht Dürer - Portrait of Bernhard von Reesen - Google Art Project.jpg|Portrait of Bernhard von Reesen, 1521, Kunsthistorisches Museum, Gemäldegalerie
File:Albrecht Dürer Saint Jerome 1521.jpg|Saint Jerome, 1521, Museu Nacional de Arte Antiga, Lisbon
File:Albrecht Dürer 078.jpg|Portrait of Hieronymus Holzschuher, 1526
File:Innsbruck castle courtyard.jpg|Innsbruck Castle Courtyard, 1494, Gouache and watercolour on paper
File:Chateau-fort-Durer.jpg|Castle Segonzano, 1502, gouache and watercolour on paper
File:Albrecht Dürer - Hare, 1502 - Google Art Project.jpg|Young Hare, (1502), Watercolour and bodycolour (Albertina, Vienna)
File:Albrecht Dürer - The Large Piece of Turf, 1503 - Google Art Project.jpg|Great Piece of Turf, 1503
File:Albrecht Dürer, Tuft of Cowslips, 1526, NGA 74162.jpg|Albrecht Dürer, Tuft of Cowslips, 1526, National Gallery of Art
File:Albrecht Dürer - The Expulsion from Paradise (NGA 1943.3.3634).jpg|The Expulsion From Paradise, 1510
File:Albrecht Dürer - Man of Sorrows - Google Art Project.jpg|Man of Sorrows
File:Albrecht Dürer - Head of an Old Man, 1521 - Google Art Project.jpg|Head of an Old Man, 1521
File:Albrecht Dürer - Bearing of the Cross - Google Art Project.jpg|Bearing of the Cross
File:Saint Christopher Facing Left MET DP815920.jpg|St.
Christopher, engraving, 1521
File:Albrecht Dürer - The Small Horse - Google Art Project.jpg|The Small Horse
File:Albrecht Dürer - Nemesis - Google Art Project.jpg|Nemesis
File:Albrecht Dürer - Bearded Saint in a Forest, c. 1516 - Google Art Project.jpg|Bearded Saint in a Forest, c. 1516
File:Albrecht Dürer - The Rhinoceros (NGA 1964.8.697).jpg|Rhinoceros, 1515, National Gallery of Art
List of works
For lists of Albrecht Dürer's works, see:
Notes
*Campbell Hutchison, Jane.
Albrecht Dürer: A Biography.
Princeton University Press, 1990.
*Demele, Christine.
Dürers Nacktheit - Das Weimarer Selbstbildnis.
Rhema Verlag, Münster 2012,
*Dürer, Albrecht (translated by R.T. Nichol from the Latin text), Of the Just Shaping of Letters, Dover Publications.
*Harbison, Craig.
"Dürer and the Reformation: The Problem of the Re-dating of the St. Philip Engraving".
The Art Bulletin, Vol. 58, No. 3, 368-373.
September 1976.
*Korolija Fontana-Giusti, Gordana.
"The Unconscious and Space: Venice and the work of Albrecht Dürer", in Architecture and the Unconscious, eds.
J. Hendrix and L.Holm, Farnham Surrey: Ashgate, 2016.
pp. 27-44, .
*Koerner, Joseph Leo.
The Moment of Self-Portraiture in German Renaissance Art. Chicago/London: University of Chicago Press, 1993.
*Landau David; Parshall, Peter.
The Renaissance Print.
Yale, 1996.
*Panofsky, Erwin.
The Life and Art of Albrecht Dürer, Princeton, 2005.
*Price, David Hotchkiss.
Albrecht Dürer's Renaissance: Humanism, Reformation and the Art of Faith.
Michigan, 2003. .
*Strauss, Walter L. (ed.).
The Complete Engravings, Etchings and Drypoints of Albrecht Durer.
Dover Publications, 1973.
*Wilhelm, Kurth (ed.).
The Complete Woodcuts of Albrecht Durer, Dover Publications, 2000.
