Giada Pamela De Laurentiis (; born August 22, 1970) is an American chef, writer, and television personality.
She is the host of Food Network's Giada at Home.
She also appears regularly as a contributor and guest co-host on NBC's Today.
De Laurentiis is the founder of the catering business GDL Foods.
She is a winner of the Daytime Emmy Award for Outstanding Lifestyle Host and the Gracie Award for Best Television Host.
Early life
Giada Pamela De Benedetti was born on August 22, 1970, in Rome, Italy, the eldest child of actress Veronica De Laurentiis and her first husband, actor-producer Alex De Benedetti.
De Benedetti was a close associate of Giada's maternal grandfather, film producer Dino De Laurentiis.
As a child, Giada often found herself in the family's kitchen and spent a great deal of time at her grandfather's restaurant, DDL Foodshow.
After graduating from Marymount High School in Los Angeles, De Laurentiis attended the University of California, Los Angeles, earning her bachelor's degree in social anthropology in 1996.
Her stepfather is producer Ivan Kavalsky.
Career
De Laurentiis studied at Le Cordon Bleu in Paris,
De Laurentiis began hosting Behind the Bash in October 2006.
The program examines the catering process behind big event extravaganzas such as the Grammy Awards.
In January 2007, a third De Laurentiis-hosted show, Giada's Weekend Getaways, debuted on Food Network.
On this show, De Laurentiis travels to a featured locale (including Seattle, South Beach, San Francisco, Napa, and Jackson Hole, Wyoming) and visits her favorite local culinary destinations.
On a November 2006 episode of Iron Chef America, De Laurentiis and Bobby Flay competed against, and were defeated by, Rachael Ray and Mario Batali.
In 2007, De Laurentiis appeared as a presenter at the inaugural Food Network Awards.
In June 2007, she hosted a two-part Food Network special entitled Giada in Paradise, featuring the two locales of Santorini, Greece and Capri, Italy.
De Laurentiis also made several appearances as a guest judge on the third season of The Next Food Network Star, which aired in 2007.
That year she was dubbed a "petite powerhouse" by Town & Country magazine, standing "just under five-foot two".
In 2008, she won a Daytime Emmy Award for Outstanding Lifestyle Host.
In 2008, De Laurentiis and the Barilla Group, launched an Italian gourmet line under the Academia Barilla name-Barilla's first-ever gourmet celebrity product line.
That same year, Giada at Home premiered, showing De Laurentiis in a kitchen preparing meals and parties for family and friends.
The show is shot on a set that is very similar to her own home.
In June 2010, De Laurentiis became a regularly appearing mentor to the finalists on the popular Food Network competition show The Next Food Network Star.
In July 2014, De Laurentiis opened her first restaurant, called GIADA, inside The Cromwell in Las Vegas, Nevada.
The restaurant offers seating in the dining room, lounge, or outdoor patio with views of the Bellagio fountains and Caesars Palace.
The GIADA menu includes Italian cuisine with Californian influences, including "lemon spaghetti, chicken cacciatore, marsala herb chicken meatballs, rosemary focaccia and lemon flatbread and vegetable Bolognese rigatoni".
Family-style, vegan, and gluten-free options are also available, as well as an antipasto station.
Restaurant guests can watch chefs prepare food from the open kitchen.
She opened a second restaurant in early 2018.
"Pronto by Giada", taking up residency in Caesars Palace, is a fast casual dining restaurant.
In July 2017, she announced she would also be opening a restaurant in the Horseshoe Casino in Baltimore, Maryland, just north of Washington, D.C.
It is called GDL Italian by Giada, and opened in May 2018.
Personal life
On May 25, 2003, De Laurentiis married Todd Thompson, a fashion designer.
The couple's only child, Jade Marie De Laurentiis-Thompson, was born on March 29, 2008.
Jade was named after her mother - "Giada" is Italian for "Jade."
While acknowledging how special the experience of having a child has been, she has stated that she does not plan to have more children.
De Laurentiis remains focused on her career, saying, "I have so many babies: the show, Todd, and Jade."
On December 29, 2014, De Laurentiis announced on her website that she and Todd had separated the previous July, and had decided to end their marriage.
The divorce was finalized on September 3, 2015.
Since November 2015 she has been romantically involved with TV producer Shane Farley.
Publications
Both Giada at Home and Weeknights with Giada landed in the number one position on The New York Times Best Seller list.
Awards and nominations
References
