Acne, also known as acne vulgaris, is a long-term skin disease that occurs when hair follicles are clogged with dead skin cells and oil from the skin.
It is characterized by blackheads or whiteheads, pimples, oily skin, and possible scarring.
It primarily affects areas of the skin with a relatively high number of oil glands, including the face, upper part of the chest, and back.
The resulting appearance can lead to anxiety, reduced self-esteem and, in extreme cases, depression or thoughts of suicide.
Genetics is thought to be the primary cause of acne in 80% of cases.
The role of diet and cigarette smoking is unclear, and neither cleanliness nor exposure to sunlight appear to play a part.
In both sexes, hormones called androgens appear to be part of the underlying mechanism, by causing increased production of sebum.
Another frequent factor is excessive growth of the bacterium Cutibacterium acnes, which is normally present on the skin.
Treatments applied directly to the affected skin, such as azelaic acid, benzoyl peroxide, and salicylic acid, are commonly used.
Several types of birth control pills help against acne in women.
Early and aggressive treatment of acne is advocated by some in the medical community to decrease the overall long-term impact to individuals.
Acne commonly occurs in adolescence and affects an estimated 80-90% of teenagers in the Western world.
Lower rates are reported in some rural societies.
Children and adults may also be affected before and after puberty.
Although acne becomes less common in adulthood, it persists in nearly half of affected people into their twenties and thirties and a smaller group continue to have difficulties into their forties.
can be classified as mild, moderate, or severe as this helps to determine an appropriate treatment regimen.
There is no universally accepted scale for grading acne severity.
True cysts are in fact rare in those with acne and the term severe nodular acne is now the preferred terminology.
Although HS shares certain common features with acne vulgaris, such as a tendency to clog skin follicles with skin cell debris, the condition otherwise lacks the defining features of acne and is therefore considered a distinct skin disorder.
The scar is created by abnormal healing following this dermal inflammation.
Scarring is most likely to take place with severe acne, but may occur with any form of acne vulgaris.
Atrophic acne scars have lost collagen from the healing response and are the most common type of acne scar (account for approximately 75% of all acne scars).
Hypertrophic scars remain within the original margins of the wound, whereas keloid scars can form scar tissue outside of these borders.
Even minimal skin exposure to the sun's ultraviolet rays can sustain hyperpigmentation.
Daily use of SPF 15 or higher sunscreen can minimize such a risk.
Sunlight and cleanliness are not associated with acne.
Genes
Acne appears to be strongly inherited with 81% of the variation in the population explained by genetics.
Acne can be a feature of rare genetic disorders such as Apert's syndrome.
Severe acne may be associated with XYY syndrome.
Hormones
Hormonal activity, such as occurs during menstrual cycles and puberty, may contribute to the formation of acne.
During puberty, an increase in sex hormones called androgens causes the skin follicle glands to grow larger and make more oily sebum.
Several hormones have been linked to acne, including the androgens testosterone, dihydrotestosterone (DHT), and dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA); high levels of growth hormone (GH) and insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF-1) have also been associated with worsened acne.
Both androgens and IGF-1 seem to be essential for acne to occur, as acne does not develop in individuals with complete androgen insensitivity syndrome (CAIS) or Laron syndrome (insensitivity to GH, resulting in very low IGF-1 levels).
Medical conditions that commonly cause a high-androgen state, such as polycystic ovary syndrome, congenital adrenal hyperplasia, and androgen-secreting tumors, can cause acne in affected individuals.
Conversely, people who lack androgenic hormones or are insensitive to the effects of androgens rarely have acne.
Acne can be a side effect of testosterone replacement therapy or of anabolic steroid use.
Over-the-counter bodybuilding and dietary supplements are commonly found to contain illegally added anabolic steroids.
Infections
It is widely suspected that the anaerobic bacterial species Cutibacterium acnes (formerly Propionibacterium acnes) contributes to the development of acne, but its exact role is not well understood.
It is unclear whether eradication of the mite improves acne.
High-glycemic-load diets have been found to have different degrees of effect on acne severity.
Multiple randomized controlled trials and nonrandomized studies have found a lower-glycemic-load diet to be effective in reducing acne.
Milk contains whey protein and hormones such as bovine IGF-1 and precursors of dihydrotestosterone.
Eating greasy foods does not increase acne nor make it worse.
Stress
Few high-quality studies have been performed which demonstrate that stress causes or worsens acne.
While the connection between acne and stress has been debated, some research indicates that increased severity is associated with high stress levels in certain contexts such as hormonal changes seen in premenstrual syndrome.
Environmental factors
Mechanical obstruction of skin follicles with helmets or chinstraps can worsen pre-existing acne.
Medications
Several medications can worsen pre-existing acne, with examples being lithium, hydantoin, isoniazid, glucocorticoids, iodides, bromides, and testosterone.
The earliest pathologic change is the formation of a plug (a microcomedone), which is driven primarily by excessive growth, reproduction, and accumulation of skin cells in the hair follicle.
However, increased production of oily sebum in those with acne causes the dead skin cells to stick together.
A major mechanism of acne-related skin inflammation is mediated by C. acnes ability to bind and activate a class of immune system receptors known as toll-like receptors (TLRs), especially TLR2 and TLR4.
Activation of TLR2 and TLR4 by C. acnes leads to increased secretion of IL-1α, IL-8, and TNF-α.
Involvement of AP-1 in the aforementioned inflammatory cascade leads to activation of matrix metalloproteinases, which contribute to local tissue destruction and scar formation.
Cook's acne grading scale uses photographs to grade severity from 0 to 8 (0 being the least severe and 8 being the most severe).
This scale was the first to use a standardized photographic protocol to assess acne severity; since its creation in 1979, the scale has undergone several revisions.
The Pillsbury acne grading scale simply classifies the severity of the acne from grade 1 (least severe) to grade 4 (most severe).
Differential diagnosis
Many skin conditions can mimic acne vulgaris, and these are collectively known as acneiform eruptions.
Age is one factor which may help distinguish between these disorders.
Skin disorders such as perioral dermatitis and keratosis pilaris can appear similar to acne but tend to occur more frequently in childhood, whereas rosacea tends to occur more frequently in older adults.
The presence of comedones helps health professionals differentiate acne from skin disorders that are similar in appearance.
Chloracne, due to exposure to certain chemicals, may look very similar to acne vulgaris.
Management
Many different treatments exist for acne.
These include alpha hydroxy acid, anti-androgen medications, antibiotics, antiseborrheic medications, azelaic acid, benzoyl peroxide, hormonal treatments, keratolytic soaps, nicotinamide, retinoids, and salicylic acid.
Recommended therapies for first-line use in acne vulgaris treatment include topical retinoids, benzoyl peroxide, and topical or oral antibiotics.
Benzoyl peroxide may be paired with a topical antibiotic or retinoid such as benzoyl peroxide adapalene, respectively.
Sunscreen use is often advised during treatment, to prevent sunburn.
Lower concentrations of benzoyl peroxide are just as effective as higher concentrations in treating acne but are associated with fewer side effects.
Unlike antibiotics, benzoyl peroxide does not appear to generate bacterial antibiotic resistance.
They are structurally related to vitamin A.
Frequently used topical retinoids include adapalene, isotretinoin, retinol, tazarotene, and tretinoin.
Most formulations of tretinoin cannot be applied at the same time as benzoyl peroxide.
The frequency of adverse events was about twice as high with isotretinoin, although these were mostly dryness-related events.
Antibiotics
Antibiotics are frequently applied to the skin or taken orally to treat acne and are thought to work due to their antimicrobial activity against C. acnes and their ability to reduce inflammation.
With the widespread use of antibiotics for acne and an increased frequency of antibiotic-resistant C. acnes worldwide, antibiotics are becoming less effective,
Hormonal agents
In women, acne can be improved with the use of any combined birth control pill.
These medications contain an estrogen and a progestin.
First-generation progestins such as norethindrone and norgestrel have androgenic properties and can worsen acne.
combined birth control pills appear to have no effect on IGF-1 levels in fertile women.
However, cyproterone acetate-containing birth control pills have been reported to decrease total and free IGF-1 levels.
Combinations containing third- or fourth-generation progestins including desogestrel, dienogest, drospirenone, or norgestimate, as well as birth control pills containing cyproterone acetate or chlormadinone acetate, are preferred for women with acne due to their stronger antiandrogenic effects.
Studies have shown a 40 to 70% reduction in acne lesions with combined birth control pills.
However, the two therapies are approximately equal in efficacy at six months for decreasing the number of inflammatory, non-inflammatory, and total acne lesions.
The medication is primarily used as an aldosterone antagonist and is thought to be a useful acne treatment due to its ability to additionally block the androgen receptor at higher doses.
The medication has also been found to be effective in the treatment of acne in males, with one study finding that a high dosage reduced inflammatory acne lesions by 73%.
However, the side effects of cyproterone acetate in males, such as gynecomastia, sexual dysfunction, and decreased bone mineral density, make its use for acne in this sex impractical in most cases.
Hormonal therapies should not be used to treat acne during pregnancy or lactation as they have been associated with birth disorders such as hypospadias, and feminization of the male babies.
Flutamide, a pure antagonist of the androgen receptor, is effective in the treatment of acne in women.
It has generally been found to reduce symptoms of acne by 80 or 90% even at low doses, with several studies showing complete acne clearance.
In one study, flutamide decreased acne scores by 80% within 3 months, whereas spironolactone decreased symptoms by only 40% in the same time period.
In a large long-term study, 97% of women reported satisfaction with the control of their acne with flutamide.
Although effective, flutamide has a risk of serious liver toxicity, and cases of death in women taking even low doses of the medication to treat androgen-dependent skin and hair conditions have occurred.
As such, the use of flutamide for acne has become increasingly limited, and it has been argued that continued use of flutamide for such purposes is unethical.
Clascoterone is a topical antiandrogen which has demonstrated effectiveness in the treatment of acne in both males and females and is currently in the late stages of clinical development.
It has shown no systemic absorption or associated antiandrogenic side effects.
In a direct head-to-head comparison, clascoterone showed greater effectiveness than topical isotretinoin.
In addition, the high risk of birth defects with 5α-reductase inhibitors limits their use in women.
Hormonal treatments for acne such as combined birth control pills and antiandrogens may be considered a first-line therapy for acne under a number of circumstances, including when contraception is desired, when known or suspected hyperandrogenism is present, when acne occurs in adulthood, when acne flares premenstrually, and when symptoms of significant sebum production (seborrhea) are co-present.
Azelaic acid is thought to be an effective acne treatment due to its ability to reduce skin cell accumulation in the follicle, and its antibacterial and anti-inflammatory properties.
It is less effective and more expensive than retinoids.
It opens obstructed skin pores and promotes shedding of epithelial skin cells.
Salicylic acid is known to be less effective than retinoid therapy.
It is thought to improve acne due to its anti-inflammatory properties, its ability to suppress sebum production, and by promoting wound healing.
The purported efficacy of zinc is attributed to its capacity to reduce inflammation and sebum production, and inhibit C. acnes.
Hydroquinone lightens the skin when applied topically by inhibiting tyrosinase, the enzyme responsible for converting the amino acid tyrosine to the skin pigment melanin, and is used to treat acne-associated postinflammatory hyperpigmentation.
Highly recommended therapies include topically applied benzoyl peroxide (category C) and azelaic acid (category B).
In studies examining the effects of topical retinoids during pregnancy, fetal harm has not been seen in the second and third trimesters.
Light therapy is a treatment method that involves delivering certain specific wavelengths of light to an area of skin affected by acne.
Both regular and laser light have been used.
The evidence for light therapy as a treatment for acne is weak and inconclusive.
Various light therapies appear to provide a short-term benefit, but data for long-term outcomes, and for outcomes in those with severe acne, are sparse; it may have a role for individuals whose acne has been resistant to topical medications.
PDT has the most supporting evidence of all light therapies.
Many different types of nonablative lasers (i.e., lasers that do not vaporize the top layer of the skin but rather induce a physiologic response in the skin from the light) have been used to treat acne, including those that use infrared wavelengths of light.
Ablative lasers (such as CO2 and fractional types) have also been used to treat active acne and its scars.
When ablative lasers are used, the treatment is often referred to as laser resurfacing because, as mentioned previously, the entire upper layers of the skin are vaporized.
Physiologically, certain wavelengths of light, used with or without accompanying topical chemicals, are thought to kill bacteria and decrease the size and activity of the glands that produce sebum.
Examples of fillers used for this purpose include hyaluronic acid; poly (methyl methacrylate) microspheres with collagen; human and bovine collagen derivatives, and fat harvested from the person's own body (autologous fat transfer).
Notable adverse effects of microneedling include postinflammatory hyperpigmentation and tram track scarring (described as discrete slightly raised scars in a linear distribution similar to a tram track).
The latter is thought to be primarily attributable to improper technique by the practitioner, including the use of excessive pressure or inappropriately large needles.
Subcision is useful for treatment of superficial atrophic acne scars and involves the use of a small needle to loosen the fibrotic adhesions that result in the depressed appearance of the scar.
Chemical peels can be used to reduce the appearance of acne scars.
Low-quality evidence suggests topical application of tea tree oil or bee venom may reduce the total number of skin lesions in those with acne.
There is a lack of high-quality evidence for the use of acupuncture, herbal medicine, or cupping therapy for acne.
Certain types of makeup may be useful to mask acne.
Prognosis
Acne usually improves around the age of 20, but may persist into adulthood.
Permanent physical scarring may occur.
This can lead to significant scarring, changes in the affected person's skin pigmentation, and a cyclic worsening of the affected person's anxiety about their appearance.
Early and aggressive treatment of acne is advocated by some in the medical community to reduce the chances of these poor outcomes.
Epidemiology
Globally, acne affects approximately 650 million people, or about 9.4% of the population, as of 2010.
It affects nearly 90% of people in Western societies during their teenage years, but can occur before adolescence and may persist into adulthood.
and has a lifetime prevalence of 85%.
While some research has found it affects people of all ethnic groups, acne may not occur in the non-Westernized peoples of Papua New Guinea and Paraguay.
Acne affects 40-50 million people in the United States (16%) and approximately 3-5 million in Australia (23%).
Severe acne tends to be more common in people of Caucasian or Hispanic descent than in people of African descent.
The sixth-century Greek physician Aëtius of Amida is credited with coining the term "ionthos" (ίονθωξ,) or "acnae", which is believed to have been a reference to facial skin lesions that occur during "the ').
In the 16th century, the French physician and botanist François Boissier de Sauvages de Lacroix provided one of the earlier descriptions of acne.
He used the term "psydracia achne" to describe small, red and hard tubercles that altered a person's facial appearance during adolescence, and were neither itchy nor painful.
The first professional medical monograph dedicated entirely to acne was written by Lucius Duncan Bulkley and published in New York in 1885.
Scientists initially hypothesized that acne represented a disease of the skin's hair follicle, and occurred due to blockage of the pore by sebum.
During the 1880s, bacteria were observed by microscopy in skin samples affected by acne and were regarded as the causal agents of comedones, sebum production, and ultimately acne.
Acne treatment was modified in the 1950s with the introduction of oral tetracycline antibiotics (such as minocycline).
These reinforced the idea amongst dermatologists that bacterial growth on the skin plays an important role in causing acne.
The development of oral isotretinoin (sold as Accutane and Roaccutane) followed in 1980.
After its introduction in the United States it was recognized as a medication highly likely to cause birth defects if taken during pregnancy.
In the United States, more than 2,000 women became pregnant while taking isotretinoin between 1982 and 2003, with most pregnancies ending in abortion or miscarriage.
About 160 babies were born with birth defects.
Treatment of acne with topical crushed dry ice (termed "cryoslush") was first described in 1907, but is no longer performed commonly.
Prior to 1960, the use of X-rays was also a common treatment.
Society and culture
The costs and social impact of acne are substantial.
In the United States, acne vulgaris is responsible for more than 5 million doctor visits and costs over billion each year in direct costs.
Similarly, acne vulgaris is responsible for 3.5 million doctor visits each year in the United Kingdom.
Misperceptions about acne's causative and aggravating factors are common, and those affected by it are often blamed for their condition.
Such blame can worsen the affected person's sense of self-esteem.
Until the 1930s, it was largely seen as a trivial problem among middle-class girls - a trivial problem, because, unlike smallpox and tuberculosis, no one died from it, and a feminine problem, because boys were much less likely to seek medical assistance for it.
Oral and topical probiotics are also being evaluated as treatments for acne.
Probiotics have been hypothesized to have therapeutic effects for those affected by acne due to their ability to decrease skin inflammation and improve skin moisture by increasing the skin's ceramide content.
Some have voiced concerns about creating a vaccine designed to neutralize a stable community of normal skin bacteria that is known to protect the skin from colonization by more harmful microorganisms.
Other animals
Acne can occur on cats, dogs, and horses.
Further reading
