The Vietnam War (), also known as the Second Indochina War, The war, considered a Cold War-era proxy war by some, lasted 19 years, with direct U.S. involvement ending in 1973, and included the Laotian Civil War and the Cambodian Civil War, which ended with all three countries becoming communist in 1975.
The conflict emerged from the First Indochina War against the communist-led Viet Minh.
Most of the funding for the French war effort was provided by the U.S.
After the French quit Indochina in 1954, the US assumed financial and military support for the South Vietnamese state.
The Việt Cộng, also known as or NLF (the National Liberation Front), a South Vietnamese common front under the direction of North Vietnam, initiated a guerrilla war in the south.
North Vietnam had also invaded Laos in the mid-1950s in support of insurgents, establishing the Ho Chi Minh Trail to supply and reinforce the Việt Cộng.
U.S. involvement escalated under President John F. Kennedy through the MAAG program from just under a thousand in 1959 to 16,000 in 1963.
By 1964, there were 23,000 US advisors in South Vietnam.
In August, the Gulf of Tonkin incident occurred, in which a U.S. destroyer was alleged to have clashed with North Vietnamese fast attack craft.
in response, the U.S Congress passed the Gulf of Tonkin Resolution, giving President Lyndon B. Johnson broad authorization to increase U.S. military presence.
He ordered the deployment of combat units for the first time and increased troop levels to 184,000.
The Peace Accords were broken almost immediately, and fighting continued for two more years.
The 1975 Spring Offensive saw the capture of Saigon by the PAVN in April; this marked the end of the war, and North and South Vietnam were reunified the following year.
The scale of fighting was enormous: by 1970 the ARVN was the world's fourth largest army, with the PAVN being similar in size at around a million regular soldiers.
which together with the Watergate scandal contributed to the crisis of confidence that affected America throughout the 1970s.
Names
Various names have been applied to the conflict.
Vietnam War is the most commonly used name in English.
It has also been called the Second Indochina War and the Vietnam Conflict.
Given that there have been several conflicts in Indochina, this particular conflict is known by the names of its primary protagonists, in order to distinguish it from others.
In Vietnamese, the war is generally known as Kháng chiến chống Mỹ (Resistance War Against America), but less formally as 'Cuộc chiến tranh Mỹ' (The American War).
It is also called Chiến tranh Việt Nam (The Vietnam War).
Background
The primary military organizations involved in the war were as follows: One side consisted of the Army of the Republic of Vietnam (ARVN) and the United States armed forces, while the other side consisted of the People's Army of Vietnam (PAVN) (commonly called the North Vietnamese Army, or NVA, in English-language sources) and the National Front for the Liberation of South Vietnam (NLF, more commonly known as the Viet Cong (VC) in English language sources), a South Vietnamese communist guerrilla force.
Indochina was a French colony during the 19th century.
When the Japanese invaded during World War II, the Viet Minh opposed them with support from the US, the Soviet Union and China.
They received some Japanese arms when Japan surrendered.
The Viet Minh, a Communist-led common front under the leadership of Ho Chi Minh, then initiated an insurgency against French rule.
Hostilities escalated into the First Indochina War (beginning in December 1946).
By the 1950s, the conflict had become entwined with the Cold War.
In January 1950, China and the Soviet Union recognized the Viet Minh's Democratic Republic of Vietnam, based in Hanoi, as the legitimate government of Vietnam.
The following month the United States and Great Britain recognized the French-backed State of Vietnam in Saigon, led by former Emperor Bảo Đại, as the legitimate Vietnamese government.
In September 1950, the United States created a Military Assistance and Advisory Group (MAAG) to screen French requests for aid, advise on strategy, and train Vietnamese soldiers.
By 1954, the United States had spent US$1 billion in support of the French military effort, shouldering 80 percent of the cost of the war.
On 7 May 1954, the French garrison at Dien Bien Phu surrendered.
The defeat marked the end of French military involvement in Indochina.
At the Geneva Conference, the French negotiated a ceasefire agreement with the Viet Minh, and independence was granted to Cambodia, Laos, and Vietnam.
Transition period
At the 1954 Geneva peace conference, Vietnam was temporarily partitioned at the 17th parallel.
Ho Chi Minh had wished to continue the war in the south, but was restrained by his Chinese allies who convinced him that he could win control by electoral means.
This followed an American psychological warfare campaign, designed by Edward Lansdale for the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA), which exaggerated anti-Catholic sentiment among the Viet Minh and which falsely claimed the US was about to drop atomic bombs on Hanoi.
The northern, mainly Catholic refugees gave the later Ngô Đình Diệm regime a strong anti-communist constituency.
Diệm staffed his government's key posts mostly with northern and central Catholics.
In addition to the Catholics flowing south, up to 174,000 "Revolutionary Regroupees" and their 86,000 dependents went to the north for "regroupment", expecting to return to the south within two years.
gives a lower estimate of 32,000 executions.
However, declassified documents from the Vietnamese and Hungarian archives indicate that the number of executions was much lower than reported at the time, although likely greater than 13,500.
In 1956, leaders in Hanoi admitted to "excesses" in implementing this program and restored a large amount of the land to the original owners.
who proposed that Vietnam eventually be united by elections under the supervision of "local commissions".
According to the Pentagon Papers, however, from 1954 to 1956 "Ngô Đình Diệm really did accomplish miracles" in South Vietnam: "It is almost certain that by 1956 the proportion which might have voted for Ho-in a free election against Diệm-would have been much smaller than eighty percent."
In 1957, independent observers from India, Poland, and Canada representing the International Control Commission (ICC) stated that fair, unbiased elections were not possible, with the ICC reporting that neither South nor North Vietnam had honored the armistice agreement.
From April to June 1955, Diệm eliminated any political opposition in the south by launching military operations against two religious groups: the Cao Đài and Hòa Hảo of Ba Cụt.
The campaign also focused on the Bình Xuyên organized crime group, which was allied with members of the communist party secret police and had some military elements.
As broad-based opposition to his harsh tactics mounted, Diệm increasingly sought to blame the communists.
Likewise, Ho Chi Minh and other communist officials always won at least 99% of the vote in North Vietnamese "elections".
Diệm era, 1954-63
Rule
A devout Roman Catholic, Diệm was fervently anti-communist, nationalist, and socially conservative.
Historian Luu Doan Huynh notes that "Diệm represented narrow and extremist nationalism coupled with autocracy and nepotism."
About 12,000 suspected opponents of Diệm were killed between 1955 and 1957, and by the end of 1958, an estimated 40,000 political prisoners had been jailed.
There had been some division among former Viet Minh whose main goal was to hold the elections promised in the Geneva Accords, leading to "wildcat" activities separate from the other communists and anti-GVN activists.
North Vietnamese involvement
In March 1956, southern communist leader Lê Duẩn presented a plan to revive the insurgency entitled "The Road to the South" to the other members of the Politburo in Hanoi; however, as both China and the Soviets opposed confrontation at this time, Lê Duẩn's plan was rejected.
About 40,000 communist soldiers infiltrated the south from 1961 to 1963., settlement negotiations between the pro-Western government of Laos and the Pathet Lao communist movement in May had been impeccable.
The Kennedy administration sought to refocus U.S. efforts on pacification and "winning over the hearts and minds" of the population.
The military leadership in Washington, however, was hostile to any role for U.S. advisors other than conventional troop training.
General Paul Harkins, the commander of U.S. forces in South Vietnam, confidently predicted victory by Christmas 1963.
Paramilitary officers from the CIA's Special Activities Division trained and led Hmong tribesmen in Laos and into Vietnam.
The indigenous forces numbered in the tens of thousands and they conducted direct action missions, led by paramilitary officers, against the Communist Pathet Lao forces and their North Vietnamese supporters.
The CIA also ran the Phoenix Program and participated in Military Assistance Command, Vietnam - Studies and Observations Group (MAC-V SOG), which was originally named the Special Operations Group, but was changed for cover purposes.
Johnson's escalation, 1963-69
President Kennedy was assassinated on November 22, 1963.
Vice President Lyndon B. Johnson had not been heavily involved with policy toward Vietnam; however, upon becoming president, Johnson immediately focused on the war.
On 24 November 1963, he said, "the battle against communism ... must be joined ... with strength and determination."
Johnson knew he had inherited a rapidly deteriorating situation in South Vietnam, but he adhered to the widely accepted domino theory argument for defending the South: Should they retreat or appease, either action would imperil other nations beyond the conflict.
The military revolutionary council, meeting in lieu of a strong South Vietnamese leader, was made up of 12 members.
This council was headed by General Dương Văn Minh, whom Stanley Karnow, a journalist on the ground, later recalled as "a model of lethargy".
Lyndon Johnson commented to Undersecretary of State George Ball that "those sailors out there may have been shooting at flying fish."
An undated NSA publication declassified in 2005 revealed that there was no attack on 4 August.
The second "attack" led to retaliatory air strikes, and prompted Congress to approve the Gulf of Tonkin Resolution on 7 August 1964.
Although most congressmen at the time denied that this was a full-scale war declaration, the Tonkin Resolution granted the president unilateral power to launch any military actions he deemed necessary.
The National Security Council recommended a three-stage escalation of the bombing of North Vietnam.
Following an attack on a U.S. Army base in Pleiku on 7 February 1965, a series of air strikes was initiated, Operation Flaming Dart, while Soviet Premier Alexei Kosygin was on a state visit to North Vietnam.
Operation Rolling Thunder and Operation Arc Light expanded aerial bombardment and ground support operations.
The bombing campaign, which ultimately lasted three years, was intended to force North Vietnam to cease its support for the Viet Cong by threatening to destroy North Vietnamese air defenses and industrial infrastructure.
It was additionally aimed at bolstering the morale of the South Vietnamese.
Between March 1965 and November 1968, Rolling Thunder deluged the north with a million tons of missiles, rockets and bombs.
The objective of stopping North Vietnam and the Viet Cong was never reached.
The Chief of Staff of the United States Air Force Curtis LeMay, however, had long advocated saturation bombing in Vietnam and wrote of the communists that "we're going to bomb them back into the Stone Age".
The 1964 Offensive
Following the Gulf of Tonkin Resolution, Hanoi anticipated the arrival of US troops and began expanding the Viet Cong, as well as sending increasing numbers of North Vietnamese personnel southwards.
At this phase they were outfitting the Viet Cong forces and standardising their equipment with AK-47 rifles and other supplies, as well as forming the 9th Division.
"From a strength of approximately 5,000 at the start of 1959 the Viet Cong's ranks grew to about 100,000 at the end of 1964 ...
Between 1961 and 1964 the Army's strength rose from about 850,000 to nearly a million men."
During this phase, the use of captured equipment decreased, while greater numbers of ammunition and supplies were required to maintained regular units.
Group 559 was tasked with expanding the Ho Chi Minh trail, in light of the near constant bombardment by US warplanes.
The war had begun to shift into the final, conventional warfare phase of Hanoi's three-stage protracted warfare model.
The Viet Cong was now tasked with destroying the ARVN and capturing and holding areas; however, the Viet Cong was not yet strong enough to assault major towns and cities.
In December 1964, ARVN forces had suffered heavy losses at the Battle of Bình Giã, in a battle that both sides viewed as a watershed.
Previously, the VC had utilised hit-and-run guerrilla tactics.
At Binh Gia, however, they had defeated a strong ARVN force in a conventional battle and remained in the field for four days.
Tellingly, South Vietnamese forces were again defeated in June 1965 at the Battle of Đồng Xoài.
This marked the beginning of the American ground war.
U.S. public opinion overwhelmingly supported the deployment.
The Marines' initial assignment was the defense of Da Nang Air Base.
The first deployment of 3,500 in March 1965 was increased to nearly 200,000 by December.
With this recommendation, Westmoreland was advocating an aggressive departure from America's defensive posture and the sidelining of the South Vietnamese.
By ignoring ARVN units, the U.S. commitment became open-ended.
The plan was approved by Johnson and marked a profound departure from the previous administration's insistence that the government of South Vietnam was responsible for defeating the guerrillas.
Westmoreland predicted victory by the end of 1967.
Johnson did not, however, communicate this change in strategy to the media.
Instead he emphasized continuity.
The change in U.S. policy depended on matching the North Vietnamese and the Viet Cong in a contest of attrition and morale.
The opponents were locked in a cycle of escalation.
The American buildup transformed the South Vietnamese economy and had a profound effect on society.
South Vietnam was inundated with manufactured goods.
Stanley Karnow noted that "the main PX Post Exchange, located in the Saigon suburb of Cholon, was only slightly smaller than the New York Bloomingdale's ..."
As a result, training programs were shortened.
Washington encouraged its SEATO allies to contribute troops.
Australia, New Zealand, Thailand and the Philippines
The U.S. and its allies mounted complex search and destroy operations, designed to find enemy forces, destroy them, and then withdraw, typically using helicopters.
In November 1965, the U.S. engaged in its first major battle with the PAVN, the Battle of Ia Drang.
The operation was the first large scale helicopter air assault by the U.S., and first to employ Boeing B-52 Stratofortress strategic bombers in a tactical support role.
These tactics continued in 1966-67 with operations such as Masher, Thayer, Attleboro, Cedar Falls and Junction City.
However, the PAVN/VC insurgents remained elusive and demonstrated great tactical flexibility.
By 1967, these operations had generated large-scale internal refugees, numbering nearly 2.1 million in South Vietnam, with 125,000 people evacuated and rendered homeless during Operation Masher alone, which was the largest search and destroy operation in the war up to that point.
Operation Masher would have negligible impact, however, as the PAVN/VC returned to the province just four months after the operation ended.
Despite the continual conductance of major operations, which the Viet Cong and PAVN would typically evade, the war was characterised by smaller-unit contacts or engagements.
Up to the war's end, the Viet Cong and PAVN would initiate 90% of large firefights, of which 80% were clear and well-planned operations, and thus the PAVN/Viet Cong would retain strategic initiative despite overwhelming US force and fire-power deployment.
internal reports in the Pentagon Papers indicate that Viet Cong forces still retained strategic initiative, and were able to control their losses widely, with 30% of all engagements being Viet Cong attacks against static US positions, 23% being a VC PAVN forces.
Preparations were underway for the General Offensive, General Uprising, known as Tet Mau Than, or the Tet Offensive, with the intention of Văn Tiến Dũng for forces to launch "direct attacks on the American and puppet nerve centers-Saigon, Huế, Danang, all the cities, towns and main bases..."
Hanoi sought to placate critics of the ongoing stalemate by planning a decisive victory.
They reasoned that this could be achieved through sparking a general uprising within the towns and cities, along with mass defections among ARVN units, who were on holiday leave during the truce period.
The Tet Offensive began on 30 January 1968, as over 100 cities were attacked by over 85,000 enemy troops, including assaults on key military installations, headquarters, and government buildings and offices, including the U.S. Embassy in Saigon.
During that time, they had executed approximately 2,800 unarmed Huế civilians and foreigners they considered to be enemy's spies.
In Saigon, Viet Cong/PAVN fighters had captured areas in and around the city, attacking key installations and the neighbourhood of Cholon before US and ARVN forces dislodged them after three weeks.
During one battle, Peter Arnett reported an infantry commander saying of the Battle of Bến Tre (laid to rubble by U.S. attacks) that "it became necessary to destroy the village in order to save it."
During the first month of the offensive, 1,100 Americans and other allied troops, 2,100 ARVN, and 14,000 civilians were killed.
By the end of the first offensive, after two months, nearly 5,000 ARVN and over 4,000 U.S. forces had been killed, with total wounded of 45,820 and an unknown number of PAVN/Viet Cong casualties, Two months later a third offensive was launched, the Phase III Offensive.
The PAVN's own official records of their losses across all three offensives was 45,267 killed and 111,179 total casualties.
By then it had become the bloodiest year of the war up to that point.
The failure to spark a general uprising, and the fact that no units within the ARVN defected, meant both war goals of Hanoi had fallen flat at enormous costs.
Prior to Tet, in November 1967, Westmoreland had spearheaded a public relations drive for the Johnson administration to bolster flagging public support.
In a speech before the National Press Club he said a point in the war had been reached "where the end comes into view."
Thus, the public was shocked and confused when Westmoreland's predictions were trumped by the Tet Offensive.
Westmoreland requested 200,000 additional troops, which was leaked to the media, and the subsequent fallout combined with intelligence failures caused him to be removed from command in March 1968, succeeded by his deputy Creighton Abrams.
On 10 May 1968, peace talks began between the United States and North Vietnam in Paris.
Negotiations stagnated for five months, until Johnson gave orders to halt the bombing of North Vietnam.
At the same time, Hanoi realized it could not achieve a "total victory" and employed a strategy known as "talking while fighting, fighting while talking", in which military offensives would occur concurrently with negotiations.
Johnson declined to run for re-election as his approval rating slumped from 48 to 36 percent.
Refusal to send more U.S. troops to Vietnam was also seen as Johnson's admission that the war was lost.
As Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara noted, "the dangerous illusion of victory by the United States was therefore dead."
Nixon had also sought détente with the Soviet Union and rapprochement with China, which decreased global tensions and led to nuclear arms reduction on the part of both superpowers; however, there was disappointment when both sides continued to supply the North Vietnamese with aid.
Hanoi's war strategy
In September 1969, Ho Chi Minh died at age seventy-nine.
The failure of Tet in sparking a popular uprising caused a shift in Hanoi's war strategy, and the Giáp-Chinh "Northern-First" faction regained control over military affairs from the Lê Duẩn-Hoàng Văn Thái "Southern-First" faction.
An unconventional victory was sidelined in favor of a strategy built on conventional victory through conquest.
Large-scale offensives were rolled back in favour of small-unit and sapper attacks as well as targeting the pacification and Vietnamization strategy.
of a suspected double agent, provoked national and international outrage.
In 1971, the Pentagon Papers were leaked to The New York Times.
The top-secret history of U.S. involvement in Vietnam, commissioned by the Department of Defense, detailed a long series of public deceptions on the part of the U.S. government.
The Supreme Court ruled that its publication was legal.
Collapsing U.S. morale
Following the Tet Offensive and the decreasing support among the U.S. public for the war, U.S. forces began a period of morale collapse, disillusionment and disobedience.
At home, desertion rates quadrupled from 1966 levels.
Among the enlisted, only 2.5% chose infantry combat positions in 1969-1970.
and reached an all-time low of 33,220 in 1974, depriving U.S. forces of much-needed military leadership.
Open refusal to engage in patrols or carry out orders and disobedience began to emerge during this period, with one notable case of an entire company refusing orders to engage or carry out operations.
Unit cohesion began to dissipate and focused on minimising contact with Viet Cong and NVA troops.
From 1969 on, search-and-destroy operations became referred to as "search and evade" or "search and avoid" operations, falsifying battle reports while avoiding guerrilla fighters.
A total of 900 fragging and suspected fragging incidents were investigated, most occurring between 1969 and 1971.
At the same time that US forces were redeployed, the ARVN took over combat operations throughout the country, with casualties double US casualties in 1969, and more than triple US ones in 1970.
In the post-Tet environment, membership in the South Vietnamese Regional Force and Popular Force militias grew, and they were now more capable of providing village security, which the Americans had not accomplished under Westmoreland.
Between 1969 and 1971 the Viet Cong and some NVA units had reverted to small unit tactics typical of 1967 and prior instead of nationwide grand offensives.
Cambodia
Prince Norodom Sihanouk had proclaimed Cambodia neutral since 1955, but permitted the NVA/Viet Cong to use Cambodia as a staging ground for the Sihanouk Trail.
In March 1969 Nixon launched a massive bombing campaign, called Operation Menu, against communist sanctuaries along the Cambodia/Vietnam border.
Only five high-ranking congressional officials were informed of Operation Menu.
In March 1970, Prince Sihanouk was deposed by his pro-American prime minister Lon Nol, who demanded that North Vietnamese troops leave Cambodia or face military action.
North Vietnam invaded Cambodia at the request of the Khmer Rouge following negotiations with deputy leader Nuon Chea.
A series of military operations in Cambodia by the South Vietnamese alongside Lon Nol's FANK was the closest that the entire leadership of the Viet Cong came to being captured, a goal that US/RVN Intelligence failed to achieve for nearly a decade.
Lon Nol began rounding up Vietnamese civilians in Cambodia into internment camps and massacring them, provoking harsh reactions from both the North Vietnamese and South Vietnamese government.
A month after COSVN's escape, U.S. and ARVN forces launched a second invasion into Cambodia to attack NVA and Viet Cong bases.
A counter-offensive later that year as part of Operation Chenla II by the NVA would recapture most of the border areas and decimate most of Lon Nol's forces.
The invasion of Cambodia sparked nationwide U.S. protests as Nixon had promised to deescalate the American involvement.
Four students were killed by National Guardsmen in May 1970 during a protest at Kent State University in Ohio, which provoked further public outrage in the United States.
The reaction to the incident by the Nixon administration was seen as callous and indifferent, providing additional impetus for the anti-war movement.
The U.S. Air Force continued to heavily bomb Cambodia in support of the Cambodian government as part of Operation Freedom Deal.
Laos
Building up on the success of ARVN units in Cambodia, and further testing the Vietnamization program, the ARVN were tasked to launch Operation Lam Son 719 in February 1971, the first major operation aimed directly at occupying the Ho Chi Minh trail by attacking the major crossroad of Tchperone.
This offensive would also be the first time the NVA would field-test its combined arms force.
Thieu had ordered air assault troops to capture Tchepone and withdraw, despite facing four-times larger numbers.
During the withdrawal the NVA counterattack had forced a panicked rout.
Half of the ARVN troops involved were either captured or killed, half of the ARVN/US support helicopters were downed by anti-aircraft fire and the operation was considered a fiasco, demonstrating operational deficiencies still present within the ARVN.
All US forces personnel were completely withdrawn by March 1973.
The success of the 1973-74 dry season offensive inspired Trà to return to Hanoi in October 1974 and plead for a larger offensive the next dry season.
This time, Trà could travel on a drivable highway with regular fueling stops, a vast change from the days when the Ho Chi Minh trail was a dangerous mountain trek.
However, the rising oil prices meant that much of this could not be used, and the rushed nature of Vietnamization, intended to cover the US retreat, saw a lack of spare parts, ground-crew and maintenance personnel, rendering most of the equipment given inoperable.
Congress refused.
On 10 March 1975, General Dung launched Campaign 275, a limited offensive into the Central Highlands, supported by tanks and heavy artillery.
The target was Buôn Ma Thuột, in Đắk Lắk Province.
If the town could be taken, the provincial capital of Pleiku and the road to the coast would be exposed for a planned campaign in 1976.
The ARVN proved incapable of resisting the onslaught, and its forces collapsed on 11 March.
Once again, Hanoi was surprised by the speed of their success.
Dung now urged the Politburo to allow him to seize Pleiku immediately and then turn his attention to Kon Tum.
He argued that with two months of good weather remaining until the onset of the monsoon, it would be irresponsible to not take advantage of the situation.
Nearly a third of the American population were strongly against the war, a position which lasted through subsequent decades.
Early opposition to U.S. involvement in Vietnam drew its inspiration from the Geneva Conference of 1954.
American support of Diệm in refusing elections was seen as thwarting the democracy America claimed to support.
John F. Kennedy, while senator, opposed involvement in Vietnam.
and for those involved with the New Left, such as the Catholic Worker Movement.
Others, such as Stephen Spiro, opposed the war based on the theory of Just War.
Some wanted to show solidarity with the people of Vietnam, such as Norman Morrison emulating the self-immolation of Thích Quảng Đức.
High-profile opposition to the Vietnam War increasingly turned to mass protests in an effort to shift U.S. public opinion.
Riots broke out at the 1968 Democratic National Convention during protests against the war.
After news reports of American military abuses, such as the 1968 My Lai Massacre, brought new attention and support to the anti-war movement, some veterans joined Vietnam Veterans Against the War.
On 15 October 1969, the Vietnam Moratorium attracted millions of Americans.
The fatal shooting of four students at Kent State University in 1970 led to nationwide university protests.
Anti-war protests declined with the final withdrawal of troops after the Paris Peace Accords in 1973.
Involvement of other countries
Pro-Hanoi
QTEMPLATE |2,000 years of Chinese-Vietnamese enmity and hundreds of years of Chinese and Russian mutual suspicions were suspended when they united against us in Vietnam.|Richard Holbrooke, 1985
China
In 1950, China extended diplomatic recognition to the Viet Minh's Democratic Republic of Vietnam and sent heavy weapons, as well as military advisers led by Luo Guibo to assist the Viet Minh in its war with the French (1946-1954).
The first draft of the 1954 Geneva Accords was negotiated by French prime minister Pierre Mendès France and Chinese Premier Zhou Enlai who, seeing U.S. intervention coming, urged the Viet Minh to accept a partition at the 17th parallel.
China's support for North Vietnam when the U.S. started to intervene included both financial aid and the deployment of hundreds of thousands of military personnel in support roles.
In the summer of 1962, Mao Zedong agreed to supply Hanoi with 90,000 rifles and guns free of charge.
Starting in 1965, China sent anti-aircraft units and engineering battalions to North Vietnam to repair the damage caused by American bombing, man anti-aircraft batteries, rebuild roads and railroads, transport supplies, and perform other engineering works.
This freed North Vietnamese army units for combat in the South.
China sent 320,000 troops and annual arms shipments worth $180 million.
The Chinese began to withdraw in November 1968 in preparation for a clash with the Soviets, which occurred at Zhenbao Island in March 1969.
In 1967, the Chinese government launched a secret military program named "Project 523".
which intended to find an treatment for malaria to provide the assistance to North Vietnamese army who suffered malaria.
As the result, Chinese scientist Youyou Tu and her collaborators discovered artemisinin.
Tu was awarded Nobel Prize in 2015 for her contribution on the anti-malaria treatment.
The Chinese also began financing the Khmer Rouge as a counterweight to the Vietnamese communists at this time.
China "armed and trained" the Khmer Rouge during the civil war and continued to aid them for years afterward.
The Khmer Rouge launched ferocious raids into Vietnam in 1975-1978.
When Vietnam responded with an invasion that toppled the Khmer Rouge, China launched a brief, punitive invasion of Vietnam in 1979.
Soviet Union
Soviet ships in the South China Sea gave vital early warnings to Viet Cong forces in South Vietnam.
The Soviet intelligence ships would pick up American B-52 bombers flying from Okinawa and Guam.
Their airspeed and direction would be noted and then relayed to COSVN, North Vietnam's southern headquarters.
Using airspeed and direction, COSVN analysts would calculate the bombing target and tell any assets to move "perpendicularly to the attack trajectory."
These advance warnings gave them time to move out of the way of the bombers, and, while the bombing runs caused extensive damage, because of the early warnings from 1968 to 1970 they did not kill a single military or civilian leader in the headquarters complexes.
The Soviet Union supplied North Vietnam with medical supplies, arms, tanks, planes, helicopters, artillery, anti-aircraft missiles and other military equipment.
Soviet crews fired Soviet-made surface-to-air missiles at U.S. F-4 Phantoms, which were shot down over Thanh Hóa in 1965.
Over a dozen Soviet citizens lost their lives in this conflict.
Following the dissolution of the Soviet Union in 1991, Russian officials acknowledged that the Soviet Union had stationed up to 3,000 troops in Vietnam during the war.
Some Russian sources give more specific numbers: Between 1953 and 1991, the hardware donated by the Soviet Union included 2,000 tanks, 1,700 APCs, 7,000 artillery guns, over 5,000 anti-aircraft guns, 158 surface-to-air missile launchers, 120 helicopters.
During the war, the Soviets sent North Vietnam annual arms shipments worth $450 million.
From July 1965 to the end of 1974, fighting in Vietnam was observed by some 6,500 officers and generals, as well as more than 4,500 soldiers and sergeants of the Soviet Armed Forces.
In addition, Soviet military schools and academies began training Vietnamese soldiers-in all more than 10,000 military personnel.
The KGB had also helped developed the signals intelligence capabilities of the North Vietnamese, through an operation known as Vostok (also known as Phương Đông, meaning "Orient" and named after the Vostok 1).
The Vostok program was a counterintelligence and espionage program.
These programs were pivotal in detecting and defeating CIA and South Vietnamese commando teams sent into North Vietnam, as they were detected and captured.
The Czechoslovakian government created committees which sought to not only promote and establish peace, but also to promote victory for Viet Cong and Viet Minh forces.
Czechoslovakia continued to send tens of thousands of Czech-made rifles as well as mortar and artillery throughout the war.
Cooperation with Czechoslovakia on the development of North Vietnamese air capabilities began as early as 1956.
Czechoslovak instructors and trainers instructed the North Vietnam Air Force in China and helped them develop a modernised air force, with the Czech-built Aero Ae-45 and Aero L-29 Delfín alongside Zlín Z 26 aircraft utilised significantly for training, and regarded as preferential to Soviet-built Yakovlev Yak-3 as training aircraft.
In addition, at least two anti-aircraft artillery regiments were sent as well.
Cuba
The contributions to North Vietnam by the Republic of Cuba under Fidel Castro have been recognized several times by representatives of the Democratic Republic of Vietnam.
Castro mentioned in his discourses the Batallón Girón (Giron Battalion) as comprising the Cuban contingent that served as military advisors during the war.
In this battalion, the Cubans were aided by Nguyễn Thị Định, founding member of the Viet Cong, who later became the first female major general in the North Vietnamese Army.
There are numerous allegations by former U.S. prisoners of war that Cuban military personnel were present at North Vietnamese prison facilities during the war and that they participated in torture activities.
Witnesses to this include Senator John McCain, the 2008 U.S. presidential candidate and a former Vietnam prisoner of war, according to his 1999 book Faith of My Fathers.
Other Eastern Bloc countries
The Ministry of Public Security of Vietnam (Bộ Công An) states that there was special interest towards the Stasi of East Germany in establishing an intelligence and security apparatus, particularly since the Stasi was well-regarded and considered as "industrial, modern, and (with a) scientific working-style".
In official Vietnamese language histories on the Vietnamese Ministry of Public Security, the assistance provided by the Soviet and East German intelligence services to Vietnam is usually rated as the most important within the socialist bloc.
The Polish People's Republic had played a substantive role in brokering and serving as an intermediary for peace-talks between Hanoi and Saigon, as part of a delegation under the International Control Commission alongside Western European nations.
Recent evidence has emerged that Poland played an early role in attempting to broker talks between Ngô Đình Nhu and the Diem regime and Hanoi in 1963 in an effort to prevent the expansion of the war, given that Polish representatives were the only communist nation present in Saigon and had acted as a broker and representative on behalf of Hanoi.
Romania was also among primary supporters of North Vietnam during the war in political, economic, and military terms.
Contemporarily, the Eastern Bloc country was also known for its role in the mediation activities in the mid-1960s, resulting in what known as the "Trinh Signal" in January 1967, in which Hanoi accepted the possibility of negotiation with Washington.
Bulgaria committed their charge-free military and economic supplies to North Vietnam in a bilateral agreement signed in 1972.
Bulgarian military aid had already been provided to the latter since 1967.
Similar conducts was undertaken by Hungary, which was reaffirmed in mutual visits of Hungary and North Vietnam in 1972 and 1973.
Hungary also expressed their support through their representatives at the International Commission of Control and Supervision, a body established to supervise the implementation of the Paris Peace Accords.
Pro-Saigon
As South Vietnam was formally part of a military alliance with the US, Australia, New Zealand, France, the UK, Pakistan, Thailand and the Philippines, the alliance was invoked during the war.
The UK, France and Pakistan declined to participate, and South Korea and Taiwan were non-treaty participants.
South Korea
On the anti-communist side, South Korea (a.k.a. the Republic of Korea, ROK) had the second-largest contingent of foreign troops in South Vietnam after the United States.
In November 1961, President Park Chung-hee proposed South Korean participation in the war to John F. Kennedy, but Kennedy disagreed as they were not SEATO treaty members.
The first South Korean troops began arriving in 1964 and large combat formations began arriving a year later.
The ROK Marine Corps dispatched their 2nd Marine Brigade, while the ROK Army sent the Capital Division and later the 9th Infantry Division.
In August 1966, after the arrival of the 9th Division, the Koreans established a corps command, the Republic of Korea Forces Vietnam Field Command, near I Field Force at Nha Trang.
State department reports furthermore state that ROK forces engaged in systemic, well-organised corruption in diverting US-equipment, and that actual security was often provided by ARVN Territorial Forces, which lacked organic firepower and heavy artillery but served as a buffer between Korean units and the North Vietnamese Army.
In addition, a RAND author conducting studies in South Vietnam in 1970 alleged that ROK forces had a "deliberate, systematic policy of committing atrocities", prompting civilians to leave ROK-controlled sectors.
The conduct of ROK forces often emboldened and strengthened the Viet Cong, adding ranks from an otherwise neutral population and undermining efforts to defeat the insurgency overall.
Approximately 320,000 South Korean soldiers were sent to Vietnam, each serving a one-year tour of duty.
Maximum troop levels peaked at 50,000 in 1968, however all were withdrawn by 1973.
About 5,099 South Koreans were killed and 10,962 wounded during the war.
South Korea claimed to have killed 41,000 Viet Cong.
The United States paid South Korean soldiers 236 million dollars for their efforts in Vietnam, In the end, though, a desire to prove their commitment to the ANZUS alliance and discourage an American withdrawal from Southeast Asia necessitated a military commitment.
Australia began by sending advisors to Vietnam in 1962, and combat troops were committed in 1965.
New Zealand began by sending a detachment of engineers and an artillery battery, later sending special forces and regular infantry, which were attached to Australian formations.
Australia's peak commitment was 7,672 combat troops and New Zealand's 552.
Around 50,190 Australian personnel were involved during the course of the war, of which 521 were killed and more than 3,000 wounded.
Approximately 3,500 New Zealanders served in Vietnam, with 37 killed and 187 wounded.
Most Australians and New Zealanders served in the 1st Australian Task Force in Phước Tuy Province.
This brought Australian commanders into conflict with Westmoreland's conventional attrition warfare approach, since Australian ground forces were required to follow US doctrine.
Subic Bay and Clark Air Base achieved maximum functionality during the war, as well as supporting an estimated 80,000 locals in allied tertiary businesses that ranged from shoe making to prostitution.
Taiwan
Beginning in November 1967, Taiwan secretly operated a cargo transport detachment to assist the United States and South Vietnam.
Taiwan also provided military training units for the South Vietnamese diving units, later known as the Lien Doi Nguoi Nhai (LDMN) or "Frogman unit" in English.
Officially, Canada did not have partisan involvement in the Vietnam War, and diplomatically, it was "non-belligerent", though there is evidence to the contrary.
The Vietnam War entry in The Canadian Encyclopedia asserts that Canada's record on the truce commissions was a pro-Saigon partisan one.
United Front for the Liberation of Oppressed Races (FULRO)
The ethnic minority peoples of South Vietnam, like the Montagnards (Degar) in the Central Highlands, the Hindu and Muslim Cham, and the Buddhist Khmer Krom, were actively recruited in the war.
There was an active strategy of recruitment and favorable treatment of Montagnard tribes for the Viet Cong, as they were pivotal for control of infiltration routes.
Some groups had split off and formed the United Front for the Liberation of Oppressed Races (French: Front Uni de Lutte des Races Opprimées, acronym: FULRO) to fight for autonomy or independence.
FULRO fought against both the South Vietnamese and the Viet Cong, later proceeding to fight against the unified Socialist Republic of Vietnam after the fall of South Vietnam.
During the war, the South Vietnamese president Ngo Dinh Diem began a program to settle ethnic Vietnamese Kinh on Montagnard lands in the Central Highlands region.
This provoked a backlash from the Montagnards, some joining the Viet Cong as a result.
The Cambodians under both the pro-China King Sihanouk and the pro-American Lon Nol supported their fellow co-ethnic Khmer Krom in South Vietnam, following an anti-ethnic Vietnamese policy.
Following Vietnamization many Montagnard groups and fighters were incorporated into the Vietnamese Rangers as border sentries.
War crimes
A large number of war crimes took place during the Vietnam War.
War crimes were committed by both sides during the conflict and included rape, massacres of civilians, bombings of civilian targets, terrorism, the widespread use of torture, and the murder of prisoners of war.
Additional common crimes included theft, arson, and the destruction of property not warranted by military necessity.
South Vietnamese, Korean and American
In 1968, the Vietnam War Crimes Working Group (VWCWG) was established by the Pentagon task force set up in the wake of the My Lai Massacre, to attempt to ascertain the veracity of emerging claims of war crimes by U.S. armed forces in Vietnam, during the Vietnam War period.
In the Thuy Bo Incident the Marines found that civilians were killed during a battle with Viet Cong, while in the Son Thang massacre the Marines court-martialled the perpetrators who served less than a year in prison.
Of the war crimes that were reported to military authorities, sworn statements by witnesses and status reports indicated that 320 incidents had a factual basis.
The substantiated cases included 7 massacres between 1967 and 1971 in which at least 137 civilians were killed; seventy eight further attacks targeting non-combatants resulting in at least 57 deaths, 56 wounded and 15 sexually assaulted; and 141 cases of U.S. soldiers torturing civilian detainees or prisoners of war with fists, sticks, bats, water or electric shock.
U.S. forces established numerous free-fire zones as a tactic to prevent Viet Cong fighters from sheltering in South Vietnamese villages.
Such practice, which involved the assumption that any individual appearing in the designated zones was an enemy combatant that could be freely targeted by weapons, is regarded by journalist Lewis M. Simons as "a severe violation of the laws of war".
Nick Turse, in his 2013 book, Kill Anything that Moves, argues that a relentless drive toward higher body counts, a widespread use of free-fire zones, rules of engagement where civilians who ran from soldiers or helicopters could be viewed as Viet Cong, and a widespread disdain for Vietnamese civilians led to massive civilian casualties and endemic war crimes inflicted by U.S. troops..
One example cited by Turse is Operation Speedy Express, an operation by the 9th Infantry Division, which was described by John Paul Vann as, in effect, "many My Lais".
R.J. Rummel estimated that 39,000 were killed by South Vietnam during the Diem-era in democide from a range of between 16,000 and 167,000 South Vietnamese civilians; for 1964 to 1975, Rummel estimated a total of 50,000 killed in democide, from a range of between 42,000 and 128,000.
Thus, the total for 1954 to 1975 is 81,000, from a range of between 57,000 and 284,000 deaths caused by South Vietnam.
An estimated 26,000 to 41,000 civilian members of the PRG/Viet Cong termed "VC Infrastructure" were killed during the Phoenix Program, by US and South Vietnamese intelligence and security, with an unknown number being innocent civilians.
Torture and ill-treatment were frequently applied by the South Vietnamese to POWs as well as civilian prisoners.
During their visit to the Con Son Prison in 1970, U.S. congressmen Augustus F. Hawkins and William R. Anderson witnessed detainees either confined in minute "tiger cages" or chained to their cells, and provided with poor-quality food.
A group of American doctors inspecting the prison in the same year found many inmates suffering symptoms resulting from forced immobility and torture.
South Korean forces were also accused of war crimes.
One documented event was the Phong Nhị and Phong Nhất massacre where the 2nd Marine Brigade reportedly killed 69-79 civilians on 12 February 1968 in Phong Nhị and Phong Nhất village, Điện Bàn District of Quảng Nam Province in South Vietnam.
South Korean forces are also accused of perpetrating other massacres, namely: Bình Hòa massacre, Binh Tai Massacre and Hà My massacre.
North Vietnamese and Viet Cong
Ami Pedahzur has written that "the overall volume and lethality of Viet Cong terrorism rivals or exceeds all but a handful of terrorist campaigns waged over the last third of the twentieth century", based on the definition of terrorists as a non-state actor, and examining targeted killings and civilian deaths which are estimated at over 18,000 from 1966 to 1969.
The US Department of Defense estimates the VC/NVA had conducted 36,000 murders and almost 58,000 kidnappings from 1967 to 1972, c. 1973.
Statistics for 1968-72 suggest that "about 80 percent of the terrorist victims were ordinary civilians and only about 20 percent were government officials, policemen, members of the self-defence forces or pacification cadres."
during the Tet Offensive and the killing of 252 civilians during the Đắk Sơn massacre.
155,000 refugees fleeing the final North Vietnamese Spring Offensive were reported to have been killed or abducted on the road to Tuy Hòa in 1975.
According to Rummel, North Vietnamese and Viet Cong troops killed 164,000 civilians in democide between 1954 and 1975 in South Vietnam, from a range of between 106,000 and 227,000 (50,000 of which were reportedly killed by shelling and mortar on ARVN forces during the retreat to Tuy Hoa).
First Lieutenant Sharon Lane was the only female military nurse to be killed by enemy gunfire during the war, on 8 June 1969.
Although a small number of women were assigned to combat zones, they were never allowed directly in the field of battle.
The women who served in the military were solely volunteers.
They faced a plethora of challenges, one of which was the relatively small number of female soldiers.
Living in a male-dominated environment created tensions between the sexes.
By 1973, approximately 7,500 women had served in Vietnam in the Southeast Asian theater.
American women serving in Vietnam were subject to societal stereotypes.
To address this problem, the ANC released advertisements portraying women in the ANC as "proper, professional and well protected."
This effort to highlight the positive aspects of a nursing career reflected the feminism of the 1960s-1970s in the United States.
Although female military nurses lived in a heavily male environment, very few cases of sexual harassment were ever reported.
Some women also served for the North Vietnamese and Viet Cong intelligence services.
The deputy military commander of the PLAF, the armed wing of the Viet Cong, was a female general, Nguyễn Thị Định.
All-female units were present throughout the entirety of the war, ranging from front-line combat troops to anti-aircraft, scout, and reconnaissance units.
Female combat squads were present in the Cu Chi theatre.
They also fought in the Battle of Hue.
In addition, large numbers of women served in North Vietnam, manning anti-aircraft batteries, providing village security and serving in logistics on the Ho Chi Minh trail.
Other women were embedded with troops on the front-lines, serving as doctors and medical personnel.
Đặng Thùy Trâm became renowned after her diary was published following her death.
The Foreign Minister for the National Liberation Front and later the PRG was also a woman, Nguyễn Thị Bình.
In South Vietnam, many women voluntarily served in the ARVN's Women's Armed Force Corps (WAFC) and various other Women's corps in the military.
Some, like in the WAFC, served in combat with other soldiers.
Others served as nurses and doctors in the battlefield and in military hospitals, or served in South Vietnam or America's intelligence agencies.
During Diệm's presidency, Madame Nhu was the commander of the WAFC.
Many women joined provincial and voluntary village-level militia in the People's Self Defense Force as part of the South Vietnamese Popular Force especially during the ARVN expansions later in the war.
During the war more than one million rural people migrated or fled the fighting in the South Vietnamese countryside to the cities, especially Saigon.
Among the internal refugees were many young women who became the ubiquitous "bargirls" of wartime South Vietnam, "hawking her wares-be that cigarettes, liquor, or herself" to American and allied soldiers.
American bases were ringed by bars and brothels.
8,040 Vietnamese women came to the United States as war brides between 1964 and 1975.
Many mixed-blood Amerasian children were left behind when their American fathers returned to the United States after their tour of duty in South Vietnam; 26,000 of them were permitted to immigrate to the United States in the 1980s and 1990s.
Journalists
Women also played a prominent role as front-line reporters in the conflict, directly reporting on the conflict as it occurred.
A number of women volunteered on the North Vietnamese side as embedded journalists, including author Lê Minh Khuê embedded with NVA forces, on the Ho Chi Minh trail as well as on combat fronts.
A number of prominent Western journalists were also involved in covering the war, with Dickey Chapelle being among the first as well as the first American female reporter killed in a war.
The French-speaking Australian journalist Kate Webb was captured along with a photographer and others by the Viet Cong in Cambodia and travelled into Laos with them; they were released back into Cambodia after 23 days of captivity.
Webb would be the first Western journalist to be captured and released, as well as cover the perspective of the Viet Cong in her memoir On The Other Side.
Another French-speaking journalist, Catherine Leroy, was briefly captured and released by North Vietnamese forces during the Battle of Huế, capturing some famous photos from the battles that would appear on the cover of Life Magazine.
Black servicemen
The experience of American military personnel of African ancestry during the Vietnam War had received significant attention.
For example, the website "African-American Involvement in the Vietnam War" compiles examples of such coverage, as does the print and broadcast work of journalist Wallace Terry.
Terry's book Bloods: An Oral History of the Vietnam War by Black Veterans (1984), includes observations about the impact of the war on the black community in general and on black servicemen specifically.
Points he makes on the latter topic include: the higher proportion of combat casualties in Vietnam among African American servicemen than among American soldiers of other races, the shift toward and different attitudes of black military careerists versus black draftees, the discrimination encountered by black servicemen "on the battlefield in decorations, promotion and duty assignments" as well as their having to endure "the racial insults, cross-burnings and Confederate flags of their white comrades"-and the experiences faced by black soldiers stateside, during the war and after America's withdrawal.
Civil rights leaders protested the disproportionate casualties and the overrepresentation in hazardous duty and combat roles experienced by African American servicemen, prompting reforms that were implemented beginning in 1967-68.
As a result, by the war's completion in 1975, black casualties had declined to 12.5% of US combat deaths, approximately equal to percentage of draft-eligible black men, though still slightly higher than the 10% who served in the military.
Weapons
During the early stages of the war, the Viet Cong mainly sustained itself with captured arms; these were often of American manufacture or were crude, makeshift weapons used alongside shotguns made of galvanized pipes.
Most arms were captured from poorly defended ARVN militia outposts.
In 1967, all Viet Cong battalions were reequipped with arms of Soviet design such as the AK-47 assault rifle, carbines and the RPG-2 anti-tank weapon.
or Soviet manufacture.
In the period up to the conventional phase in 1970, the Viet Cong and NVA were primarily limited to 81 mm mortars, recoilless rifles, and small arms and had significantly lighter equipment and firepower in comparison with the US arsenal.
They relied on ambushes, superior stealth, planning, marksmanship, and small-unit tactics to face the disproportionate US technological advantage.
After the Tet Offensive, many North Vietnamese units incorporated light tanks such as the Type 62 Type 59 tank., BTR-60, Type 60 artillery, amphibious tanks (such as the PT-76) and integrated into new war doctrines as a mobile combined-arms force.
The US service rifle was initially the M14 until it was replaced by the M16 rifle.
For a period, the gun suffered from a jamming flaw.
According to a congressional report, the jamming was due to inadequate testing and reflected a decision for which the safety of soldiers was a secondary consideration.
That issue was solved in early 1968 with the issuance of the M16A1, which featured a chrome-plated bore.
The M60 machine gun was the main machine gun of the US army at the time, and many M60s were put on helicopters to provide suppressive fire.
The MAC-10 machine pistol was supplied to many special forces troops in the midpoint of the war.
Two aircraft that were prominent in the war were the AC-130 "Spectre" Gunship and the UH-1 "Huey" gunship.
The AC-130 was a heavily armed ground-attack aircraft variant of the C-130 Hercules transport plane, while the Huey is a military helicopter powered by a single, turboshaft engine; approximately 7,000 UH-1 aircraft saw service in Vietnam.
The U.S. heavily armored, 90 mm M48A3 Patton tank saw extensive action during the Vietnam War, and over 600 were deployed with US Forces.
Ground forces also had access to B-52 and F-4 Phantom II and other aircraft to launch napalm, white phosphorus, tear gas, chemical weapons, precision-guided munition and cluster bombs.
Radio communications
The Vietnam War was the first conflict where U.S. forces had secure voice communication equipment available at the tactical level.
The National Security Agency ran a crash program to provide U.S. forces with a family of security equipment, codenamed NESTOR, fielding 17,000 units initially; eventually 30,000 units were produced.
However, limitations of the units, including poor voice quality, reduced range, annoying time delays and logistical support issues, led to only one unit in ten being used.
While many in the U.S. military believed that the Viet Cong and NVA would not be able to exploit insecure communications, interrogation of captured communication intelligence units showed they were able to understand the jargon and codes used in realtime and were often able to warn their side of impending U.S. actions.
Due to the particularly heavy impact of cluster bombs during this war, Laos was a strong advocate of the Convention on Cluster Munitions to ban the weapons, and was host to the First Meeting of States Parties to the convention in November 2010.
Former U.S. Air Force official Earl Tilford has recounted "repeated bombing runs of a lake in central Cambodia.
The B-52s literally dropped their payloads in the lake."
The Air Force ran many missions of this kind for the purpose of securing additional funding during budget negotiations, so the amount of tonnage expended does not directly correlate with the resulting damage.
Aftermath
Events in Southeast Asia
On 2 July 1976, North and South Vietnam were merged to form the Socialist Republic of Vietnam.
Despite speculation that the victorious North Vietnamese would, in President Nixon's words, "massacre the civilians there South Vietnam by the millions," there is a widespread consensus that no mass executions in fact took place.
However, in the years following the war, a vast number of South Vietnamese was sent to re-education camps where many endured torture, starvation, and disease while being forced to perform hard labor.
According to Amnesty International Report 1979, this figure varied considerably depend on different observers: "... included such figures as "50,000 to 80,000" (Le Monde, 19 April 1978), "150,000" (Reuters from Bien Hoa, 2 November 1977), "150,000 to 200,000" (Washington Post, 20 December 1978), and "300,000" (Agence France Presse from Hanoi, 12 February 1978)."
Such variations may be because "Some estimates may include not only detainees but also people sent from the cities to the countryside."
According to a native observer, there were 443,360 people who had to register for a period in re-education camps in Saigon alone, and while some of them were released after a few days, others stayed there for more than a decade.
Gabriel García Márquez, a Nobel Prize winning writer, described South Vietnam as a "False paradise" after the war, when he visited in 1980: "The cost of this delirium was stupefying: 360,000 people mutilated, a million widows, 500,000 prostitutes, 500,000 drug addicts, a million tuberculous and more than a million soldiers of the old regime, impossible to completely rehabilitate into a new society.
Ten percent of the population of Ho Chi Minh City was suffering from serious venereal diseases when the war ended, and there were 4 million illiterates throughout the South."
The US used its security council veto to block Vietnam's recognition by the United Nations three times, an obstacle to the country receiving international aid.
By 1975, the Viet Minh had lost influence over the Cambodian communists.
Phnom Penh, the capital of Cambodia, fell to the Khmer Rouge on 17 April 1975.
Under the leadership of Pol Pot, the Khmer Rouge would eventually kill 1-3 million Cambodians out of a population of around 8 million, in one of the bloodiest genocides in history.
The relationship between Vietnam and Cambodia, then ruled by the Khmer Rouge communist party, escalated right after the end of the war.
In response to the Khmer Rouge taking over Phu Quoc on 17 April and Tho Chu on 4 May 1975, and the belief that they were responsible for the disappearance of 500 Vietnamese natives on Tho Chu, Vietnam launched a counterattack to take back these islands.
After several failed attempts to negotiate by both sides, Vietnam invaded Democratic Kampuchea (Cambodia) in 1978 and ousted the Khmer Rouge, who were being supported by China, in the Cambodian-Vietnamese War.
In response, China invaded Vietnam in 1979.
The two countries fought a brief border war, known as the Sino-Vietnamese War.
From 1978 to 1979, some 450,000 ethnic Chinese left Vietnam by boat as refugees or were expelled.
The Pathet Lao overthrew the monarchy of Laos in December 1975, establishing the Lao People's Democratic Republic under the leadership of a member of the royal family, Souphanouvong.
The change in regime was "quite peaceful, a sort of Asiatic 'velvet revolution'"-although 30,000 former officials were sent to reeducation camps, often enduring harsh conditions for several years.
The conflict between Hmong rebels and the Pathet Lao continued in isolated pockets.
The millions of cluster bombs the US dropped on Southeast Asia rendered the landscape hazardous.
In Laos alone, some 80 million bombs failed to explode and remain scattered throughout the country, rendering vast swathes of land impossible to cultivate and killing or maiming 50 Laotians every year.
It is estimated that the explosives still remaining buried in the ground will not be removed entirely for the next few centuries.
Over 3 million people left Vietnam, Laos, and Cambodia in the Indochina refugee crisis.
Most Asian countries were unwilling to accept these refugees, many of whom fled by boat and were known as boat people.
Between 1975 and 1998, an estimated 1.2 million refugees from Vietnam and other Southeast Asian countries resettled in the United States, while Canada, Australia, and France resettled over 500,000.
China accepted 250,000 people.
Of all the countries of Indochina, Laos experienced the largest refugee flight in proportional terms, as 300,000 people out of a total population of 3 million crossed the border into Thailand.
Included among their ranks were "about 90 percent" of Laos's "intellectuals, technicians, and officials."
An estimated 200,000 to 400,000 Vietnamese boat people died at sea, according to the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees.
Agent Orange and similar chemical substances used by the U.S. have also caused a considerable number of deaths and injuries in the intervening years, including among the US Air Force crews that handled them.
Scientific reports have concluded that refugees exposed to chemical sprays while in South Vietnam continued to experience pain in the eyes and skin as well as gastrointestinal upsets.
In one study, ninety-two percent of participants suffered incessant fatigue; others reported monstrous births.
Meta-analyses of the most current studies on the association between Agent Orange and birth defects have concluded that there is a statistically significant correlation such that having a parent who was exposed to Agent Orange at any point in their life will increase one's likelihood of either possessing or acting as a genetic carrier of birth defects.
The most common deformation appears to be spina bifida.
There is substantial evidence that the birth defects carry on for three generations or more.
In 2012, the United States and Vietnam began a cooperative cleaning up of the toxic chemical on part of Danang International Airport, marking the first time Washington has been involved in cleaning up Agent Orange in Vietnam.
Effect on the United States
Views on the war
In the post-war era, Americans struggled to absorb the lessons of the military intervention.
As General Maxwell Taylor, one of the principal architects of the war, noted, "First, we didn't know ourselves.
We thought that we were going into another Korean War, but this was a different country.
Secondly, we didn't know our South Vietnamese allies… And we knew less about North Vietnam.
Who was Ho Chi Minh?
Nobody really knew.
So, until we know the enemy and know our allies and know ourselves, we'd better keep out of this kind of dirty business.
It's very dangerous."
President Ronald Reagan coined the term "Vietnam Syndrome" to describe the reluctance of the American public and politicians to support further military interventions abroad after Vietnam.
According to a 2004 Gallup poll, 62 percent of Americans believed it was an unjust war.
US public polling in 1978 reveal nearly 72% of Americans believing the war was "fundamentally wrong and immoral", nearly a decade later the number reduced to 66% and by 1985 to 2000 surveys consistently show 34-35% believing the war was fundamentally wrong and immoral.
Nearly a third of Americans believed the war was a noble cause when surveyed in 2000.
Even General William Westmoreland admitted that the bombing had been ineffective.
As he remarked, "I still doubt that the North Vietnamese would have relented."
Hanoi had persistently sought unification of the country since the Geneva Accords, and the effects of U.S. bombings had negligible diplomatic impacts on the goals of the North Vietnamese government.
The effects of U.S. bombing campaigns had mobilised the people throughout North Vietnam and mobilised international support for North Vietnam due to the perception of a super-power attempting to bomb a significantly smaller, agrarian society into submission.
The Vietnam War POW/MIA issue, concerning the fate of U.S. service personnel listed as missing in action, persisted for many years after the war's conclusion.
The costs of the war loom large in American popular consciousness; a 1990 poll showed that the public incorrectly believed that more Americans lost their lives in Vietnam than in World War II.
Cost of the war
Between 1953 and 1975, the United States was estimated to have spent $168 billion on the war ($1.02 trillion in FY2015 dollars).
This resulted in a large federal budget deficit.
Other figures point to $138.9 billion from 1965 to 1974 (not inflation-adjusted), ten times the amount of support for all education spending in the US and 50 times more than housing and community development spending within that time period.
General record-keeping was reported to have been sloppy for government spending during the war.
James E. Westheider wrote that "At the height of American involvement in 1968, for example, there were 543,000 American military personnel in Vietnam, but only 80,000 were considered combat troops."
Conscription in the United States had been controlled by the president since World War II, but ended in 1973.
As of 2013, the U.S. government is paying Vietnam veterans and their families or survivors more than $22 billion a year in war-related claims.
Impact on the U.S. military
By war's end, 58,220 American soldiers had been killed, The average age of the U.S. troops killed in Vietnam was 23.11 years.
According to Dale Kueter, "Of those killed in combat, 86.3 percent were white, 12.5 percent were black and the remainder from other races."
Approximately 830,000 Vietnam veterans suffered some degree of posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD).
An estimated 125,000 Americans left for Canada to avoid the Vietnam draft, and approximately 50,000 American servicemen deserted.
In 1977, United States president Jimmy Carter granted a full and unconditional pardon to all Vietnam-era draft dodgers.
As the Vietnam War continued inconclusively and became more unpopular with the American public, morale declined and disciplinary problems grew among American enlisted men and junior, non-career officers.
Drug use, racial tensions, and the growing incidence of fragging-attempting to kill unpopular officers and non-commissioned officers with grenades or other weapons-created severe problems for the U.S. military and impacted its capability of undertaking combat operations.
By 1971, a U.S. Army colonel writing in the Armed Forces Journal declared: "By every conceivable indicator, our army that now remains in Vietnam is in a state approaching collapse, with individual units avoiding or having refused combat, murdering their officers and non commissioned officers, drug-ridden, and dispirited where not near mutinous....
The morale, discipline, and battle-worthiness of the U.S. Armed Forces are, with a few salient exceptions, lower and worse than at any time in this century and possibly in the history of the United States."
Between 1969 and 1971 the U.S. Army recorded more than 700 attacks by troops on their own officers.
Eighty-three officers were killed and almost 650 were injured.
The Vietnam War called into question the U.S. Army doctrine.
Marine Corps general Victor H. Krulak heavily criticised Westmoreland's attrition strategy, calling it "wasteful of American lives… with small likelihood of a successful outcome."
Ron Milam has questioned the severity of the "breakdown" of the U.S. armed forces, especially among combat troops, as reflecting the opinions of "angry colonels" who deplored the erosion of traditional military values during the Vietnam War.
Although acknowledging serious problems, he questions the alleged "near mutinous" conduct of junior officers and enlisted men in combat.
Investigating one combat refusal incident, a journalist declared, "A certain sense of independence, a reluctance to behave according to the military's insistence on obedience, like pawns or puppets...
The grunts infantrymen were determined to survive...they insisted of having something to say about the making of decisions that determined whether they might live or die."
The morale and discipline problems and resistance to conscription (the draft) were important factors leading to the creation of an all-volunteer military force by the United States and the termination of conscription.
The last conscript was inducted into the army in 1973.
The all-volunteer military moderated some of the coercive methods of discipline previously used to maintain order in military ranks.
Effects of U.S. chemical defoliation
One of the most controversial aspects of the U.S. military effort in Southeast Asia was the widespread use of chemical defoliants between 1961 and 1971.
They were used to |accessdate=4 September 2013
Early in the American military effort, it was decided that since the enemy were hiding their activities under triple-canopy jungle, a useful first step might be to defoliate certain areas.
This was especially true of growth surrounding bases (both large and small) in what became known as Operation Ranch Hand.
Corporations like Dow Chemical Company and Monsanto were given the task of developing herbicides for this purpose.
American officials also pointed out that the British had previously used 2,4,5-T and 2,4-D (virtually identical to America's use in Vietnam) on a large scale throughout the Malayan Emergency in the 1950s in order to destroy bushes, crops, and trees in effort to deny communist insurgents the concealment they needed to ambush passing convoys.
Indeed, Secretary of State Dean Rusk told President John F. Kennedy on 24 November 1961, that "the use of defoliant does not violate any rule of international law concerning the conduct of chemical warfare and is an accepted tactic of war.
Precedent has been established by the British during the emergency in Malaya in their use of aircraft for destroying crops by chemical spraying."
The defoliants, which were distributed in drums marked with color-coded bands, included the "Rainbow Herbicides"-Agent Pink, Agent Green, Agent Purple, Agent Blue, Agent White, and most famously, Agent Orange, which included dioxin as a byproduct of its manufacture.
About 11-12 million gallons (41.6-45.4 million L) of Agent Orange were sprayed over southern Vietnam between 1961 and 1971.
A prime area of Ranch Hand operations was in the Mekong Delta, where the U.S. Navy patrol boats were vulnerable to attack from the undergrowth at the water's edge.
In 1961 and 1962, the Kennedy administration authorized the use of chemicals to destroy rice crops.
Between 1961 and 1967, the U.S. Air Force sprayed 20 million U.S. gallons (75,700,000 L) of concentrated herbicides over 6 million acres (24,000 km2) of crops and trees, affecting an estimated 13% of South Vietnam's land.
In 1965, 42% of all herbicide was sprayed over food crops.
Another purpose of herbicide use was to drive civilian populations into RVN-controlled areas.
They appealed, but the dismissal was cemented in February 2008 by the Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit. , the Vietnamese government estimates that there are over 4,000,000 victims of dioxin poisoning in Vietnam, although the United States government denies any conclusive scientific links between Agent Orange and the Vietnamese victims of dioxin poisoning.
In some areas of southern Vietnam, dioxin levels remain at over 100 times the accepted international standard.
In 2006, Anh Duc Ngo and colleagues of the University of Texas Health Science Center published a meta-analysis that exposed a large amount of heterogeneity (different findings) between studies, a finding consistent with a lack of consensus on the issue on the effect of Agent Orange in Vietnam.
Despite this, statistical analysis of the studies they examined resulted in data that the increase in birth defects dioxin "appears" to be on the order of 3 in Vietnamese-funded studies, but 1.29 in the rest of the world.
There is data near the threshold of statistical significance suggesting Agent Orange contributes to still-births, cleft palate, and neural tube defects, with spina bifida being the most statistically significant defect.
The large discrepancy in RR between Vietnamese studies and those in the rest of the world has been ascribed to bias in the Vietnamese studies.
Casualties
Estimates of the number of casualties vary, with one source suggesting up to 3.8 million violent war deaths in Vietnam for the period 1955 to 2002.
A detailed demographic study calculated 791,000-1,141,000 war-related deaths during the war for all of Vietnam, for both military and civilians.
A 1974 US Senate subcommittee estimates nearly 1.4 million civilians killed and wounded between 1965 and 1974, and attributed over half as resulting from US and South Vietnamese military action.
It was difficult to distinguish between civilians and military personnel on the Viet Cong side as many persons were part-time guerrillas or impressed labourers who did not wear uniforms and civilians actually killed were sometimes written off as enemy KIA.
MACV rarely made a distinction between unarmed civilians and combatants, leading to couting of civilians killed as enemy casualties since it was directly tied to promotions and commendation.
Between 275,000 20,000-62,000 Laotians also died,
Unexploded ordnance, mostly from U.S. bombing, continue to detonate and kill people today.
According to the Vietnamese government, ordnance has killed some 42,000 people since the war officially ended.
According to the government of Laos, unexploded ordnance has killed or injured over 20,000 Laotians since the end of the war.
Another Vietnamese film produced was The Abandoned Field: Free Fire Zone (Cánh đồng hoang) in 1979 which weaves the narrative of living on the ground in a US "free-fire zone" as well as perspectives from US helicopters.
In American popular culture, the "Crazy Vietnam Veteran", who was suffering from posttraumatic stress disorder, became a common stock character after the war.
One of the first major films based on the Vietnam War was John Wayne's pro-war film, The Green Berets (1968).
Further cinematic representations were released during the 1970s and 1980s, including Michael Cimino's The Deer Hunter (1978), Francis Ford Coppola's Apocalypse Now (1979), Oliver Stone's Platoon (1986) - based on his service in the U.S. military during the Vietnam War, Stanley Kubrick's Full Metal Jacket (1987), Hamburger Hill (1987), Born on the Fourth of July (1989), Casualties of War (1989), and Forrest Gump (1994).
Later films would include We Were Soldiers (2002) and Rescue Dawn (2007).
in particular the notion that the My Lai massacre was caused by drug use.
* Opposition to United States involvement in the Vietnam War
General
Annotations
Notes
References
Secondary sources
:Angio, Joe.
Nixon a Presidency Revealed (2007)
The History Channel television documentary
:Baker, Kevin.
"Stabbed in the Back!
The past and future of a right-wing myth", Harper's Magazine (June 2006)
:Blaufarb Douglas S.
The Counterinsurgency Era (1977).
A history of the Kennedy Administration's involvement in South Vietnam.
:Brigham, Robert K. Battlefield Vietnam: A Brief History.
A PBS interactive website.
:Buckley, Kevin.
http:/ english Vietnam/buckley.html "Pacification's Deadly Price", Newsweek, 19 June 1972.
:Buzzanco, Bob.
"25 Years After End of Vietnam War: Myths Keep Us from Coming to Terms with Vietnam", The Baltimore Sun (17 April 2000)
: a Washington insider's memoir of events.
:Fincher, Ernest Barksdale, The Vietnam War (1980).
:Gettleman, Marvin E.; Franklin, Jane; Young, Marilyn Vietnam and America: A Documented History.
(1995).
:Hammond, William.
Public Affairs: The Military and the Media, 1962-1968 (1987); Public Affairs: The Military and the Media, 1968-1973 (1995).
Full-scale history of the war by U.S. Army; much broader than title suggests.
:Hitchens, Christopher.
The Vietnam Syndrome.
:Leepson, Marc ed. (1999).
Dictionary of the Vietnam War.
New York: Webster's New World.
:Moss, George D. Vietnam (4th ed 2002) textbook.
:Major General Spurgeon Neel.
Medical Support of the U.S. Army in Vietnam 1965-1970 official medical history
:Nulty, Bernard.
The Vietnam War (1998)
New York: Barnes and Noble.
:Palmer, Bruce Jr.
The Twenty-Five Year War (1984), narrative military history by a senior U.S. general.
* Roberts III, Mervyn Edwin.
The Psychological War for Vietnam, 1960-1968 (2018)
:Schell, Jonathan.
The Time of Illusion (1976).
:Schulzinger, Robert D. A Time for War: The United States and Vietnam, 1941-1975 (1997).
:Sorley, Lewis, A Better War: The Unexamined Victories and Final Tragedy of America's Last Years in Vietnam (1999), based upon still classified tape-recorded meetings of top level US commanders in Vietnam,
:Spector, Ronald.
After Tet: The Bloodiest Year in Vietnam (1992), very broad coverage of 1968.
:Summers, Harry G. https:/ ?
id=-Z4l-ZySVWwC On Strategy:
A Critical Analysis of the Vietnam War, Presidio press (1982), (225 pages)
:Tucker, Spencer.
ed.
Encyclopedia of the Vietnam War (1998) 3 vol.
reference set; also one-volume abridgement (2001).
:Witz, James J. The Tet Offensive: Intelligence Failure in War (1991).
:Xiaoming, Zhang.
"China's 1979 War With Vietnam: A Reassessment", China Quarterly.
Issue no. 184, (December 2005)
Primary sources
:Carter, Jimmy.
http:/ pardon/carter_proclamation.htm By The President Of The United States Of America, A Proclamation Granting Pardon For Violations Of The Selective Service Act,
4 August 1964
To 28 March 1973 (21 January 1977)
:Central Intelligence Agency.
"https:/ library the-world-factbook la.html#history Laos", CIA World Factbook
:http:/ content.php?pid
227219&sid
1880539 Cora Weiss Collection (materials related to war resistance and peace activism movements during the Vietnam War), Lloyd Sealy Library Special Collections, John Jay College of Criminal Justice
:Eisenhower, Dwight D. Mandate for Change.
(1963) a presidential political memoir
:Ho, Chi Minh.
"Vietnam Declaration of Independence", Selected Works.
(1960-1962) selected writings
:LeMay, General Curtis E. and Kantor, MacKinlay.
Mission with LeMay (1965) autobiography of controversial former Chief of Staff of the United States Air Force
:Kissinger, United States Secretary of State Henry A. https:/ web http:/ library vietnam/750512a.htm "Lessons on Vietnam", (1975) secret memoranda to U.S. President Ford
:McCain, John.
Faith of My Fathers: A Family Memoir (1999)
:Marshall, Kathryn.
In the Combat Zone: An Oral History of American Women in Vietnam, 1966-1975 (1987)
:Martin, John Bartlow.
Was Kennedy Planning to Pull out of Vietnam?
(1964) oral history for the John F. Kennedy Library, tape V, reel 1.
:Myers, Thomas.
Walking Point: American Narratives of Vietnam (1988)
:Public Papers of the Presidents, 1965 (1966) official documents of U.S. presidents.
:Schlesinger, Arthur M. Jr. Robert Kennedy and His Times.
(1978) a first-hand account of the Kennedy administration by one of his principal advisors
:Sinhanouk, Prince Norodom.
"Cambodia Neutral: The Dictates of Necessity."
Foreign Affairs.
(1958) describes the geopolitical situation of Cambodia
:Tang, Truong Nhu.
A Viet Cong Memoir (1985), revealing account by senior NLF official
:Terry, Wallace, ed.
Bloods: An Oral History of the Vietnam War by Black Veterans (1984)
:The landmark series Vietnam: A Television History, first broadcast in 1983, is a special presentation of the award-winning PBS history series, American Experience.
:The Pentagon Papers (Gravel ed. 5 vol 1971); combination of narrative and secret documents compiled by Pentagon.
http:/ acad pentagon web https:/ www history index.html vol 1: 1964; https:/ web https:/ www history index.html vol 2: 1965; https:/ www history index.html vol 4: 1966;
:U.S. Department of Defense and the House Committee on Armed Services.
U.S.-Vietnam Relations, 1945-1967.
Washington, DC Department of Defense and the House Committee on Armed Services, 1971, 12 volumes.
Historiography and memory
:Hall, Simon, "Scholarly Battles over the Vietnam War", Historical Journal 52 (September 2009), 813-29.
Further reading
* Chris Mullin, "Terror Was Absolute" (review of Max Hastings, Vietnam: An Epic Tragedy, 1945-75, Collins, 2019, 722 pp., ), London Review of Books, vol. 41, no. 14 (18 July 2019), pp. 35-36.
* Jan Berry, W.D. Ehrhart: Demilitarized Zones - Veterans after Vietnam, East River Anthology 1976, Perkasie, Pa. 18944, USA, .
