The dachshund ( or ) (German: "badger dog"), also known as the wiener dog or sausage dog is a short-legged, long-bodied, hound-type dog breed.
They may be smooth-haired, wire-haired, or long-haired.
The standard-size dachshund was developed to scent, chase, and flush out badgers and other burrow-dwelling animals, while the miniature dachshund was bred to hunt smaller prey such as rabbits.
In the Western United States, they have also been used to track wounded deer and hunt prairie dogs.
Dachshunds also participate in conformation shows, field trials and many other events organized through pure-bred dog organizations such as the American Kennel Club (AKC).
According to the AKC, the dachshund is ranked in 13th place in popularity amongst dog breeds in the United States.
Etymology
The name dachshund is of German origin and literally means "badger dog," from Dachs ("European badger") and Hund ("hound, dog").
The pronunciation varies in English: variations of the first and second syllables include , , and , , .
It may be mispronounced as "dash-hound" by some English speakers.
Although "dachshund" is a German word, in modern German they are more commonly known by the short name Dackel or Teckel.
The German word is pronounced .
Because of their long, narrow build, they are often nicknamed wiener dog or sausage dog.
Classification
While classified in the hound group or scent hound group in the United States and Great Britain, the breed has its own group in the countries which belong to the Fédération Cynologique Internationale (World Canine Federation).
Many dachshunds, especially the wire-haired subtype, may exhibit behavior and appearance that are similar to that of the terrier group of dogs.
An argument can be made for the scent (or hound) group classification because the breed was developed to use scent to trail and hunt animals, and probably descended from the Saint Hubert Hound like many modern scent hound breeds such as bloodhounds and Basset Hounds; but with the persistent personality and love for digging that probably developed from the terrier, it can also be argued that they could belong in the terrier, or "earth dog", group.
According to the AKC standards for the breed, "scars from honorable wounds shall not be considered a fault" because the dachshund is a hunting dog.
Coat and color
There are three dachshund coat varieties: smooth coat (short hair), longhaired, and wirehaired.
and kaninchen (German for "rabbit").
Although the standard and miniature sizes are recognized almost universally, the rabbit size is not recognized by clubs in the United States and the United Kingdom.
The rabbit size is recognized by the Fédération Cynologique Internationale (World Canine Federation) (FCI), which contain kennel clubs from 83 countries all over the world.
An increasingly common size for family pets falls between the miniature and the standard size, frequently referred to as "tweenies," not an official classification.
A full-grown standard dachshund averages to , while the miniature variety normally weighs less than .
H. L. Mencken said that "A dachshund is a half-dog high and a dog-and-a-half long," although they have been referred to as "two dogs long".
This characteristic has led them to be quite a recognizable breed, and they are featured in many jokes and cartoons, particularly The Far Side by Gary Larson.
Eye color
Light-colored dachshunds can sport amber, light brown, or green eyes; however, kennel club standards state that the darker the eye color, the better.
Dapple and double dapple dachshunds can have multi coloured “wall” eyes with fully blue, partially blue or patched irises due to the effect of the dapple gene on eye pigmentation expression.
“Wall” eye is permissible according to DCA standards but undesirable by AKC standards.
Piebald-patterned dachshunds will never have blue in their eyes, unless the dapple pattern is present.
Temperament
Dachshunds are playful, but as hunting dogs can be quite stubborn, and are known for their propensity for chasing small animals, birds, and tennis balls with great determination and ferocity.
Many dachshunds are stubborn, making them a challenge to train.
Dachshunds can be aggressive to strangers and other dogs.
Despite this, they are rated in the intelligence of dogs as an average working dog with a persistent ability to follow trained commands 50% of the time or more.
They rank 49th in Stanley Coren's Intelligence of Dogs, being of average working and obedience intelligence.
They can have a loud bark.
Some bark quite a lot and may need training to stop, while others will not bark much at all.
though they can be standoffish towards strangers.
According to the American Kennel Club's breed standards, "the dachshund is clever, lively and courageous to the point of rashness, persevering in above and below ground work, with all the senses well-developed.
Any display of shyness is a serious fault."
Their temperament and body language give the impression that they do not know or care about their relatively small size.
Like many small hunting dogs, they will challenge a larger dog.
Indulged dachshunds may become snappy or extremely obstinate.
Many dachshunds do not like unfamiliar people, and many will growl or bark at them.
Although the dachshund is generally an energetic dog, some are sedate.
This dog's behavior is such that it is not the dog for everyone.
A bored, untrained dachshund will become destructive.
Health
The breed is prone to spinal problems, especially intervertebral disk disease (IVDD), due in part to an extremely long spinal column and short rib cage.
The risk of injury may be worsened by obesity, jumping, rough handling, or intense exercise, which place greater strain on the vertebrae.
About 20-25% of dachshunds will develop IVDD.
Treatment consists of combinations of crate confinement and courses of anti-inflammatory medications (steroids and non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs like carprofen and meloxicam), or chronic pain medications, like tramadol.
Serious cases may require surgery to remove the troublesome disk contents.
A dog may need the aid of a cart to get around if paralysis occurs.
A minimally invasive procedure called "percutaneous laser disk ablation" has been developed at the Oklahoma State University Veterinary Hospital.
Originally, the procedure was used in clinical trials Dachshunds may also be affected by osteogenesis imperfecta (brittle bone disease).
The condition seems to be mainly limited to wire-haired Dachshunds, with 17% being carriers.
A genetic test is available to allow breeders to avoid breeding carriers to carriers.
In such pairings, each puppy will have a 25% chance of being affected.
In some double dapples, there are varying degrees of vision and hearing loss, including reduced or absent eyes.
Not all double dapples have problems with their eyes and/or ears, which may include degrees of hearing loss, full deafness, malformed ears, congenital eye defects, reduced or absent eyes, partial or full blindness, or varying degrees of both vision and hearing problems; but heightened problems can occur due to the genetic process in which two dapple genes cross, particularly in certain breeding lines.
Dapple genes, which are dominant genes, are considered "dilution" genes, meaning whatever color the dog would have originally carried is lightened, or diluted, randomly; two dominant "dilution" genes can cancel each other out, or "cross", removing all color and producing a white recessive gene, essentially a white mutation.
When occurring genetically within the eyes or ears, this white mutation can be detrimental to development, causing hearing or vision problems.
Other dachshund health problems include hereditary epilepsy, granulomatous meningoencephalitis, dental issues, Cushing's syndrome, thyroid various allergies and atopies, and various eye conditions including cataracts, glaucoma, progressive retinal atrophy, The records analyzed contained data on 42,855 litters.
It was found that as the inbreeding coefficient increased, litter size decreased and the percentage of stillborn puppies increased, thus indicating inbreeding depression.
It was also found that young and older dams had smaller litter sizes and more stillborn puppies than middle-aged dams.
History
In 1891 an author stated that the origin of the dachshund is not known, but theorized that the early roots of the dachshund may go back to ancient Egypt.
In its modern incarnation, the dachshund is a creation of German breeders and includes elements of German, French, and English hounds and terriers.
Dachshunds have been kept by royal courts all over Europe, including that of Queen Victoria, who was particularly enamored by the breed.
The first verifiable references to the dachshund, originally named the "Dachs Kriecher" ("badger crawler") or "Dachs Krieger" ("badger warrior"), came from books written in the early 18th century.
Prior to that, there exist references to "badger dogs" and "hole dogs", but these likely refer to purposes rather than to specific breeds.
The original German dachshunds were larger than the modern full-size variety, weighing between , and originally came in straight-legged and crook-legged varieties (the modern dachshund is descended from the latter).
Though the breed is famous for its use in exterminating badgers and badger-baiting, dachshunds were also commonly used for rabbit and fox hunting, for locating wounded deer, and in packs were known to hunt game as large as wild boar and as fierce as the wolverine.
There are huge differences of opinion as to when dachshunds were specifically bred for their purpose of badger hunting, as the American Kennel Club states the dachshund was bred in the 15th century, while the Dachshund Club of America states that foresters bred the dogs in the 18th or 19th century.
Double-dapple dachshunds, which are prone to eye disease, blindness, or hearing problems, are generally believed to have been introduced to the United States between 1879 and 1885.
The flap-down ears and famous curved tail of the dachshund have deliberately been bred into the dog.
In the case of the ears, this is to keep grass seeds, dirt, and other matter from entering the ear canal.
The curved tail is dual-purposed: to be seen more easily in long grass and, in the case of burrowing dachshunds, to help haul the dog out if it becomes stuck in a burrow.
Others believe it was a cross from a miniature French pointer and a pinscher; others claim that it was developed from the St. Hubert Hound, also a bloodhound, in the 18th century, and still others believe that they were descended from Basset Hounds, based upon their scent abilities and general appearance.
The exact origins of the dachshund are therefore unknown.
According to William Loeffler, from The American Book of the Dog (1891), in the chapter on dachshunds: "The origin of the Dachshund is in doubt, our best authorities disagreeing as to the beginning of the breed."
Symbol of Germany
Dachshunds have traditionally been viewed as a symbol of Germany.
Political cartoonists commonly used the image of the dachshund to ridicule Germany.
During World War I the dachshunds' popularity in the United States plummeted because of this association.
As a result, they were often called "liberty hounds" by their owners similar to "liberty cabbage" becoming a term for sauerkraut mostly in North America.
The stigma of the association was revived to a lesser extent during World War II, though it was comparatively short-lived.
Kaiser Wilhelm II and German Field Marshal
Erwin Rommel were known for keeping dachshunds.
Due to the association of the breed with Germany, as well as its particular popularity among dog keepers in Munich back then, the dachshund was chosen to be the first official mascot for the 1972 Summer Olympics in Munich, with the name Waldi.
Sports
Some people train and enter their dachshund to compete in dachshund races, such as the Wiener Nationals.
Several races across the United States routinely draw several thousand attendees, including races in Germantown, Tennessee; Bossier City, Louisiana; Buda, Texas; Davis, California; Phoenix, Arizona; Los Alamitos, California; Findlay, Ohio; Milwaukee, Wisconsin; Oklahoma City, Oklahoma; Kansas City, Kansas; Palo Alto, California; and Shakopee, Minnesota.
There is also an annual dachshund run in Kennywood, located in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, called the Wiener 100, in Huntington, West Virginia called the Dachshund Dash and in Lovettsville, Virginia as part of the town's annual Oktoberfest celebration.
Despite the popularity of these events, the Dachshund Club of America opposes "wiener racing", as many greyhound tracks use the events to draw large crowds to their facilities.
The DCA is also worried about potential injuries to dogs, due to their predisposition to back injuries.
Another favorite sport is earthdog trials, in which dachshunds enter tunnels with dead ends and obstacles attempting to locate an artificial bait or live but caged and protected rats.
Dackel versus Teckel
In Germany, dachshunds are widely called Dackel (both singular and plural).
Among hunters, they are mainly referred to as Teckel.
There are kennels which specialize in breeding hunting dachshunds, the so-called jagdliche Leistungszucht ("hunting-related performance breed") or Gebrauchshundezucht ("working dog breed"), as opposed to breeding family dogs.
Therefore, it is sometimes incorrectly believed that Teckel is either a name for the hunting breed or a mark for passing the test for a trained hunting dog (called "VGP", "Verband-Gebrauchsprüfung") in Germany.
Popularity
Dachshunds are one of the most popular dogs in the United States, ranking 13th in the 2016 AKC registration statistics.
They are popular with urban and apartment dwellers, ranking among the top ten most popular breeds in 76 of 190 major US cities surveyed by the AKC.
One will find varying degrees of organized local dachshund clubs in most major American cities, including New York, New Orleans, Portland, Los Angeles, and Chicago.
File:Adolf Eberle Dackelfamilie.jpg|Die Dackelfamilie mit Jäger und Magd (The Dachshund family with Hunter and maid) by Adolf Eberle
File:Jean-Baptiste Oudry - Hound with Gun and Dead Game - WGA16780.jpg|Jean-Baptiste Oudry - Dachshund with Gun and Dead Game, 1740
File:L Riedler Hunde 1 Wie wird es enden.jpg|How will it end?
Wie wird es enden? c. 1900.
File:Dackel mit Bierkrug.jpg|German postcard with inscription "This beer belongs to my master!"
c. 1900.
Notable dogs and owners
* John F. Kennedy bought a dachshund puppy while touring Europe in 1937 for his then-girlfriend Olivia.
The puppy, named Dunker, never left Germany after Kennedy started to get allergic reactions.
* Grover Cleveland, the 22nd and 24th President, had a dachshund in the White House.
* William Randolph Hearst was an avid lover of dachshunds.
When his own dachshund Helena died, he eulogized her in his "In The News" column.
* Fred, E.B. White's dachshund, appeared in many of his famous essays.
* Lump, the pet of Pablo Picasso, who was thought to have inspired some of his artwork.
(Pronounced: loomp; German for "Rascal") Picasso & Lump: A Dachshund's Odyssey tells the story of Picasso and Lump.
*Jack Ruby, the killer of Lee Harvey Oswald, had a dachshund named Sheba, which he often referred to as his wife.
* Andy Warhol had a pair of dachshunds, Archie and Amos, whom he depicted in his paintings and mentioned frequently in his diaries.
* Stanley and Boodgie, immortalized on canvas by owner David Hockney, and published in the book David Hockney's Dog Days.
* Wadl and Hexl, Kaiser Wilhelm II's famous ferocious pair.
Upon arriving at Archduke Franz Ferdinand's country seat, château Konopiště, on a semi-official visit, they promptly proceeded to do away with one of the Austro-Hungarian heir presumptive's priceless golden pheasants, thereby almost causing an international incident.
Another one of his beloved dachshunds, Senta, is currently buried at Huis Doorn, Wilhelm's manor in the Netherlands.
* Donald Rumsfeld was asked, in 2003, whether he had duct tape, plastic sheeting, and a three-day supply of bottled water at home.
He replied, "I would like to say I did.
I don't believe we do.
But I do have a miniature dachshund named Reggie who looks out for us."
In Zelenogorsk, Russia, a parade of Dachshunds pass by a Dachshund monument every July 25 to commemorate the day the city was founded.
* Joe was the dachshund of General Claire Lee Chennault, commander of the Flying Tigers and then the China Air Task Force of the US Army Air Forces, and became the mascot of those organizations.
* Maxie, a dachshund owned by actress Marie Prevost, tried to awaken his dead mistress, who was found with small bites on her legs.
Maxie's barking eventually summoned neighbours to the scene.
The incident inspired the 1977 Nick Lowe song "Marie Prevost".
* Liliane Kaufmann, wife of Edgar J. Kaufmann who commissioned the home Fallingwater from Frank Lloyd Wright in 1935, was a well known breeder and owner of long-haired dachshunds.
At the Fallingwater bookstore, visitors are able to purchase a book titled "Moxie" which is about one of the dachshunds who lived at Fallingwater.
Liliane raised long haired dachshunds and they travelled from Pittsburgh to Bear Run with her.
* Obie is a dachshund who became infamous for his obesity, weighing as much as , more than twice a normal-weight standard dachshund.
He reached his target weight of in July 2013.
* Carole Lombard and Clark Gable had a dachshund named Commissioner.
*Crusoe the Celebrity Dachshund gained fame on social media.
In 2015, Crusoe came out with his The New York Times best-selling book titled "Crusoe: Adventures of the Wiener Dog Extraordinaire!".
In 2018, Crusoe came out with another book titled Crusoe: The Worldly Weiner Dog.
At the 9th annual Shorty Awards, Crusoe won the best animal category.
In 2018, Crusoe won the People's Choice Awards Animal Star of 2018.
Further reading
* http:/ Documents Documents/StandartTaksPL.htm Dachshund Breed Standard Poland Kennel Club 9 May 2001
