Diplodocus long, based on findings that show that Gillette had originally misplaced vertebrae 12-19 as vertebrae 20-27.
The nearly complete Diplodocus carnegii skeleton at the Carnegie Museum of Natural History in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, on which size estimates of D. hallorum are mainly based, also was found to have had its 13th tail vertebra come from another dinosaur, throwing off size estimates for D. hallorum even further.
While dinosaurs such as Supersaurus were probably longer, fossil remains of these animals are only fragmentary.
Diplodocus had an extremely long tail, composed of about 80 caudal vertebrae, which are almost double the number some of the earlier sauropods had in their tails (such as Shunosaurus with 43), and far more than contemporaneous macronarians had (such as Camarasaurus with 53).
Some speculation exists as to whether it may have had a defensive or noisemaking (by cracking it like a coachwhip) function.
The tail may have served as a counterbalance for the neck.
The middle part of the tail had "double beams" (oddly shaped chevron bones on the underside, which gave Diplodocus its name).
They may have provided support for the vertebrae, or perhaps prevented the blood vessels from being crushed if the animal's heavy tail pressed against the ground.
These "double beams" are also seen in some related dinosaurs.
Chevron bones of this particular form were initially believed to be unique to Diplodocus; since then they have been discovered in other members of the diplodocid family as well as in non-diplodocid sauropods, such as Mamenchisaurus.
Like other sauropods, the manus (front "feet") of Diplodocus were highly modified, with the finger and hand bones arranged into a vertical column, horseshoe-shaped in cross section.
Diplodocus lacked claws on all but one digit of the front limb, and this claw was unusually large relative to other sauropods, flattened from side to side, and detached from the bones of the hand.
The function of this unusually specialized claw is unknown.
No skull has ever been found that can be confidently said to belong to Diplodocus, though skulls of other diplodocids closely related to Diplodocus (such as Galeamopus) are well known.
The skulls of diplodocids were very small compared with the size of these animals.
Diplodocus had small, 'peg'-like teeth that pointed forward and were only present in the anterior sections of the jaws.
The discovery of partial diplodocid skin impressions in 1990 showed that some species had narrow, pointed keratinous spines, much like those on an iguana and up to long, on the "whiplash" portion of their tails, and possibly along the back and neck as well, as in hadrosaurids.
The spines have been incorporated into many recent reconstructions of Diplodocus, notably Walking with Dinosaurs.
The original description of the spines noted that the specimens in the Howe Quarry near Shell, Wyoming were associated with skeletal remains of an undescribed diplodocids "resembling Diplodocus and Barosaurus."
Discovery and species
Several species of Diplodocus were described between 1878 and 1924.
The first skeleton was found at Cañon City, Colorado, by Benjamin Mudge and Samuel Wendell Williston in 1877, and was named Diplodocus longus ('long double-beam') by paleontologist Othniel Charles Marsh in 1878.
Although not the type species, D. carnegii is the most completely known and most famous species due to the large number of casts of its skeleton in museums around the world.
In 2015, it was renamed as the separate genus Galeamopus, and several other Diplodocus specimens were referred to that genus, leaving no definite Diplodocus skulls known.
Fossil remains of Diplodocus have been recovered from stratigraphic zone 5 of the Morrison Formation.
Valid species
* D. carnegii (also spelled D. carnegiei), named after Andrew Carnegie, is the best known, mainly due to a near-complete skeleton (specimen CM 84) collected by Jacob Wortman, of the Carnegie Museum of Natural History in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania and described and named by John Bell Hatcher in 1901.
This was reconsidered as type-species for Diplodocus.
* D. hallorum, first described in 1991 by Gillette as Seismosaurus halli from a partial skeleton comprising vertebrae, pelvis and ribs, specimen NMMNH P-3690, was found in 1979.
As the specific name honours two people, Jim and Ruth Hall, George Olshevsky later suggested to emend the name as S. hallorum, using the mandatory genitive plural; Gillette then emended the name, which usage has been followed by others, including Carpenter (2006).
This was followed by a much more detailed publication in 2006, which not only renamed the species Diplodocus hallorum, but also speculated that it could prove to be the same as D. longus.
The position that D. hallorum should be regarded as a specimen of D. longus was also taken by the authors of a redescription of Supersaurus, refuting a previous hypothesis that Seismosaurus and Supersaurus were the same.
A 2015 analysis of diplodocid relationships noted that these opinions are based on the more complete referred specimens of D. longus.
The authors of this analysis concluded that those specimens were indeed the same species as D. hallorum, but that D. longus itself was a nomen dubium.
detailed analysis has suggested that the original fossil lacks the necessary features to allow comparison with other specimens.
For this reason, it has been considered a nomen dubium, which is not an ideal situation for the type species of a well-known genus like Diplodocus.
A petition to the International Commission on Zoological Nomenclature was being considered which proposed to make D. carnegii the new type species.
* D. lacustris ("of the lake") is a nomen dubium, named by Marsh in 1884 based on specimen YPM 1922 found by Arthur Lakes, consisting of the snout and upper jaw of a smaller animal from Morrison, Colorado.
In 2015, it was concluded that the specimen actually belonged to Camarasaurus.
Members of this family, while still massive, are of a markedly more slender build than other sauropods, such as the titanosaurs and brachiosaurs.
All are characterised by long necks and tails and a horizontal posture, with fore limbs shorter than hind limbs.
Diplodocids flourished in the Late Jurassic of North America and possibly Africa.
The Portuguese Dinheirosaurus and the African Tornieria have also been identified as close relatives of Diplodocus by some authors.
The Diplodocoidea comprise the diplodocids, as well as dicraeosaurids, rebbachisaurids, Suuwassea, and/or the nemegtosaurids.
This clade is the sister group to Macronaria (camarasaurids, brachiosaurids and titanosaurians).
Marsh and then Hatcher assumed that the animal was aquatic, because of the position of its nasal openings at the apex of the cranium.
Similar aquatic behavior was commonly depicted for other large sauropods, such as Brachiosaurus and Apatosaurus.
A 1951 study by Kenneth A. Kermack indicates that sauropods probably could not have breathed through their nostrils when the rest of the body was submerged, as the water pressure on the chest wall would be too great.
Since the 1970s, general consensus has the sauropods as firmly terrestrial animals, browsing on trees, ferns, and bushes.
Scientists have debated as to how sauropods were able to breathe with their large body sizes and long necks, which would have increased the amount of dead space.
They likely had an avian respiratory system, which is more efficient than a mammalian and reptilian system.
Reconstructions of the neck and thorax of Diplodocus show great pneumaticity, which could have played a role in respiration as it does in birds.
Posture
The depiction of Diplodocus posture has changed considerably over the years.
For instance, a classic 1910 reconstruction by Oliver P. Hay depicts two Diplodocus with splayed lizard-like limbs on the banks of a river.
Hay argued that Diplodocus had a sprawling, lizard-like gait with widely splayed legs, and was supported by Gustav Tornier.
This hypothesis was contested by William Jacob Holland, who demonstrated that a sprawling Diplodocus would have needed a trench through which to pull its belly.
Finds of sauropod footprints in the 1930s eventually put Hay's theory to rest.
A nuchal ligament may have held the neck in this position.
As with the related genus Barosaurus, the very long neck of Diplodocus is the source of much controversy among scientists.
A 1992 Columbia University study of diplodocid neck structure indicated that the longest necks would have required a 1.6-ton heart - a tenth of the animal's body weight.
The study proposed that animals like these would have had rudimentary auxiliary "hearts" in their necks, whose only purpose was to pump blood up to the next "heart".
The most prominent wear facet is on the apex, though unlike all other wear patterns observed within sauropods, diplodocine wear patterns are on the labial (cheek) side of both the upper and lower teeth.
as it explains the unusual wear patterns of the teeth (coming from tooth-food contact).
In unilateral branch stripping, one tooth row would have been used to strip foliage from the stem, while the other would act as a guide and stabilizer.
With the elongated preorbital (in front of the eyes) region of the skull, longer portions of stems could be stripped in a single action.
Diplodocine teeth were also continually replaced throughout their lives, usually in less than 35 days, as was discovered by Michael D'Emic et al.
Within each tooth socket, as many as five replacement teeth were developing to replace the next one.
Studies of the teeth also reveal that it preferred different vegetation from the other sauropods of the Morrison, such as Camarasaurus.
This may have better allowed the various species of sauropods to exist without competition.
The flexibility of Diplodocus neck is debated but it should have been able to browse from low levels to about 4 m (13 ft) when on all fours.
this means that Diplodocus could rear up into a bipedal posture with relatively little effort.
It also had the advantage of using its large tail as a 'prop' which would allow for a very stable tripodal posture.
In a tripodal posture Diplodocus could potentially increase its feeding height up to about .
The neck's range of movement would have also allowed the head to graze below the level of the body, leading some scientists to speculate on whether Diplodocus grazed on submerged water plants, from riverbanks.
This concept of the feeding posture is supported by the relative lengths of front and hind limbs.
Furthermore, its peg-like teeth may have been used for eating soft water plants.
The conclusions of Cobley et al. were disputed in 2013 and 2014 by Mike Taylor, who analysed the amount and positioning of intervertebral cartilage to determine the flexibility of the neck of Diplodocus and Apatosaurus.
Taylor found that the neck of Diplodocus was very flexible, and that Cobley et al. were incorrect, in that flexibility as implied by bones is less than in reality.
In 2010, Whitlock et al. described a juvenile skull at the time referred to Diplodocus (CM 11255) that differed greatly from adult skulls of the same genus: its snout was not blunt, and the teeth were not confined to the front of the snout.
These differences suggest that adults and juveniles were feeding differently.
Such an ecological difference between adults and juveniles had not been previously observed in sauropodomorphs.
Reproduction and growth
While the long neck has traditionally been interpreted as a feeding adaptation, it was also suggested that the oversized neck of Diplodocus and its relatives may have been primarily a sexual display, with any other feeding benefits coming second.
A 2011 study refuted this idea in detail.
While no evidence indicates Diplodocus nesting habits, other sauropods, such as the titanosaurian Saltasaurus, have been associated with nesting sites.
The titanosaurian nesting sites indicate that they may have laid their eggs communally over a large area in many shallow pits, each covered with vegetation.
Diplodocus may have done the same.
The documentary Walking with Dinosaurs portrayed a mother Diplodocus using an ovipositor to lay eggs, but it was pure speculation on the part of the documentary author.
Based on a number of bone histology studies, Diplodocus, along with other sauropods, grew at a very fast rate, reaching sexual maturity at just over a decade, and continued to grow throughout their lives.
Paleoecology
The Morrison Formation is a sequence of shallow marine and alluvial sediments which, according to radiometric dating, ranges between 156.3 million years old (Ma) at its base, and 146.8 million years old at the top, which places it in the late Oxfordian, Kimmeridgian, and early Tithonian stages of the Late Jurassic period.
This formation is interpreted as a semiarid environment with distinct wet and dry seasons.
The Morrison Basin, where dinosaurs lived, stretched from New Mexico to Alberta and Saskatchewan, and was formed when the precursors to the Front Range of the Rocky Mountains started pushing up to the west.
The deposits from their east-facing drainage basins were carried by streams and rivers and deposited in swampy lowlands, lakes, river channels, and floodplains.
This formation is similar in age to the Lourinha Formation in Portugal and the Tendaguru Formation in Tanzania.
Dinosaurs known from the Morrison include the theropods Ceratosaurus, Koparion, Stokesosaurus, Ornitholestes, Allosaurus and Torvosaurus, the sauropods Apatosaurus, Brachiosaurus, Camarasaurus, and Diplodocus, and the ornithischians Camptosaurus, Dryosaurus, Othnielia, Gargoyleosaurus and Stegosaurus.
Diplodocus is commonly found at the same sites as Apatosaurus, Allosaurus, Camarasaurus, and Stegosaurus.
Allosaurus accounted for 70 to 75% of theropod specimens and was at the top trophic level of the Morrison food web.
Many of the dinosaurs of the Morrison Formation are the same genera as those seen in Portuguese rocks of the Lourinha Formation (mainly Allosaurus, Ceratosaurus, Torvosaurus, and Stegosaurus), or have a close counterpart (Brachiosaurus and Lusotitan, Camptosaurus and Draconyx).
Other vertebrates that shared this paleoenvironment included ray-finned fishes, frogs, salamanders, turtles like Dorsetochelys, sphenodonts, lizards, terrestrial and aquatic crocodylomorphans such as Hoplosuchus, and several species of pterosaur like Harpactognathus and Mesadactylus.
Shells of bivalves and aquatic snails are also common.
The flora of the period has been revealed by fossils of green algae, fungi, mosses, horsetails, cycads, ginkgoes, and several families of conifers.
Vegetation varied from river-lining forests of tree ferns, and ferns (gallery forests), to fern savannas with occasional trees such as the Araucaria-like conifer Brachyphyllum.
Cultural significance
Diplodocus has been a famous and much-depicted dinosaur as it has been on display in more places than any other sauropod dinosaur.
Much of this has probably been due to its wealth of skeletal remains and former status as the longest dinosaur.
The donation of many mounted skeletal casts of “Dippy” by industrialist Andrew Carnegie to potentates around the world at the beginning of the 20th century did much to familiarize it to people worldwide.
Casts of Diplodocus skeletons are still displayed in many museums worldwide, including D. carnegii in a number of institutions.
(Translation: ...
But even a much older gent • Sees itself forced to wander •
He goes by the name Diplodocus •
And belongs among the fossils •
Mr. Carnegie packs him joyfully •
Into giant arks •
And sends him as gift • To several monarchs ...)
"Le diplodocus" became a generic term for sauropods in French, much as "brontosaur" is in English.
D. longus is displayed the Senckenberg Museum in Frankfurt (a skeleton made up of several specimens, donated in 1907 by the American Museum of Natural History), Germany.
A mounted and more complete skeleton of D. longus is at the Smithsonian National Museum of Natural History in Washington, DC, while a mounted skeleton of D. hallorum (formerly Seismosaurus), which may be the same as D. longus, can be found at the New Mexico Museum of Natural History and Science.
Dance musician Diplo derived his name from the dinosaur.
