The Day of the Dead () is a Mexican holiday celebrated throughout Mexico, in particular the Central and South regions, and by people of Mexican heritage elsewhere.
The multi-day holiday involves family and friends gathering to pray for and remember friends and family members who have died, and helping support their spiritual journey.
In Mexican culture, death is viewed as a natural part of the human cycle.
Mexicans view it not as a day of sadness but as a day of celebration because their loved ones awake and celebrate with them.
In 2008, the tradition was inscribed in the Representative List of the Intangible Cultural Heritage of Humanity by UNESCO.
The holiday is sometimes called Día de los Muertos in Anglophone countries, a back-translation of its original name, Día de Muertos.
It is particularly celebrated in Mexico where the day is a public holiday.
Prior to Spanish colonization in the 16th century, the celebration took place at the beginning of summer.
Gradually, it was associated with October 31, November 1, and November 2 to coincide with the Western Christian triduum of , and the favorite foods and beverages of the departed, and visiting graves with these as gifts.
Visitors also leave possessions of the deceased at the graves.
Scholars trace the origins of the modern Mexican holiday to indigenous observances dating back hundreds of years and to an Aztec festival dedicated to the goddess Mictecacihuatl.
It has become a national symbol and as such is taught (for educational purposes) in the nation's schools.
Many families celebrate a traditional "All Saints' Day" associated with the Catholic Church.
Originally, the Day of the Dead as such was not celebrated in northern Mexico, where it was unknown until the 20th century because its indigenous people had different traditions.
The people and the church rejected it as a day related to syncretizing pagan elements with Catholic Christianity.
They held the traditional "All Saints' Day" in the same way as other Christians in the world.
There was limited Mesoamerican influence in this region, and relatively few indigenous inhabitants from the regions of Southern Mexico, where the holiday was celebrated.
In the early 21st century in northern Mexico, Día de Muertos is observed because the Mexican government made it a national holiday based on educational policies from the 1960s; it has introduced this holiday as a unifying national tradition based on indigenous traditions.
Observance in Mexico
History
The Day of the Dead celebrations in Mexico developed from ancient traditions among its pre-Columbian cultures.
Rituals celebrating the deaths of ancestors had been observed by these civilizations perhaps for as long as 2,500-3,000 years.
The festival that developed into the modern Day of the Dead fell in the ninth month of the Aztec calendar, about the beginning of August, and was celebrated for an entire month.
The festivities were dedicated to the goddess known as the "Lady of the Dead", corresponding to the modern La Calavera Catrina.
By the late 20th century in most regions of Mexico, practices had developed to honor dead children and infants on November 1, and to honor deceased adults on November 2.
November 1 is generally referred to as Día de los Inocentes ("Day of the Innocents") but also as Día de los Angelitos ("Day of the Little Angels"); November 2 is referred to as Día de los Muertos or Día de los Difuntos ("Day of the Dead").
In the 2015 James Bond film, Spectre, the opening sequence features a Day of the Dead parade in Mexico City.
At the time, no such parade took place in Mexico City; one year later, due to the interest in the film and the government desire to promote the pre-Hispanic Mexican culture, the federal and local authorities decided to organize an actual "Día de Muertos" parade through Paseo de la Reforma and Centro Historico on October 29, 2016, which was attended by 250,000 people.
This is an example of the pizza effect.
Beliefs
Frances Ann Day summarizes the three-day celebration, the Day of the Dead:
Altars (ofrendas)
People go to cemeteries to be with the souls of the departed and build private altars containing the favorite foods and beverages, as well as photos and memorabilia, of the departed.
The intent is to encourage visits by the souls, so the souls will hear the prayers and the comments of the living directed to them.
Celebrations can take a humorous tone, as celebrants remember funny events and anecdotes about the departed.
Toys are brought for dead children (los angelitos, or "the little angels"), and bottles of tequila, mezcal or pulque or jars of atole for adults.
Families will also offer trinkets or the deceased's favorite candies on the grave.
Some families have ofrendas in homes, usually with foods such as candied pumpkin, pan de muerto ("bread of dead"), and sugar skulls; and beverages such as atole.
The ofrendas are left out in the homes as a welcoming gesture for the deceased.
Tamales are one of the most common dishes prepared for this day for both purposes.
Pan de muerto and calaveras are associated specifically with Day of the Dead.
Pan de muerto is a type of sweet roll shaped like a bun, topped with sugar, and often decorated with bone-shaped phalanges pieces.
Calaveras, or sugar skulls, display colorful designs to represent the vitality and individual personality of the departed.
Calaveras
Those with a distinctive talent for writing sometimes create short poems, called calaveras literarias (skulls literature), mocking epitaphs of friends, describing interesting habits and attitudes or funny anecdotes.
This custom originated in the 18th or 19th century after a newspaper published a poem narrating a dream of a cemetery in the future, "and all of us were dead", proceeding to read the tombstones.
Newspapers dedicate calaveras to public figures, with cartoons of skeletons in the style of the famous calaveras of José Guadalupe Posada, a Mexican illustrator.
Other holiday foods include pan de muerto, a sweet egg bread made in various shapes from plain rounds to skulls, often decorated with white frosting to look like twisted bones.
Observances outside Mexico
Americas
Belize
In Belize, Day of the Dead is practiced by people of the Yucatec Maya ethnicity.
The celebration is known as Hanal Pixan which means "food for the souls" in their language.
Altars are constructed and decorated with food, drinks, candies, and candles put on them.
Bolivia
Día de las Ñatitas ("Day of the Skulls") is a festival celebrated in La Paz, Bolivia, on May 5.
In pre-Columbian times indigenous Andeans had a tradition of sharing a day with the bones of their ancestors on the third year after burial.
Today families keep only the skulls for such rituals.
Traditionally, the skulls of family members are kept at home to watch over the family and protect them during the year.
On November 9, the family crowns the skulls with fresh flowers, sometimes also dressing them in various garments, and making offerings of cigarettes, coca leaves, alcohol, and various other items in thanks for the year's protection.
The skulls are also sometimes taken to the central cemetery in La Paz for a special Mass and blessing.
Brazil
The Brazilian public holiday of Finados (Day of the Dead) is celebrated on November 2.
Similar to other Day of the Dead celebrations, people go to cemeteries and churches with flowers and candles and offer prayers.
The celebration is intended as a positive honoring of the dead.
Memorializing the dead draws from indigenous, African and European Catholic origins.
Guatemala
Guatemalan celebrations of the Day of the Dead, on November 1, are highlighted by the construction and flying of giant kites.
Guatemalans fly kites in the belief that the kites help the spirits find their way back to Earth.
A few kites have notes for the dead attached to the strings of the kites.
The kites are used as a kind of telecommunication to heaven.
Peru
Usually people visit the cemetery and bring flowers to decorate the graves of dead relatives.
Sometimes people play music at the cemetery.
United States
In many U.S. communities with Mexican residents, Day of the Dead celebrations are very similar to those held in Mexico.
In some of these communities, in states such as Texas, New Mexico, and Arizona, the celebrations tend to be mostly traditional.
The All Souls Procession has been an annual Tucson, Arizona event since 1990.
The event combines elements of traditional Day of the Dead celebrations with those of pagan harvest festivals.
People wearing masks carry signs honoring the dead and an urn in which people can place slips of paper with prayers on them to be burned.
Likewise, Old Town San Diego, California annually hosts a traditional two-day celebration culminating in a candlelight procession to the historic El Campo Santo Cemetery.
The festival also is held annually at historic Forest Hills Cemetery in Boston's Jamaica Plain neighborhood.
Sponsored by Forest Hills Educational Trust and the folkloric performance group La Piñata, the Day of the Dead festivities celebrate the cycle of life and death.
People bring offerings of flowers, photos, mementos, and food for their departed loved ones, which they place at an elaborately and colorfully decorated altar.
A program of traditional music and dance also accompanies the community event.
The Smithsonian Institution, in collaboration with the University of Texas at El Paso and Second Life, have created a Smithsonian Latino Virtual Museum and accompanying multimedia e-book: Día de los Muertos: Day of the Dead.
The project's website contains some of the text and images which explain the origins of some of the customary core practices related to the Day of the Dead, such as the background beliefs and the offrenda (the special altar commemorating one's deceased loved one).
The Made For iTunes multimedia e-book version provides additional content, such as further details; additional photo galleries; pop-up profiles of influential Latino artists and cultural figures over the decades; and video clips of interviews with artists who make Día de Muertos-themed artwork, explanations and performances of Aztec and other traditional dances, an animation short that explains the customs to children, virtual poetry readings in English and Spanish.
California
Santa Ana, California is said to hold the "largest event in Southern California" honoring Día de Muertos, called the annual Noche de Altares, which began in 2002.
The celebration of the Day of the Dead in Santa Ana has grown to two large events with the creation of an event held at the Santa Ana Regional Transportation Center for the first time on November 1, 2015.
In other communities, interactions between Mexican traditions and American culture are resulting in celebrations in which Mexican traditions are being extended to make artistic or sometimes political statements.
For example, in Los Angeles, California, the Self Help Graphics & Art Mexican-American cultural center presents an annual Day of the Dead celebration that includes both traditional and political elements, such as altars to honor the victims of the Iraq War, highlighting the high casualty rate among Latino soldiers.
An updated, intercultural version of the Day of the Dead is also evolving at Hollywood Forever Cemetery.
There, in a mixture of Native Californian art, Mexican traditions and Hollywood hip, conventional altars are set up side-by-side with altars to Jayne Mansfield and Johnny Ramone.
Colorful native dancers and music intermix with performance artists, while sly pranksters play on traditional themes.
Similar traditional and intercultural updating of Mexican celebrations are held in San Francisco.
For example, the Galería de la Raza, SomArts Cultural Center, Mission Cultural Center, de Young Museum and altars at Garfield Square by the Marigold Project.
Oakland is home to Corazon Del Pueblo in the Fruitvale district.
Corazon Del Pueblo has a shop offering handcrafted Mexican gifts and a museum devoted to Day of the Dead artifacts.
Also, the Fruitvale district in Oakland serves as the hub of the Día de Muertos annual festival which occurs the last weekend of October.
Here, a mix of several Mexican traditions come together with traditional Aztec dancers, regional Mexican music, and other Mexican artisans to celebrate the day.
Europe
As part of a promotion by the Mexican embassy in Prague, Czech Republic, since the late 20th century, some local citizens join in a Mexican-style Day of the Dead.
A theater group conducts events involving masks, candles and make-up using luminous paint in the form of sugar skulls.
Asia and Oceania
Mexican-style Day of the Dead celebrations occur in major cities in Australia, Fiji, and Indonesia.
Additionally, prominent celebrations are held in Wellington, New Zealand, complete with altars celebrating the deceased with flowers and gifts.
In the Philippines "Undás", "Araw ng mga Yumao" (Tagalog, Day of those who have died), coincides with the Roman Catholic's celebration of All Saints' Day and continues on to the following day of All Souls' Day.
Filipinos traditionally observe this day by visiting the family dead to clean and repair their tombs.
Offerings of prayers, flowers, candles, and even food, while Chinese Filipinos additionally burn joss sticks and kim.
Many also spend the day and ensuing night holding reunions at the cemetery, having feasts and merriment.
Further reading
* Andrade, Mary J. Day of the Dead A Passion for Life - Día de los Muertos Pasión por la Vida.
La Oferta Publishing, 2007.
* Anguiano, Mariana, et al.
Las tradiciones de Día de Muertos en México.
Mexico City 1987.
* Cadafalch, Antoni.
The Day of the Dead.
Korero Books, 2011.
* Carmichael, Elizabeth; Sayer, Chloe.
The Skeleton at the Feast: The Day of the Dead in Mexico.
Great Britain: The Bath Press, 1991.
* Haley, Shawn D.; Fukuda, Curt.
Day of the Dead: When Two Worlds Meet in Oaxaca.
Berhahn Books, 2004.
Lane, Sarah and Marilyn Turkovich, Días de los Muertos/Days of the Dead.
Chicago 1987.
* Lomnitz, Claudio.
Death and the Idea of Mexico.
Zone Books, 2005.
* Matos Moctezuma, Eduardo, et al.
"Miccahuitl: El culto a la muerte," Special issue of Artes de México 145 (1971)
* Nutini, Hugo G. Todos Santos in Rural Tlaxcala: A Syncretic, Expressive, and Symbolic Analysis of the Cult of the Dead.
Princeton 1988.
* Oliver Vega, Beatriz, et al.
The Days of the Dead, a Mexican Tradition.
Mexico City 1988.
o4w9x7wi1vcsxtqf30e3sj93fhs2atw
