The Canary Islands (; , ) are a Spanish archipelago and the southernmost autonomous community of Spain located in the Atlantic Ocean, west of Morocco at the closest point.
The Canary Islands, which are also known informally as the Canaries, are among the outermost regions (OMR) of the European Union proper.
It is also one of eight regions with special consideration of historical nationality as recognized by the Spanish Government.
The Canary Islands belong to the African Plate like the Spanish cities of Ceuta and Melilla, the two on the African mainland.
The seven main islands are (from largest to smallest in area)
Tenerife, Fuerteventura, Gran Canaria, Lanzarote, La Palma, La Gomera and El Hierro.
The archipelago includes many smaller islands and islets: La Graciosa, Alegranza, Isla de Lobos, Montaña Clara, Roque del Oeste and Roque del Este.
It also includes a series of adjacent roques (those of Salmor, Fasnia, Bonanza, Garachico and Anaga).
In ancient times, the island chain was often referred to as "the Fortunate Isles".
The Canary Islands are the most southerly region of Spain and the largest and most populated archipelago of the Macaronesia region.
Historically, the Canary Islands have been considered a bridge between four continents: Africa, North America, South America and Europe.
The Canary Islands currently have a population of 2,127,685 inhabitants and a density of 283.08 inhabitants/km², being the eighth most populous autonomous community.
The population of the archipelago is mostly concentrated in the two capital islands, around 43% on the island of Tenerife and 40% on the island of Gran Canaria.
The archipelago's beaches, climate and important natural attractions, especially Maspalomas in Gran Canaria and Teide National Park and Mount Teide (a World Heritage Site) in Tenerife (the third tallest volcano in the world measured from its base on the ocean floor), make it a major tourist destination with over 12 million visitors per year, especially Tenerife, Gran Canaria, Fuerteventura and Lanzarote.
The islands have a subtropical climate, with long hot summers and moderately warm winters.
The precipitation levels and the level of maritime moderation vary depending on location and elevation.
Green areas as well as desert exist on the archipelago.
Due to their location above the temperature inversion layer, the high mountains of these islands are ideal for astronomical observation.
For this reason, two professional observatories, Teide Observatory on the island of Tenerife and Roque de los Muchachos Observatory on the island of La Palma, have been built on the islands.
In 1927, the Province of Canary Islands was split into two provinces.
The autonomous community of the Canary Islands was established in 1982.
Its capital is shared by the cities of Santa Cruz de Tenerife and Las Palmas de Gran Canaria, which in turn are the capitals of the provinces of Santa Cruz de Tenerife and Las Palmas.
Las Palmas de Gran Canaria has been the largest city in the Canaries since 1768, except for a brief period in the 1910s.
Between the 1833 territorial division of Spain and 1927 Santa Cruz de Tenerife was the sole capital of the Canary Islands.
In 1927 a decree ordered that the capital of the Canary Islands be shared, as it remains at present.
The third largest city of the Canary Islands is San Cristóbal de La Laguna (a World Heritage Site) on Tenerife.
This city is also home to the Consejo Consultivo de Canarias, which is the supreme consultative body of the Canary Islands.
During the time of the Spanish Empire, the Canaries were the main stopover for Spanish galleons on their way to the Americas, which came south to catch the prevailing north-easterly trade winds.
Etymology
The name Islas Canarias is likely derived from the Latin name Canariae Insulae, meaning "Islands of the Dogs", a name that was applied only to Gran Canaria.
According to the historian Pliny the Elder, the Mauretanian king Juba II named the island Canaria because it contained "vast multitudes of dogs of very large size".
Alternatively, it is said that the original inhabitants of the island, Guanches, used to worship dogs, mummified them and treated dogs generally as holy animals.
Some hypothesize that the Canary Islands' dog-worship and the ancient Egyptian cult of the dog-headed god Anubis are closely connected but there is no explanation given as to which one was first.
Other theories speculate that the name comes from the Nukkari Berber tribe living in the Moroccan Atlas, named in Roman sources as Canarii, though Pliny again mentions the relation of this term with dogs.
The connection to dogs is retained in their depiction on the islands' coat-of-arms.
It is considered that the aborigines of Gran Canaria called themselves "Canarios".
It is possible that after being conquered, this name was used in plural in Spanish, i.e., as to refer to all of the islands as the Canarii-as.
According to the position of the islands with respect to the north-east trade winds, the climate can be mild and wet or very dry.
Several native species form laurisilva forests.
As a consequence, the individual islands in the Canary archipelago tend to have distinct microclimates.
Those islands such as El Hierro, La Palma and La Gomera lying to the west of the archipelago have a climate which is influenced by the moist Canary Current.
They are well vegetated even at low levels and have extensive tracts of sub-tropical laurisilva forest.
As one travels east toward the African coast, the influence of the current diminishes, and the islands become increasingly arid.
Fuerteventura and Lanzarote, the islands which are closest to the African mainland, are effectively desert or semi desert.
Gran Canaria is known as a "continent in miniature" for its diverse landscapes like Maspalomas and Roque Nublo.
In terms of its climate Tenerife is particularly interesting.
The north of the island lies under the influence of the moist Atlantic winds and is well vegetated, while the south of the island around the tourist resorts of Playa de las Americas and Los Cristianos is arid.
The island rises to almost above sea level, and at altitude, in the cool relatively wet climate, forests of the endemic pine Pinus canariensis thrive.
Many of the plant species in the Canary Islands, like the Canary Island pine and the dragon tree, Dracaena draco are endemic, as noted by Sabin Berthelot and Philip Barker Webb in their epic work, L'Histoire Naturelle des Îles Canaries (1835-50).
Climate
The climate is subtropical and desertic, moderated by the sea and in summer by the trade winds.
There are a number of microclimates and the classifications range mainly from semi-arid to desert.
According to the Köppen climate classification, the majority of the Canary Islands have a hot desert climate represented as BWh.
There also exists a subtropical humid climate which is very influenced by the ocean in the middle of the islands of La Gomera, Tenerife and La Palma; where the laurisilva forests grow.
Geology
The seven major islands, one minor island, and several small islets were originally volcanic islands, formed by the Canary hotspot.
The Canary Islands is the only place in Spain where volcanic eruptions have been recorded during the Modern Era, with some volcanoes still active (El Hierro, 2011).
Volcanic islands such as those in the Canary chain often have steep ocean cliffs caused by catastrophic debris avalanches and landslides.
The Teide volcano on Tenerife is the highest mountain in Spain, and the third tallest volcano on Earth on a volcanic ocean island.
All the islands except La Gomera have been active in the last million years; four of them (Lanzarote, Tenerife, La Palma and El Hierro) have historical records of eruptions since European discovery.
The islands rise from Jurassic oceanic crust associated with the opening of the Atlantic.
Underwater magmatism commenced during the Cretaceous, and reached the ocean's surface during the Miocene.
The islands are considered as a distinct physiographic section of the Atlas Mountains province, which in turn is part of the larger African Alpine System division.
In the summer of 2011 a series of low-magnitude earthquakes occurred beneath El Hierro.
These had a linear trend of northeast-southwest.
In October a submarine eruption occurred about south of Restinga.
This eruption produced gases and pumice, but no explosive activity was reported.
The following table shows the highest mountains in each of the islands:
Natural symbols
The official natural symbols associated with Canary Islands are the bird Serinus canaria (canary) and the Phoenix canariensis palm.
File:Serinus canaria LC0210.jpg|Serinus canaria
File:Phoenix canariensis ag.JPG|Phoenix canariensis
National parks
Four of Spain's thirteen national parks are located in the Canary Islands, more than any other autonomous community.
Two of these have been declared UNESCO World Heritage Sites and the other two are part of Biosphere Reserves.
The parks are:
Teide National Park is the oldest and largest national park in the Canary Islands and one of the oldest in Spain.
Located in the geographic centre of the island of Tenerife, it is the most visited national park in Spain.
In 2010, it became the most visited national park in Europe and second worldwide.
Political geography
The Autonomous Community of the Canary Islands consists of two provinces (provincias), Las Palmas and Santa Cruz de Tenerife, whose capitals (Las Palmas de Gran Canaria and Santa Cruz de Tenerife) are capitals of the autonomous community.
Each of the seven major islands is ruled by an island council named Cabildo Insular.
Each island is subdivided into smaller municipalities (municipios); Las Palmas is divided into 34 municipalities, and Santa Cruz de Tenerife is divided into 54 municipalities.
The international boundary of the Canaries is the subject of dispute between Spain and Morocco.
Morocco's official position is that international laws regarding territorial limits do not authorise Spain to claim seabed boundaries based on the territory of the Canaries, since the Canary Islands enjoy a large degree of autonomy.
In fact, the islands do not enjoy any special degree of autonomy as each one of the Spanish regions is considered an autonomous community with equal status to the European ones.
The boundary determines the ownership of seabed oil deposits and other ocean resources.
Morocco and Spain have been unable to agree on a compromise regarding the territorial boundary, since neither nation wants to cede its claimed right to the vast resources whose ownership depends upon the boundary.
In 2002, for example, Morocco rejected a unilateral Spanish proposal.
Canarian nationalism
There are some pro-independence political parties, like the National Congress of the Canaries (CNC) and the Popular Front of the Canary Islands, but these parties are non-violent, and their popular support is almost insignificant, with no presence in either the autonomous parliament or the cabildos insulares.
According to a 2012 study by the Centro de Investigaciones Sociológicas, when asked about national identity, the majority of respondents from the Canary Islands (49.3%) consider themselves Spanish and Canarian in equal measures, followed by 37.1% who consider themselves more Canarian than Spanish.
Only 6.1% of the respondents consider themselves only Canarian.
History
Ancient and pre-colonial times
Before the arrival of humans, the Canaries were inhabited by prehistoric animals; for example, the giant lizard (Gallotia goliath), the Tenerife and Gran Canaria giant rats, and giant prehistoric tortoises, Geochelone burchardi and Geochelone vulcanica.
The islands may have been visited by the Phoenicians, the Greeks, and the Carthaginians.
King Juba II, Caesar Augustus's Numidian protégé, is credited with discovering the islands for the Western world.
According to Pliny the Elder, Juba found the islands uninhabited, but found "a small temple of stone" and "some traces of buildings".
Juba dispatched a naval contingent to re-open the dye production facility at Mogador in what is now western Morocco in the early first century AD.
That same naval force was subsequently sent on an exploration of the Canary Islands, using Mogador as their mission base.
When the Europeans began to explore the islands in the late Middle Ages, they encountered several indigenous peoples living at a Neolithic level of technology.
Although the prehistory of the settlement of the Canary Islands is still unclear, linguistic and genetic analyses seem to indicate that at least some of these inhabitants shared a common origin with the Berbers on the nearby North African coast.
The precolonial inhabitants came to be known collectively as the Guanches, although Guanches had been the name for only the indigenous inhabitants of Tenerife.
From the 14th century onward, numerous visits were made by sailors from Majorca, Portugal and Genoa.
Lancelotto Malocello settled on Lanzarote in 1312.
The Majorcans established a mission with a bishop in the islands that lasted from 1350 to 1400.
Castilian conquest
In 1402, the Castilian conquest of the islands began, with the expedition of the French explorers Jean de Béthencourt and Gadifer de la Salle, nobles and vassals of Henry III of Castile, to Lanzarote.
From there, they went on to conquer Fuerteventura (1405) and El Hierro.
Béthencourt received the title King of the Canary Islands, but still recognised King Henry III as his overlord.
It was not a simple military enterprise, given the aboriginal resistance on some islands.
Neither was it politically, since the particular interests of the nobility (determined to strengthen their economic and political power through the acquisition of the islands) conflicted with those of the states, particularly Castile, which were in the midst of territorial expansion and in a process of strengthening of the Crown against the nobility.
Historians distinguish two periods in the conquest of the Canary Islands:
Aristocratic conquest (Conquista señorial).
This refers to the early conquests carried out by the nobility, for their own benefit and without the direct participation of the Crown of Castile, which merely granted rights of conquest in exchange for pacts of vassalage between the noble conqueror and the Crown.
One can identify within this period an early phase known as the Betancurian or Norman Conquest, carried out by Jean de Bethencourt (who was originally from Normandy) and Gadifer de la Salle between 1402 and 1405, which involved the islands of Lanzarote, El Hierro and Fuerteventura.
The subsequent phase is known as the Castilian Conquest, carried out by Castilian nobles who acquired, through purchases, assignments and marriages, the previously conquered islands and also incorporated the island of La Gomera around 1450.
Royal conquest (Conquista realenga).
This defines the conquest between 1478 and 1496, carried out directly by the Crown of Castile, during the reign of the Catholic Monarchs, who armed and partly financed the conquest of those islands which were still unconquered: Gran Canaria, La Palma and Tenerife.
This phase of the conquest came to an end in the year 1496, with the dominion of the island of Tenerife, bringing the entire Canarian Archipelago under the control of the Crown of Castile.
Béthencourt also established a base on the island of La Gomera, but it would be many years before the island was fully conquered.
The natives of La Gomera, and of Gran Canaria, Tenerife, and La Palma, resisted the Castilian invaders for almost a century.
In 1448 Maciot de Béthencourt sold the lordship of Lanzarote to Portugal's Prince Henry the Navigator, an action that was accepted by neither the natives nor the Castilians.
Despite Pope Nicholas V ruling that the Canary Islands were under Portuguese control, the crisis swelled to a revolt which lasted until 1459 with the final expulsion of the Portuguese.
In 1479, Portugal and Castile signed the Treaty of Alcáçovas, which settled disputes between Castile and Portugal over the control of the Atlantic.
This treaty recognized Castilian control of the Canary Islands but also confirmed Portuguese possession of the Azores, Madeira, and the Cape Verde islands, and gave the Portuguese rights to any further islands or lands in the Atlantic that might be discovered.
The Castilians continued to dominate the islands, but due to the topography and the resistance of the native Guanches, they did not achieve complete control until 1496, when Tenerife and La Palma were finally subdued by Alonso Fernández de Lugo.
After that, the Canaries were incorporated into the Kingdom of Castile.
After the conquest
After the conquest, the Castilians imposed a new economic model, based on single-crop cultivation: first sugarcane; then wine, an important item of trade with England.
In this era, the first institutions of colonial government were founded.
Gran Canaria, a colony of the Crown of Castile since 6 March 1480 (from 1556, of Spain), and Tenerife, a Spanish colony since 1495, each had its own governor.
There has been speculation that the abundance of roccella tinctoria on the Canary Islands offered a profit motive for Jean de Béthencourt during his conquest of the islands.
Lichen has been used for centuries to make dyes.
This includes royal purple colors derived from roccella tinctoria, also known as orseille.
The cities of Santa Cruz de Tenerife and Las Palmas de Gran Canaria became a stopping point for the Spanish conquistadors, traders, and missionaries on their way to the New World.
This trade route brought great prosperity to some of the social sectors of the islands.
The islands became quite wealthy and soon were attracting merchants and adventurers from all over Europe.
Magnificent palaces and churches were built on La Palma during this busy, prosperous period.
The Church of El Salvador survives as one of the island's finest examples of the architecture of the 16th century.
The Canaries' wealth invited attacks by pirates and privateers.
Ottoman Turkish admiral and privateer Kemal Reis ventured into the Canaries in 1501, while Murat Reis the Elder captured Lanzarote in 1585.
The most severe attack took place in 1599, during the Dutch Revolt.
A Dutch fleet of 74 ships and 12,000 men, commanded by Pieter van der Does, attacked the capital Las Palmas de Gran Canaria (the city had 3,500 of Gran Canaria's 8,545 inhabitants).
The Dutch attacked the Castillo de la Luz, which guarded the harbor.
The Canarians evacuated civilians from the city, and the Castillo surrendered (but not the city).
The Dutch moved inland, but Canarian cavalry drove them back to Tamaraceite, near the city.
The Dutch then laid siege to the city, demanding the surrender of all its wealth.
They received 12 sheep and 3 calves.
Furious, the Dutch sent 4,000 soldiers to attack the Council of the Canaries, who were sheltering in the village of Santa Brígida.
300 Canarian soldiers ambushed the Dutch in the village of Monte Lentiscal, killing 150 and forcing the rest to retreat.
The Dutch concentrated on Las Palmas de Gran Canaria, attempting to burn it down.
The Dutch pillaged Maspalomas, on the southern coast of Gran Canaria, San Sebastián on La Gomera, and Santa Cruz on La Palma, but eventually gave up the siege of Las Palmas and withdrew.
In 1618 the Barbary pirates attacked Lanzarote and La Gomera taking 1000 captives to be sold as slaves.
Another noteworthy attack occurred in 1797, when Santa Cruz de Tenerife was attacked by a British fleet under Horatio Nelson on 25 July.
The British were repulsed, losing almost 400 men.
It was during this battle that Nelson lost his right arm.
18th to 19th century
The sugar-based economy of the islands faced stiff competition from Spain's Caribbean colonies.
Low prices in the sugar market in the 19th century caused severe recessions on the islands.
A new cash crop, cochineal (cochinilla), came into cultivation during this time, saving the islands' economy.
During this time the Canarian-American trade was developed, in which Canarian products such as cochineal, sugarcane and rum are sold in American ports, such as Veracruz, Campeche, La Guaira and Havana among others.
By the end of the 18th century, Canary Islanders had already emigrated to Spanish American territories, such as Havana, Veracruz, Santo Domingo, San Antonio, Texas and St. Bernard Parish, Louisiana.
These economic difficulties spurred mass emigration, primarily to the Americas, during the 19th and first half of the 20th century.
Between 1840 and 1890 as many as 40,000 Canary Islanders emigrated to Venezuela.
Also, thousands of Canarians moved to Puerto Rico where the Spanish monarchy felt that Canarians would adapt to island life better than other immigrants from the mainland of Spain.
Deeply entrenched traditions, such as the Mascaras Festival in the town of Hatillo, Puerto Rico, are an example of Canarian culture still preserved in Puerto Rico.
Similarly, many thousands of Canarians emigrated to the shores of Cuba.
During the Spanish-American War of 1898, the Spanish fortified the islands against a possible American attack, but no such event took place.
Romantic period and scientific expeditions
Sirera and Renn (2004) distinguish two different types of expeditions, or voyages, during the period 1770-1830, which they term "the Romantic period":
First are "expeditions financed by the States, closely related with the official scientific Institutions.
characterised by having strict scientific objectives (and inspired by) the spirit of Illustration and progress".
In this type of expedition, Sirera and Renn include the following travellers:
* J. Edens, whose 1715 ascent and observations of Mt. Teide influenced many subsequent expeditions.
* Louis Feuillée (1724), who was sent to measure the meridian of El Hierro and to map the islands.
* Jean-Charles de Borda (1771, 1776) who more accurately measured the longitudes of the islands and the height of Mount Teide
* the Baudin-Ledru expedition (1796) which aimed to recover a valuable collection of natural history objects.
The second type of expedition identified by Sirera and Renn is one that took place starting from more or less private initiatives.
Among these, the key exponents were the following:
Sirera and Renn identify the period 1770-1830 as one in which "In a panorama dominated until that moment by France and England enters with strength and brio Germany of the Romantic period whose presence in the islands will increase".
Early 20th century
At the beginning of the 20th century, the British introduced a new cash-crop, the banana, the export of which was controlled by companies such as Fyffes.
The rivalry between the elites of the cities of Las Palmas de Gran Canaria and Santa Cruz de Tenerife for the capital of the islands led to the division of the archipelago into two provinces in 1927.
This has not laid to rest the rivalry between the two cities, which continues to this day.
During the time of the Second Spanish Republic, Marxist and anarchist workers' movements began to develop, led by figures such as Jose Miguel Perez and Guillermo Ascanio.
However, outside of a few municipalities, these organisations were a minority and fell easily to Nationalist forces during the Spanish Civil War.
Franco regime
In 1936, Francisco Franco was appointed General Commandant of the Canaries.
He joined the military revolt of 17 July which began the Spanish Civil War.
Franco quickly took control of the archipelago, except for a few points of resistance on La Palma and in the town of Vallehermoso, on La Gomera.
Though there was never a war in the islands, the post-war suppression of political dissent on the Canaries was most severe.
During the Second World War, Winston Churchill prepared plans for the British seizure of the Canary Islands as a naval base, in the event of Gibraltar being invaded from the Spanish mainland.
Opposition to Franco's regime did not begin to organise until the late 1950s, which experienced an upheaval of parties such as the Communist Party of Spain and the formation of various nationalist, leftist parties.
Self-governance
After the death of Franco, there was a pro-independence armed movement based in Algeria, the Movement for the Independence and Self-determination of the Canaries Archipelago (MAIAC).
In 1968, the Organisation of African Unity recognized the MAIAC as a legitimate African independence movement, and declared the Canary Islands as an African territory still under foreign rule.
After the establishment of a democratic constitutional monarchy in Spain, autonomy was granted to the Canaries via a law passed in 1982, with a newly established autonomous devolved government and parliament.
In 1983, the first autonomous elections were held.
The Spanish Socialist Workers' Party (PSOE) won.
In the 2007 elections, the PSOE gained a plurality of seats, but the nationalist Canarian Coalition and the conservative Partido Popular (PP) formed a ruling coalition government.
Capitality
At present, the Canary Islands is the only autonomous community in Spain that has two capitals: Santa Cruz de Tenerife and Las Palmas de Gran Canaria, since the Statute of Autonomy of the Canary Islands was created in 1982.
Although, because the period of splendor of these cities developed before the total conquest of the archipelago and its incorporation into the Crown of Castile never had a political and real control of the entire Canary archipelago.
The function of a Canarian city with full jurisdiction for the entire archipelago only exists after the conquest of the Canary Islands, although originally De facto, that is, without legal and real meaning and linked to the headquarters of the Canary Islands General Captaincy.
Las Palmas de Gran Canaria was the first city that exercised this function.
This is because the residence of the Captain General of the Canary Islands was in this city during part of the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries.
In May 1661, the Captain General of the Canary Islands, Jerónimo de Benavente y Quiñones, moved the headquarters of the captaincy to the city of San Cristóbal de La Laguna on the island of Tenerife.
This was due to the fact that this island since the conquest was the most populated, productive and with the highest economic expectations.
La Laguna would be considered the De facto capital of the archipelago until mid the official status of the capital of Canary Islands in the city of Santa Cruz de Tenerife was confirmed in the 19th century, due in part to the constant controversies and rivalries between the bourgeoisies of San Cristóbal de La Laguna and Las Palmas de Gran Canaria for the economic, political and institutional hegemony of the archipelago.
Already in 1723 the Captain General of the Canary Islands Lorenzo Fernandez de Villavicencio had moved the headquarters of the General Captaincy of the Canary Islands from San Cristóbal de La Laguna to Santa Cruz de Tenerife.
This decision continued without pleasing the society of the island of Gran Canaria.
It would be after the creation of the Province of Canary Islands in November 1833 in which Santa Cruz would become the first fully official capital of the Canary Islands (De jure and not of De facto as happened previously).
The Canarian population includes long-tenured residents and new waves of mainland Spanish immigrants, as well as Moroccan,
Population of the individual islands
The population of the islands according to the 2018 data are: with various smaller foreign-born populations of other Christian beliefs such as Protestants from northern Europe.
The appearance of the Virgin of Candelaria (Patron of Canary Islands) was credited with moving the Canary Islands toward Christianity.
Two Catholic saints were born in the Canary Islands: Peter of Saint Joseph de Betancur and José de Anchieta.
Both born on the island of Tenerife, they were respectively missionaries in Guatemala and Brazil.
The Canary Islands are divided into two Catholic dioceses, each governed by a bishop:
* Diócesis Canariense: Includes the islands of the Eastern Province: Gran Canaria, Fuerteventura and Lanzarote.
Its capital was San Marcial El Rubicón (1404) and Las Palmas de Gran Canaria (1483-present).
There was a previous bishopric which was based in Telde, but it was later abolished.
* Diócesis Nivariense: Includes the islands of the western province: Tenerife, La Palma, La Gomera and El Hierro.
Its capital is San Cristóbal de La Laguna (1819-present).
Other religions
Separate from the overwhelming Christian majority are a minority of Muslims.
Among the followers of Islam, the Islamic Federation of the Canary Islands exists to represent the Islamic community in the Canary Islands as well as to provide practical support to members of the Islamic community.
Other religious faiths represented include Jehovah's Witnesses, The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints as well as Hinduism.
Population genetics
Islands
Ordered from west to east, the Canary Islands are El Hierro, La Palma, La Gomera, Tenerife, Gran Canaria, Fuerteventura and Lanzarote.
In addition, north of the latter are the island of La Graciosa, the islets of Montaña Clara, Alegranza, Roque del Este and Roque del Oeste, belonging to the Chinijo Archipelago, and northeast of Fuerteventura is the islet of Lobos.
There are also a series of small adjacent rocks in the Canary Islands: the Roques de Anaga, Garachico and Fasnia in Tenerife, and those of Salmor and Bonanza in El Hierro.
File:Spain Canary Islands location map El Hierro.svg|El Hierro
File:Spain Canary Islands location map La Palma.svg|La Palma
File:Spain Canary Islands location map La Gomera.svg|La Gomera
File:Spain Canary Islands location map Tenerife.svg|Tenerife
File:Spain Canary Islands location map Gran Canaria.svg|Gran Canaria
File:Spain Canary Islands location map Fuerteventura.svg|Fuerteventura
File:Spain Canary Islands location map Lanzarote.svg|Lanzarote
El Hierro
El Hierro, the westernmost island, covers , making it the smallest of the major islands, and the least populous with 10,798 inhabitants.
The whole island was declared Reserve of the Biosphere in 2000.
Its capital is Valverde.
Also known as Ferro, it was once believed to be the westernmost land in the world.
Fuerteventura
Fuerteventura, with a surface of , is the second-most extensive island of the archipelago.
It has been declared a Biosphere reserve by Unesco.
It has a population of 113,275.
Being also the most ancient of the islands, it is the one that is more eroded: its highest point is the Peak of the Bramble, at a height of .
Its capital is Puerto del Rosario.
Gran Canaria
Gran Canaria has 846,717 inhabitants.
The capital, Las Palmas de Gran Canaria (377,203 inhabitants), is the most populous city and shares the status of capital of the Canaries with Santa Cruz de Tenerife.
Gran Canaria's surface area is .
In center of the island lie the Roque Nublo and Pico de las Nieves ("Peak of Snow") .
In the south of island are the Maspalomas Dunes (Gran Canaria), these are the biggest tourist attractions.
La Gomera
La Gomera has an area of and is the second least populous island with 21,136 inhabitants.
Geologically it is one of the oldest of the archipelago.
The insular capital is San Sebastian de La Gomera.
Garajonay's National Park is located on the island.
Lanzarote
Lanzarote is the easternmost island and one of the most ancient of the archipelago, and it has shown evidence of recent volcanic activity.
It has a surface of , and a population of 149,183 inhabitants, including the adjacent islets of the Chinijo Archipelago.
The capital is Arrecife, with 56,834 inhabitants.
Chinijo Archipelago
The Chinijo Archipelago includes the islands La Graciosa, Alegranza, Montaña Clara, Roque del Este and Roque del Oeste.
It has a surface of , and a population of 658 inhabitants all of them on La Graciosa.
With , La Graciosa, is the smallest inhabited island of the Canaries, and the major island of the Chinijo Archipelago.
La Palma
La Palma, with 81,863 inhabitants covering an area of , is in its entirety a biosphere reserve.
It shows no recent signs of volcanic activity, even though the volcano Teneguía entered into eruption last in 1971.
In addition, it is the second-highest island of the Canaries, with the Roque de los Muchachos as highest point.
Santa Cruz de La Palma (known to those on the island as simply "Santa Cruz") is its capital.
Tenerife
Tenerife is, with its area of , the most extensive island of the Canary Islands.
In addition, with 904,713 inhabitants it is the most populated island of the archipelago and Spain.
Two of the islands' principal cities are located on it: The capital, Santa Cruz de Tenerife and San Cristóbal de La Laguna (a World Heritage Site).
San Cristóbal de La Laguna, the second city of the island is home to the oldest university in the Canary Islands, the University of La Laguna.
The Teide, with its is the highest peak of Spain and also a World Heritage Site.
Tenerife is the site of the worst air disaster in the history of aviation, in which 583 people were killed in the collision of two Boeing 747s on 27 March 1977.
Data
Economy
The economy is based primarily on tourism, which makes up 32% of the GDP.
The Canaries receive about 12 million tourists per year.
Construction makes up nearly 20% of the GDP and tropical agriculture, primarily bananas and tobacco, are grown for export to Europe and the Americas.
Ecologists are concerned that the resources, especially in the more arid islands, are being overexploited but there are still many agricultural resources like tomatoes, potatoes, onions, cochineal, sugarcane, grapes, vines, dates, oranges, lemons, figs, wheat, barley, maize, apricots, peaches and almonds.
The economy is € 25 billion (2001 GDP figures).
The islands experienced continuous growth during a 20-year period, up until 2001, at a rate of approximately 5% annually.
This growth was fueled mainly by huge amounts of Foreign Direct Investment, mostly to develop tourism real estate , and European Funds (near €11 billion euro in the period from 2000 to 2007), since the Canary Islands are labelled Region Objective 1 (eligible for euro structural funds).
Additionally, the EU allows the Canary Islands Government to offer special tax concessions for investors who incorporate under the Zona Especial Canaria (ZEC) regime and create more than five jobs.
Spain gave permission in August 2014 for Repsol and its partners to explore oil and gas prospects off the Canary Islands, involving an investment of €7.5 billion over four years, to commence at the end of 2016.
Repsol at the time said the area could ultimately produce 100,000 barrels of oil a day, which would meet 10 percent of Spain's energy needs.
However, the analysis of samples obtained did not show the necessary volume nor quality to consider future extraction, and the project was scrapped.
The Canary Islands have great natural attractions, climate and beaches make the islands a major tourist destination, being visited each year by about 12 million people (11,986,059 in 2007, noting 29% of Britons, 22% of Spanish, not residents of the Canaries, and 21% of Germans).
Among the islands, Tenerife has the largest number of tourists received annually, followed by Gran Canaria and Lanzarote.
The combination of high mountains, proximity to Europe, and clean air has made the Roque de los Muchachos peak (on La Palma island) a leading location for telescopes like the Grantecan.
The islands, as an autonomous region of Spain, are in the European Union and the Schengen Area.
They are in the European Union Customs Union but outside the VAT area, Instead of VAT there is a local Sales Tax (IGIC) which has a general rate of 7%, an increased tax rate of 13.5%, a reduced tax rate of 3% and a zero tax rate for certain basic need products and services.
Consequently, some products are subject to additional VAT if being exported from the islands into mainland Spain or the rest of the EU.
Canarian time is Western European Time (WET) (or GMT; in summer one hour ahead of GMT).
So Canarian time is one hour behind that of mainland Spain and the same as that of the UK, Ireland and mainland Portugal all year round.
Tourism statistics
In 2017, 15,976,000 tourists visited the Canary Islands.
The statistics per destination island were:
Transport
The Canary Islands have eight airports altogether, two of the main ports of Spain, and an extensive network of autopistas (highways) and other roads.
For a road map see multimap.
There are large ferry boats that link islands as well as fast ferries linking most of the islands.
Both types can transport large numbers of passengers and cargo (including vehicles).
Fast ferries are made of aluminium and powered by modern and efficient diesel engines, while conventional ferries have a steel hull and are powered by heavy oil.
Fast ferries travel relatively quickly (in excess of ) and are a faster method of transportation than the conventional ferry (some ).
A typical ferry ride between La Palma and Tenerife may take up to eight hours or more while a fast ferry takes about two and a half hours and between Tenerife and Gran Canaria can be about one hour.
The largest airport is the Gran Canaria Airport.
Tenerife has two airports, Tenerife North Airport and Tenerife South Airport.
The island of Tenerife gathers the highest passenger movement of all the Canary Islands through its two airports.
The two main islands (Tenerife and Gran Canaria) receive the greatest number of passengers.
Tenerife 6,204,499 passengers and Gran Canaria 5,011,176 passengers.
The port of Las Palmas is first in freight traffic in the islands, while the port of Santa Cruz de Tenerife is the first fishing port with approximately 7,500 tons of fish caught, according to the Spanish government publication Statistical Yearbook of State Ports.
Similarly, it is the second port in Spain as regards ship traffic, only surpassed by the Port of Algeciras Bay.
The port's facilities include a border inspection post (BIP) approved by the European Union, which is responsible for inspecting all types of imports from third countries or exports to countries outside the European Economic Area.
The port of Los Cristianos (Tenerife) has the greatest number of passengers recorded in the Canary Islands, followed by the port of Santa Cruz de Tenerife.
The Port of Las Palmas is the third port in the islands in passengers and first in number of vehicles transported.
Ports
Health
The Servicio Canario de Salud is an autonomous body of administrative nature attached to the Ministry responsible for Health of the Government of the Canary Islands.
The majority of the archipelago's hospitals belong to this organization:
* Hospital Universitario Nuestra Señora de Candelaria - Tenerife
* Hospital Universitario de Gran Canaria Doctor Negrín - Gran Canaria
* Hospital Universitario Insular de Gran Canaria - Gran Canaria
* Hospital General de Lanzarote Doctor José Molina Orosa - Lanzarote
Wildlife
Prehistoric fauna
Before the arrival of the Aborigines, the Canary Islands was inhabited by endemic animals, such as some extinct; giant lizards (Gallotia goliath), giant rats (Canariomys bravoi and Canariomys tamarani) and giant tortoises (Geochelone burchardi and Geochelone vulcanica), among others.
Terrestrial wildlife
With a range of habitats, the Canary Islands exhibit diverse plant species.
The bird life includes European and African species, such as the black-bellied sandgrouse; and a rich variety of endemic (local) taxa including the:
* Graja, a subspecies of red-billed chough endemic to La Palma
* Blue chaffinch (endemic to Tenerife and Gran Canaria)
Terrestrial fauna includes geckos, wall lizards, and three endemic species of recently rediscovered and critically endangered giant lizard: the El Hierro giant lizard (or Roque Chico de Salmor giant lizard), La Gomera giant lizard, and La Palma giant lizard.
Mammals include the Canarian shrew, Canary big-eared bat, the Algerian hedgehog (which may have been introduced) and the more recently introduced mouflon.
Some endemic mammals, the lava mouse, Tenerife giant rat and Gran Canaria giant rat, are extinct, as are the Canary Islands quail, long-legged bunting, the eastern Canary Islands chiffchaff and the giant prehistoric tortoises; Geochelone burchardi and Geochelone vulcanica.
Marine life
The marine life found in the Canary Islands is also varied, being a combination of North Atlantic, Mediterranean and endemic species.
In recent years, the increasing popularity of both scuba diving and underwater photography have provided biologists with much new information on the marine life of the islands.
Fish species found in the islands include many species of shark, ray, moray eel, bream, jack, grunt, scorpionfish, triggerfish, grouper, goby, and blenny.
In addition, there are many invertebrate species, including sponge, jellyfish, anemone, crab, mollusc, sea urchin, starfish, sea cucumber and coral.
There are a total of five different species of marine turtle that are sighted periodically in the islands, the most common of these being the endangered loggerhead sea turtle.
The other four are the green sea turtle, hawksbill sea turtle, leatherback sea turtle and Kemp's ridley sea turtle.
Currently, there are no signs that any of these species breed in the islands, and so those seen in the water are usually .
However, it is believed that some of these species may have bred in the islands in the past, and there are records of several sightings of leatherback sea turtle on beaches in Fuerteventura, adding credibility to the theory.
Marine mammals include the large varieties of cetaceans including rare and not well-known species (see more details in the Marine life of the Canary Islands).
Hooded seals have also been known to be vagrant in the Canary Islands every now and then.
The Canary Islands were also formerly home to a population of the rarest pinniped in the world, the Mediterranean monk seal.
Native flora gallery
Arbutus canariensis2.jpg|Arbutus canariensis
Argyranthemum frutescens cv Vera 2.jpg|Argyranthemum frutescens
Bosea yervamora berries.
JPG|Bosea yervamora
Canarina canariensis Tenerife (02).jpg|Canarina canariensis
Digitalis (Isoplexis) canariensis by Scott zona - 004.jpg|Digitalis canariensis
Tajinaste rojo.jpg|Echium wildpretii
Euphorbia canariensis2.jpg|Euphorbia canariensis
Gonospermum elegans.jpg|Gonospermum elegans
Lavatera acerifolia var.
acerifolia (Jardín Botánico Canario Viera y Clavijo).jpg|Lavatera acerifolia var.
acerifolia
Lavatera phoenicea1.jpg|Lavatera phoenicea
Lotus berthelotii1.jpg|Lotus berthelotii
Pericallis webbii.jpg|Pericallis webbii
Persea indica.jpg|Persea indica
Phoenix canariensis (Puntallana) 01.jpg|Phoenix canariensis
Sonchus palmensis (Barlovento) 04.jpg|Sonchus palmensis
Spartocytisus supranubius.jpg|Spartocytisus supranubius
Holidays
Some holidays of those celebrated in the Canary Islands are international and national, others are regional holidays and others are of insular character.
The official day of the autonomous community is Canary Islands Day on 30 May.
The anniversary of the first session of the Parliament of the Canary Islands, based in the city of Santa Cruz de Tenerife, held on 30 May 1983, is commemorated with this day.
The common festive calendar throughout the Canary Islands is as follows:
In addition, each of the islands has an island festival in which it is a holiday only on that island in question.
These are the festivities of island patrons saints of each island.
Organized chronologically are:
The most famous festivals of the Canary Islands is the carnival.
It is the most famous and international festival of the archipelago.
The carnival is celebrated in all the islands and all its municipalities, perhaps the two busiest are those of the two Canarian capitals; the Carnival of Santa Cruz de Tenerife (Tourist Festival of International Interest) and the Carnival of Las Palmas de Gran Canaria.
It is celebrated on the streets between the months of February and March.
But the rest of the islands of the archipelago have their carnivals with their own traditions among which stand out: The Festival of the Carneros of El Hierro, the Festival of the Diabletes of Teguise in Lanzarote, Los Indianos de La Palma, the Carnival of San Sebastián de La Gomera and the Carnival of Puerto del Rosario in Fuerteventura.
Science and technology
In the 1960s, Gran Canaria was selected as the location for one of the 14 ground stations in the Manned Space Flight Network (MSFN) to support the NASA space program.
Maspalomas Station, located in the south of the island, took part in a number of space missions including the Apollo 11 Moon landings and Skylab.
Today it continues to support satellite communications as part of the ESA network.
Because of the remote location, a number of astronomical observatories are located in the archipelago, including the Teide Observatory on Tenerife, the Roque de los Muchachos Observatory on La Palma, and the Temisas Astronomical Observatory on Gran Canaria.
Sports
A unique form of wrestling known as Canarian wrestling (lucha canaria) has opponents stand in a special area called a "terrero" and try to throw each other to the ground using strength and quick movements.
Another sport is the "game of the sticks" where opponents fence with long sticks.
This may have come about from the shepherds of the islands who would challenge each other using their long walking sticks.
on Gran Canaria and the Half Marathon des Sables on Fuerteventura.
A yearly Ironman Triathlon has been taking place on Lanzarote since 1992.
Notable athletes
* Nicolás García Hemme, born 20 June 1988 in Las Palmas de Gran Canaria, Canary Islands, 2012 London Olympics, Taekwondo Silver Medalist in Men's Welterweight category (−80 kg).
* Alfredo Cabrera, (1881-1964); shortstop for the St. Louis Cardinals in 1913
* Sergio Rodríguez, born in San Cristóbal de La Laguna in 1986, played point guard for the Portland Trail Blazers, Sacramento Kings, and New York Knicks
* David Silva, born in Arguineguín in 1986, plays association football for Manchester City, member of the 2010 FIFA World Cup champion Spain national football team
* Juan Carlos Valerón, born in Arguineguín in 1975, played association football for Deportivo la Coruna and Las Palmas
* Pedro, born in Santa Cruz de Tenerife in 1987, plays association football for Chelsea, member of the 2010 FIFA World Cup champion Spain national football team
* Carla Suárez Navarro, born in Las Palmas de Gran Canaria in 1988, professional tennis player
* Paola Tirados, born in Las Palmas de Gran Canaria in 1980, synchronized swimmer, who participated in the Olympic Games of 2000, 2004 and 2008.
She won the silver medal in Beijing in 2008 in the team competition category.
* Jesé, born in Las Palmas de Gran Canaria in 1993, plays association football for Paris Saint-Germain
* Christo Bezuidenhout, born in Tenerife in 1970, played rugby union for Gloucester and South Africa.
* Tenerife airport disaster; prior to the September 11 attacks, the deadliest commercial aviation disaster in history.
Geography
Culture
* Silbo Gomero, a whistled language, is an indigenous variant of Spanish
* Virgin of Candelaria (Patron saint of Canary Islands)
Notes
* Felipe Fernández-Armesto, The Canary Islands after the Conquest: The Making of a Colonial Society in the Early-Sixteenth Century, Oxford U. Press, 1982. ;
* Sergio Hanquet, Diving in Canaries, Litografía A. ROMERO, 2001.
* Martin Wiemers: https:/ profile publication links/0c960519bbc8e48a1b000000.pdf?inViewer
0&pdfJsDownload
0&origin=publication_detail The butterflies of the Canary Islands. -
A survey on their distribution, biology and ecology (Lepidoptera: Papilionoidea and Hesperioidea) - Linneana Belgica 15 (1995): 63-84 & 87-118
Further reading
* Borgesen, F. 1929.
Marine algae from the Canary Islands.
III Rhodophyceae.
Part II.
Cryptonemiales, Gigartinales, and Rhodymeniales.
Det Kongelige Danske Videnskabernes Selskabs Biologiske Meddelelser. 8: 1 - 97.
* Gill R and M Thirlwall (2012) "Tenerife, Canary Islands".
https:/ guidesales guidesales/ Geologists' Association Guide No.62.
* Paegelow, Claus: Bibliography Canary Islands, 2009,
