Giovanni Pierluigi da Palestrina ( 1525 - 2 February 1594) was an Italian Renaissance composer of sacred music and the best-known 16th-century representative of the Roman School of musical composition.
He had a lasting influence on the development of church music, and his work is considered as the culmination of Renaissance polyphony.
near Rome, then part of the Papal States.
Documents suggest that he first visited Rome in 1537, when he is listed as a chorister at the Santa Maria Maggiore basilica.
He studied with Robin Mallapert and Firmin Lebel.
He spent most of his career in the city.
Palestrina came of age as a musician under the influence of the northern European style of polyphony, which owed its dominance in Italy primarily to two influential Netherlandish composers, Guillaume Dufay and Josquin des Prez, who had spent significant portions of their careers there.
Italy itself had yet to produce anyone of comparable fame or skill in polyphony.
(Julian Chapel, in the sense of choir), the choir of the chapter of canons at St. Peter's Basilica.
Palestrina dedicated to Julius III his first published compositions (1554), a book of Masses.
It was the first book of Masses by a native composer, since in the Italian states of Palestrina's day, most composers of sacred music were from the Low Countries, France, or Spain.
In fact the book was modeled on one by Cristóbal de Morales: the woodcut in the front is almost an exact copy of the one from the book by the Spanish composer.
During the next decade, Palestrina held positions similar to his Julian Chapel appointment at other chapels and churches in Rome, notably St. John Lateran (1555-1560, a post previously held by Lassus), and St Mary Major (1561-1566).
In 1571 he returned to the Julian Chapel and remained at St Peter's for the rest of his life.
The decade of the 1570s was difficult for him personally: he lost his brother, two of his sons, and his wife in three separate outbreaks of the plague (1572, 1575, and 1580, respectively).
He seems to have considered becoming a priest at this time, but instead he remarried, this time to a wealthy widow.
This finally gave him financial independence (he was not well paid as choirmaster) and he was able to compose prolifically until his death.
He died in Rome of pleurisy in 1594.
As was usual, Palestrina was buried on the same day he died, in a plain coffin with a lead plate on which was inscribed Libera me Domine.
A five-part psalm for three choirs was sung at the funeral.
Palestrina's funeral was held at St. Peter's, and he was buried beneath the floor of the basilica.
His tomb was later covered by new construction and attempts to locate the site have been unsuccessful.
Music
Palestrina left hundreds of compositions, including 105 masses, 68 offertories, at least 140 madrigals and more than 300 motets.
In addition, there are at least 72 hymns, 35 magnificats, 11 litanies, and four or five sets of lamentations.
His attitude toward madrigals was somewhat enigmatic: whereas in the preface to his collection of Canticum canticorum (Song of Songs) motets (1584)
he renounced the setting of profane texts, only two years later he was back in print with Book II of his secular madrigals (some of these being among the finest compositions in the medium).
Most of Palestrina's masses appeared in thirteen volumes printed between 1554 and 1601, the last seven published after his death.
One of his most important works, the Missa Papae Marcelli , has been historically associated with erroneous information involving the Council of Trent.
According to this tale (which forms the basis of Hans Pfitzner's opera Palestrina), it was composed in order to persuade the Council of Trent that a draconian ban on the polyphonic treatment of text in sacred music (as opposed, that is, to a more directly intelligible homophonic treatment) was unnecessary.
However, more recent scholarship shows that this mass was in fact composed before the cardinals convened to discuss the ban (possibly as much as ten years before).
This produced a smoother and more consonant type of polyphony which is now considered to be definitive of late Renaissance music, given Palestrina's position as Europe's leading composer (along with Orlande de Lassus) in the wake of Josquin des Prez (d. 1521).
The "Palestrina style" taught in college courses covering Renaissance counterpoint is often based on the codification by the 18th-century composer and theorist Johann Joseph Fux, published as Gradus ad Parnassum (Steps to Parnassus, 1725).
Citing Palestrina as his model, Fux divided counterpoint into five species (hence the term "species counterpoint"), designed as exercises for the student, which deployed progressively more elaborate rhythmic combinations of voices while adhering to strict harmonic and melodic requirements.
The method was widely adopted and was the main basis of contrapuntal training in the 19th century, but Fux had introduced a number of simplifications to the Palestrina style, notably the obligatory use of a cantus firmus in semibreves, which were corrected by later authors such as Knud Jeppesen and R. O. Morris.
Palestrina's music conforms in many ways to Fux's rules, particularly in the fifth species but does not fit his pedagogical format.
The main insight, that the "pure" style of polyphony achieved by Palestrina followed an invariable set of stylistic and combinational requirements, was justified.
Fux's manual was endorsed by his contemporary J.S. Bach, who himself arranged two of Palestrina's masses for performance.
According to Fux, Palestrina had established and followed these basic guidelines:
The flow of music is dynamic, not rigid or static.
* Melody should contain few leaps between notes.
Reputation
Palestrina was extremely famous in his day, and if anything, his reputation and influence increased after his death.
J.S. Bach studied and hand-copied Palestrina's first book of Masses, and in 1742 wrote his own adaption of the Kyrie and Gloria of the Missa sine nomine.
Felix Mendelssohn placed him in the pantheon of the greatest musicians, writing, "I always get upset when some praise only Beethoven, others only Palestrina and still others only Mozart or Bach.
All four of them, I say, or none at all.".
Conservative music of the Roman school continued to be written in Palestrina's style (which in the 17th century came to be known as the prima pratica) by such students of his as Giovanni Maria Nanino, Ruggiero Giovanelli, Arcangelo Crivelli, Teofilo Gargari, Francesco Soriano, and Gregorio Allegri.
Film
In 2009 a film about the composer was produced by German television ZDF/Arte.
Title: Palestrina - Prince of Music, directed by Georg Brintrup.
Sources
* Article "Palestrina, Giovanni Pierluigi da", in: The New Grove Dictionary of Music and Musicians, ed.
Stanley Sadie. 20 vol.
London, Macmillan Publishers Ltd., 1980.
* Benjamin, Thomas, The Craft of Modal Counterpoint, 2nd ed.
Routledge, New York, 2005.
* Coates, Henry, Palestrina.
J. M. Dent & Sons, London, 1938.
* Daniel, Thomas, Kontrapunkt, Eine Satzlehre zur Vokalpolyphonie des 16.
Jahrhunderts.
Verlag Dohr, 2002.
*Della Sciucca, Marco, Giovanni Pierluigi da Palestrina.
L'Epos, Palermo, 2009.
* Johann Joseph Fux, The Study of Counterpoint (Gradus ad Parnassum).
Tr. Alfred Mann.
W.W. Norton & Co., New York, 1965.
* Gauldin, Robert, A Practical Approach to Sixteenth-Century Counterpoint.
Waveland Press, Inc., Long Grove, Illinois, 1995.
* Haigh, Andrew C. "Modal Harmony in the Music of Palestrina", in the festschrift Essays on Music:
In Honor of Archibald Thompson Davison.
Harvard University Press, 1957, pp. 111-120.
* Jeppesen, Knud, The Style of Palestrina and the Dissonance.
2nd ed., London, 1946.
* Jeppesen, Knud; Haydon, Glen (Translator); Foreword by Mann, Alfred.
Counterpoint.
New York, 1939.
Available through Dover Publications, 1992.
* Lewis Lockwood, Noel O'Regan, Jessie Ann Owens: "Palestrina, Giovanni Pierluigi da".
Grove Music Online, ed.
L. Macy (Accessed 7 July 2007), (subscription access)
* Meier, Bernhard, The Modes of Classical Vocal Polyphony, Described According to the Sources.
Broude Brothers Limited, 1988.
* Morris, R.O., Contrapuntal Technique in the Sixteenth Century.
Oxford University Press, 1978.
(out of print; one of the first attempts at "direct approach", meaning Morris does away with Fux' five species).
*Motte, Diether de la, Kontrapunkt.
1981 Bärenreiter-Verlag, Kassel. / 3-7618-4371-2 (this text is in German; great, though!)
*Pyne, Zoe Kendrick, Giovanni Pierluigi di Palestrina: His Life and Times, Bodley Head, London, 1922.
*Reese, Gustave, Music in the Renaissance.
W.W. Norton & Co., New York, 1954.
*Roche, Jerome, Palestrina.
Oxford University Press, 1970.
*Marvin, Clara, Giovanni Pierluigi da Palestrina: A Research Guide.
Routlege Publishing Inc, 2002.
*Schubert, Peter, Modal Counterpoint, Renaissance Style, 2nd edition.
New York and Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2008.
(guidelines for writing and analyzing 16th-century music).
*Stewart, Robert, An Introduction to Sixteenth-Century Counterpoint and Palestrina's Musical Style.
Ardsley House, Publishers, 1994.
*Stove, R. J., Prince of Music: Palestrina and His World, Quakers Hill Press, Sydney, 1990.
(biographical rather than musicological in nature; is wholly devoid of staff-notation extracts; but corrects some errors found in Z. K. Pyne and elsewhere).
*Swindale, Owen, Polyphonic Composition, Oxford University Press, 1962.
