Robert Smalls (April 5, 1839 - February 23, 1915) was an American businessman, publisher, and politician.
Born into slavery in Beaufort, South Carolina, he freed himself, his crew, and their families during the American Civil War by commandeering a Confederate transport ship, CSS Planter, in Charleston harbor, on May 13, 1862, and sailing it from Confederate-controlled waters of the harbor to the U.S. blockade that surrounded it.
He then piloted the ship to the Union-controlled enclave in Beaufort-Port Royal-Hilton Head area, where she became a Union warship.
His example and persuasion helped convince President Abraham Lincoln to accept African-American soldiers into the Union Army.
After the American Civil War he returned to Beaufort and became a politician, winning election as a Republican to the South Carolina State legislature and the United States House of Representatives during the Reconstruction era.
Smalls authored state legislation providing for South Carolina to have the first free and compulsory public school system in the United States.
He founded the Republican Party of South Carolina.
Smalls was the last Republican to represent South Carolina's 5th congressional district until 2010.
Early life
Robert Smalls was born in 1839 to Lydia Polite, a woman enslaved by Henry McKee, who was most likely Smalls' father.
She gave birth to him in a cabin behind McKee's house, at 511 Prince Street in Beaufort, South Carolina.
He grew up in the city under the influence of the Lowcountry Gullah culture of his mother.
His mother lived as a servant in the house but grew up in the fields.
Robert was favored over other slaves, so his mother worried that he might grow up not understanding the plight of field slaves, and asked for him to be made to work in the fields and to witness whipping.
When he was 12, at the request of his mother, Smalls' master sent him to Charleston to hire out as a laborer for one dollar a week, with the rest of the wage being paid to his master.
The youth first worked in a hotel, then became a lamplighter on Charleston's streets.
In his teen years, his love of the sea led him to find work on Charleston's docks and wharves.
Smalls worked as a longshoreman, a rigger, a sail maker, and eventually worked his way up to become a wheelman, more or less a pilot, though slaves were not honored by that title.
As a result, he was very knowledgeable about Charleston harbor.
At age 17, Smalls married Hannah Jones, an enslaved hotel maid, in Charleston on December 24, 1856.
She was five years his senior and already had two daughters.
Their own first child, Elizabeth Lydia Smalls, was born in February 1858.
Three years later they had a son, Robert Jr., who later died at age two.
Planters duties were to deliver dispatches, troops and supplies, to survey waterways, and to lay mines.
Smalls piloted the Planter throughout Charleston harbor and beyond, on area rivers and along the South Carolina, Georgia and Florida coasts.
From Charleston harbor, Smalls and the Planters crew could see the line of Federal blockade ships in the outer harbor, seven miles away.
Smalls appeared content and had the confidence of the Planters crew and owners, and at some time in April 1862, Smalls began to plan an escape.
He discussed the matter with the other slaves in the crew except one, whom he did not trust.
There the ship picked up four large guns to transport to a fort in Charleston harbor.
Back in Charleston, the crew loaded 200 pounds of ammunition and 20 cords of firewood onto the Planter.
On the evening of May 12, the Planter was docked as usual at the wharf below General Ripley's headquarters.
along the coast and river.
Now, as a pilot, he helped find and remove them and serviced the blockade between Charleston and Beaufort.
He was also present when the Planter was fired upon at several fights at Adam's Run on the Dawho River and at battles at Rockville, at John's Island, and at the Second Battle of Pocotaligo.
He continued to pilot the Planter, serving a humanitarian mission of taking food and supplies to freedmen who lost their homes and livelihoods during the war.
On September 30, the Planter entered the service of the Freedmen's Bureau.
Commission and prize money
Smalls' position in the Union Army and Navy has been disputed and Smalls' reward for the capture of the Planter has been criticized.
During Smalls' life, articles about Smalls state that when he was assigned to pilot the Planter, the Navy did not allow him to hold the rank of pilot because he was not a graduate of a naval academy, a requirement at that time.
To assure he received proper pay for a captain, he was commissioned second lieutenant of the 1st South Carolina Volunteers (later re-designated as the 33rd US Colored Infantry) and detailed to act as pilot.
Many sources also state that General Gillmore promoted Smalls to captain in December 1863 when he saved the Planter when it was under attack near Secessionville.
Later sources state that Smalls did receive a commission either in the Army or the Navy, but he was likely officially a civilian throughout the war.
In 1897, a special act of congress granted Smalls a pension of $30 per month, equal to the pension for a Navy captain.
Except for one white director, the railroad's board of directors was entirely African American.
Richard H. Cain was its first president.
Author Bernard E. Powers describes it as "the most impressive commercial venture by members of Charleston's black elite."
He owned and helped publish a black-owned newspaper, the Beaufort Southern Standard starting in 1872.
He was also elected vice-president of the South Carolina Republican Party at their 1872 state convention.
In 1873, he was appointed lieutenant-colonel of the Third Regiment, South Carolina State Militia.
He was later promoted to brigadier-general of the Second Brigade, South Carolina Militia, and the major-general of the Second Division, South Carolina State Militia.
He held this position until 1877, when Democrats took control of the state government.
Smalls and his family were affiliated with the Baptist Church and attended Berean Baptist Church when living in Washington, D.C.
Smalls died of malaria and diabetes in 1915 at the age of 75.
Honors and legacy
*Fort Robert Smalls was named in his honor; it was built by free blacks in 1863 on McGuire's Hill on the South Side of Pittsburgh during the American Civil War.
It survived until the 1940s.
*The Robert Smalls House in Beaufort, S.C., has been designated a National Historic Landmark.
*A monument and statue are dedicated to his memory where he is interred at Tabernacle Baptist Church in Beaufort.
*During World War II, Camp Robert Smalls was established as a sub-facility of the Great Lakes Naval Training Center to train black sailors (the Navy was segregated in those years).
*The Verdier House museum in Beaufort has an exhibit on Robert Smalls.
*In 2004, the U.S. named a ship for Robert Smalls.
It is , a Kuroda class logistics support vessel operated by the U.S. Army.
It is the first Army ship named after an African American.
*Charleston held commemorative ceremonies in 2012 on the 150th anniversary of Robert Smalls' escape on the Planter, with special programs on May 12 and 13.
*Robert Smalls Parkway is a five-mile section of South Carolina Highway 170 that crosses Port Royal Island and leads into Beaufort.
*There is a statue of Robert Smalls in the US National Museum of African American History and Culture.
*An image of Robert Smalls was featured on the cover of the album Devil Is Fine by the musical project Zeal & Ardor.
*There is a proposal to create a statue of Robert Smalls to be installed at the South Carolina State House.
*List of African-American United States Representatives
Further reading
* Coker, P. C., III.
Charleston's Maritime Heritage, 1670-1865: An Illustrated History.
Charleston, S.C.:
Coker-Craft, 1987.
314 pp.
Downing, David C. A South Divided: Portraits of Dissent in the Confederacy, Nashville: Cumberland House, 2007.
*Foner, Eric ed., Freedom's Lawmakers: A Directory of Black Officeholders During Reconstruction Revised Edition.
(Baton Rouge: Louisiana State University Press, 1996). .
Between 1865 and 1876, about 2,000 blacks (including men of color or mixed race) held elective and appointive offices in the South.
A few are relatively well-known, but most became obscure because official state histories prepared after Reconstruction omitted them; whites dominated state governments and suppressed the black population and its history.
Foner profiles more than 1,500 black legislators, state officials, sheriffs, justices of the peace, and constables in this volume.
* Gabridge, Patrick, Steering to Freedom (Penmore Press, 2015). .
Novel about Robert Smalls' life.
*Kennedy, Robert F., Jr. Robert Smalls, the Boat Thief (New York: Hyperion, 2008). .
A picture book illustrated by Patrick Faricy.
*Rabinowitz, Howard N. Southern Black Leaders of the Reconstruction Era (Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 1982)
*Sterling, Dorothy.
Captain of the "Planter": The Story of Robert Smalls (Doubleday & Co. Garden City, 1958)
*Thomas, Rhondda R. & Ashton, Susanna, eds (2014).
http:/ uscpress 2013/7314.html
The South Carolina Roots of African American Thought, Columbia: University of South Carolina Press.
"Robert Smalls (1839-1915)," pp.
*Uya, Okon Edet, From Slavery to Public Service: Robert Smalls, 1839-1915 (Oxford University Press.
New York, 1971)
