Weebly () is a web hosting service specifically oriented for online shopping, headquartered in San Francisco.
Its parent company is Square, Inc., and currently has more than 45 million customers around the world.
Weebly was founded by Chief Executive Officer David Rusenko, Chief Technology Officer Chris Fanini, and former Chief Product Officer Dan Veltri.
History
Dave Rusenko, Chris Fanini, and Dan Veltri co-founded Weebly in 2006.
This selection represents the time that Rusenko, Veltri and Fanini began working on Weebly full-time.
Also in 2007, Weebly raised a US$650,000 financing round from several angel investors, including Ron Conway, Steve Anderson, Mike Maples, and Paul Buchheit.
Weebly reached 1,000,000 users in 2008 and released a statement announcing that it had become profitable.
During its initial startup years, Weebly received criticism for its lack of CSS/HTML editing support, and in 2009 it added this functionality.
In 2011, Weebly raised a growth-stage round from Sequoia Capital and added Roelof Botha to its board of directors.
In April 2014, Weebly raised $35 million in Series C funding from existing partner Sequoia Capital and Tencent Holdings Ltd.
The funds will be used to expand into new markets, increase investment in research and development, and drive Weebly's mission of empowering people to pursue their passion.
Rusenko stated in August 2013 that the company signed a lease for a warehouse in San Francisco, based on an expectation of ongoing growth.
The new office will house the majority of a global team of 600 employees in 2014 when it moves into the property.
As of August 25, 2013, Weebly had 80 employees and was based in an space in the Pacific Heights area of San Francisco.
In October 2015 it was announced that a Berlin office would open in late 2015/early 2016 to offer European-based support and marketing.
In April 2016, Weebly integrated JotForm software on its services.
In 2016, Weebly began to focus in on its ecommerce offering with the release of Weebly 4 and Weebly Promote, an integrated marketing tool built into the platform.
As more sellers began using the company as the initial entry into their market, the company created features for one click taxes, integrations with Shippo to streamline the shipping process, Facebook Ad creator, integrated email marketing and lead capture, abandoned cart features, the release of Mobile 5.0 to help sellers run their store from anywhere and deep integrations with Square, the payment processing company.
In early 2018, co-founder Dan Veltri left the company to pursue other interests.
In January 2018, Weebly hired its first VP of Brand, Alexis Contos, and her hire marked the first time the 12 person executive team was 50% women and 50% men.
On April 26, 2018, Square announced that it will acquire Weebly for approximately $365 million in cash and stock.
Product
Weebly's free online website creator uses a simple widget-based site builder that operates in the web browser.
All the site elements are drag-and-drop, Basic features for blogging and e-Commerce are supported: site owners can develop simple stores with payments through either PayPal, Stripe or .
Users can choose to incorporate advertisements in their pages, and visitor statistics can be tracked through an in-house tracking tool or Google Analytics.
A new version was released on October 1, 2015.
Named Weebly Carbon, it enabled users to add plugins into their websites among other features.
Public relations and sponsorship
In April 2012, Weebly co-sponsored a hackathon hosted by Pennsylvania State University titled the "PSUhackathon."
It was also featured briefly on the BBC in February 2008.
Vikitech, Business Insider, and InGeek have all featured Weebly as one of the best Google Chrome apps.
David Rusenko, Weebly's CEO and co-founder, earned a spot in Forbes 2011 "30 Under 30" list.
Censorship
In December 2014, the Indian government blocked Weebly in India, due to fears that ISIS propaganda was being spread through the site.
On December 31, the site was again made available throughout India.
Weebly also applies censorship to its availability with a wide selection of geoblocked countries where weebly is unavailable to internet users.
Site owners are unable to login from these geoblocked locations to administer the site just as internet users cannot reach the site.
To date no list of blocked countries is available even after multiple requests.
The list does include most of West and Central Africa along with reports of Russia, Middle East and many Asian countries.
