In cell biology, mitosis () is a part of the cell cycle when replicated chromosomes are separated into two new nuclei.
Cell division gives rise to genetically identical cells in which the number of chromosomes is maintained.
In general, mitosis (division of the nucleus) is preceded by the S stage of interphase (during which the DNA is replicated) and is often accompanied or followed by cytokinesis, which divides the cytoplasm, organelles and cell membrane into two new cells containing roughly equal shares of these cellular components.
Mitosis and cytokinesis together define the mitotic (M) phase of an animal cell cycle-the division of the mother cell into two daughter cells genetically identical to each other.
The process of mitosis is divided into stages corresponding to the completion of one set of activities and the start of the next.
These stages are prophase, prometaphase, metaphase, anaphase, and telophase.
During mitosis, the chromosomes, which have already duplicated, condense and attach to spindle fibers that pull one copy of each chromosome to opposite sides of the cell.
The result is two genetically identical daughter nuclei.
The rest of the cell may then continue to divide by cytokinesis to produce two daughter cells.
Other errors during mitosis can induce apoptosis (programmed cell death) or cause mutations.
Certain types of cancer can arise from such mutations.
Mitosis occurs only in eukaryotic cells.
Prokaryotic cells, which lack a nucleus, divide by a different process called binary fission.
Mitosis varies between organisms.
In 1838, Matthias Jakob Schleiden affirmed that the formation of new cells in their interior was a general law for cell multiplication in plants, a view later rejected in favour of Mohl model, due to contributions of Robert Remak and others.
In animal cells, cell division with mitosis was discovered in frog, rabbit, and cat cornea cells in 1873 and described for the first time by the Polish histologist Wacław Mayzel in 1875.
Bütschli, Schneider and Fol might have also claimed the discovery of the process presently known as "mitosis".
In 1873, the German zoologist Otto Bütschli published data from observations on nematodes.
A few years later, he discovered and described mitosis based on those observations.
The term "mitosis", coined by Walther Flemming in 1882, is derived from the Greek word μίτος (mitos, "warp thread").
There are some alternative names for the process, e.g., "karyokinesis" (nuclear division), a term introduced by Schleicher in 1878, or "equational division", proposed by August Weismann in 1887.
However, the term "mitosis" is also used in a broad sense by some authors to refer to karyokinesis and cytokinesis together.
Presently, "equational division" is more commonly used to refer to meiosis II, the part of meiosis most like mitosis.
Phases
Overview
The primary result of mitosis and cytokinesis is the transfer of a parent cell's genome into two daughter cells.
The genome is composed of a number of chromosomes-complexes of tightly coiled DNA that contain genetic information vital for proper cell function.
Because each resultant daughter cell should be genetically identical to the parent cell, the parent cell must make a copy of each chromosome before mitosis.
This occurs during the S phase of interphase.
Prophase
During prophase, which occurs after G2 interphase, the cell prepares to divide by tightly condensing its chromosomes and initiating mitotic spindle formation.
During interphase, the genetic material in the nucleus consists of loosely packed chromatin.
At the onset of prophase, chromatin fibers condense into discrete chromosomes that are typically visible at high magnification through a light microscope.
In this stage, chromosomes are long, thin and thread-like.
Each chromosome has two chromatids.
The two chromatids are joined at the centromere.
Gene transcription ceases during prophase and does not resume until late anaphase to early G1 phase.
The nucleolus also disappears during early prophase.
then push the centrosomes along these microtubules to opposite sides of the cell.
Although centrosomes help organize microtubule assembly, they are not essential for the formation of the spindle apparatus, since they are absent from plants,
Prometaphase
At the beginning of prometaphase in animal cells, phosphorylation of nuclear lamins causes the nuclear envelope to disintegrate into small membrane vesicles.
As this happens, microtubules invade the nuclear space.
This is called open mitosis, and it occurs in some multicellular organisms.
Fungi and some protists, such as algae or trichomonads, undergo a variation called closed mitosis where the spindle forms inside the nucleus, or the microtubules penetrate the intact nuclear envelope.
A number of polar microtubules find and interact with corresponding polar microtubules from the opposite centrosome to form the mitotic spindle.
In most animal cells, anaphase A precedes anaphase B, but some vertebrate egg cells demonstrate the opposite order of events.
Telophase
Telophase (from the Greek word τελος meaning "end") is a reversal of prophase and prometaphase events.
At telophase, the polar microtubules continue to lengthen, elongating the cell even more.
If the nuclear envelope has broken down, a new nuclear envelope forms using the membrane vesicles of the parent cell's old nuclear envelope.
The new envelope forms around each set of separated daughter chromosomes (though the membrane does not enclose the centrosomes) and the nucleolus reappears.
Both sets of chromosomes, now surrounded by new nuclear membrane, begin to "relax" or decondense.
Mitosis is complete.
Each daughter nucleus has an identical set of chromosomes.
Cell division may or may not occur at this time depending on the organism.
Cytokinesis
Cytokinesis is not a phase of mitosis but rather a separate process, necessary for completing cell division.
In animal cells, a cleavage furrow (pinch) containing a contractile ring develops where the metaphase plate used to be, pinching off the separated nuclei.
Following, the occurrence of the forms of mitosis in eukaryotes:
*Closed intranuclear pleuromitosis is typical of Foraminifera, some Prasinomonadida, some Kinetoplastida, the Oxymonadida, the Haplosporidia, many fungi (chytrids, oomycetes, zygomycetes, ascomycetes), and some Radiolaria (Spumellaria and Acantharia); it seems to be the most primitive type.
*Closed extranuclear pleuromitosis occurs in Trichomonadida and Dinoflagellata.
* Closed orthomitosis is found among diatoms, ciliates, some Microsporidia, unicellular yeasts and some multicellular fungi.
*Semiopen pleuromitosis is typical of most Apicomplexa.
*Semiopen orthomitosis occurs with different variants in some amoebae (Lobosa) and some green flagellates (e.g., Raphidophyta or Volvox).
*Open orthomitosis is typical in mammals and other Metazoa, and in land plants; but it also occurs in some protists.
Errors and other variations
Errors can occur during mitosis, especially during early embryonic development in humans.
Mitotic errors can create aneuploid cells that have too few or too many of one or more chromosomes, a condition associated with cancer.
Early human embryos, cancer cells, infected or intoxicated cells can also suffer from pathological division into three or more daughter cells (tripolar or multipolar mitosis), resulting in severe errors in their chromosomal complements.
One daughter cell receives both sister chromatids from the nondisjoining chromosome and the other cell receives none.
As a result, the former cell gets three copies of the chromosome, a condition known as trisomy, and the latter will have only one copy, a condition known as monosomy.
On occasion, when cells experience nondisjunction, they fail to complete cytokinesis and retain both nuclei in one cell, resulting in binucleated cells.
Anaphase lag occurs when the movement of one chromatid is impeded during anaphase.
Endoreduplication is found in many species and appears to be a normal part of development.
The cells then re-enter G1 and S phase and replicate their chromosomes again.
Amitosis in ciliates and in animal placental tissues results in a random distribution of parental alleles.
Karyokinesis without cytokinesis originates multinucleated cells called coenocytes.
Diagnostic marker
In histopathology, the mitosis rate is an important parameter in various types of tissue samples, for diagnosis as well as to further specify the aggressiveness of tumors.
For example, there is routinely a quantification of mitotic count in breast cancer classification.
Related cell processes
Cell rounding
In animal tissue, most cells round up to a near-spherical shape during mitosis.
Mitotic cells irradiated in the G2 phase repair such damages preferentially by sister-chromatid recombination.
These findings suggest that mitotic recombination is an adaptation for repairing DNA damages including those that are potentially lethal.
Evolution
There are prokaryotic homologs of all the key molecules of eukaryotic mitosis (e.g., actins, tubulins).
Being a universal eukaryotic property, mitosis probably arose at the base of the eukaryotic tree.
As mitosis is less complex than meiosis, meiosis presumably arose after mitosis.
While in bacterial cell division, after duplication of DNA, two circular chromosomes are attached to a special region of the cell membrane, eukaryotic mitosis is usually characterized by the presence of many linear chromosomes, whose kinetochores attaches to the microtubules of the spindle.
In relation to the forms of mitosis, closed intranuclear pleuromitosis seems to be the most primitive type, as it is more similar to bacterial division.
Further reading
