The Battle of Marathon () took place in 490 BC during the first Persian invasion of Greece.
It was fought between the citizens of Athens, aided by Plataea, and a Persian force commanded by Datis and Artaphernes.
The battle was the culmination of the first attempt by Persia, under King Darius I, to subjugate Greece.
The Greek army decisively defeated the more numerous Persians, marking a turning point in the Greco-Persian Wars.
The first Persian invasion was a response to Athenian involvement in the Ionian Revolt, when Athens and Eretria had sent a force to support the cities of Ionia in their attempt to overthrow Persian rule.
The Athenians and Eretrians had succeeded in capturing and burning Sardis, but they were then forced to retreat with heavy losses.
In response to this raid, Darius swore to burn down Athens and Eretria.
According to Herodotus, Darius had his bow brought to him and then shot an arrow "upwards towards heaven", saying as he did so: "Zeus, that it may be granted me to take vengeance upon the Athenians!"
Herodotus further writes that Darius charged one of his servants to say "Master, remember the Athenians" three times before dinner each day.
At the time of the battle, Sparta and Athens were the two largest city-states in Greece.
Once the Ionian revolt was finally crushed by the Persian victory at the Battle of Lade in 494 BC, Darius began plans to subjugate Greece.
In 490 BC, he sent a naval task force under Datis and Artaphernes across the Aegean, to subjugate the Cyclades, and then to make punitive attacks on Athens and Eretria.
Reaching Euboea in mid-summer after a successful campaign in the Aegean, the Persians proceeded to besiege and capture Eretria.
The Persian force then sailed for Attica, landing in the bay near the town of Marathon.
The Athenians, joined by a small force from Plataea, marched to Marathon, and succeeded in blocking the two exits from the plain of Marathon.
The Athenians also sent a message to the Spartans asking for support.
When the messenger arrived in Sparta, the Spartans were involved in a religious festival and gave this as a reason for not coming to aid of the Athenians.
The Athenians and their allies chose a location for the battle, with marshes and mountainous terrain, that prevented the Persian cavalry from joining the Persian infantry.
Miltiades, the Athenian general, ordered a general attack against the Persian forces, composed primarily of missile troops.
He reinforced his flanks, luring the Persians' best fighters into his centre.
The inward wheeling flanks enveloped the Persians, routing them.
The Persian army broke in panic towards their ships, and large numbers were slaughtered.
The defeat at Marathon marked the end of the first Persian invasion of Greece, and the Persian force retreated to Asia.
Darius then began raising a huge new army with which he meant to completely subjugate Greece; however, in 486 BC, his Egyptian subjects revolted, indefinitely postponing any Greek expedition.
After Darius died, his son Xerxes I restarted the preparations for a second invasion of Greece, which finally began in 480 BC.
The Battle of Marathon was a watershed in the Greco-Persian wars, showing the Greeks that the Persians could be beaten; the eventual Greek triumph in these wars can be seen to have begun at Marathon.
The battle also showed the Greeks that they were able to win battles without the Spartans, as they had heavily relied on Sparta previously.
This victory was largely due to the Athenians, and Marathon raised Greek esteem of them.
The following two hundred years saw the rise of the Classical Greek civilization, which has been enduringly influential in western society and so the Battle of Marathon is often seen as a pivotal moment in Mediterranean and European history.
Background
The first Persian invasion of Greece had its immediate roots in the Ionian Revolt, the earliest phase of the Greco-Persian Wars.
However, it was also the result of the longer-term interaction between the Greeks and Persians.
In 500 BC the Persian Empire was still relatively young and highly expansionistic, but prone to revolts amongst its subject peoples.
Darius thus resolved to subjugate and pacify Greece and the Aegean, and to punish those involved in the Ionian Revolt.
The Ionian Revolt had begun with an unsuccessful expedition against Naxos, a joint venture between the Persian satrap Artaphernes and the Milesian tyrant Aristagoras.
In the aftermath, Artaphernes decided to remove Aristagoras from power, but before he could do so, Aristagoras abdicated, and declared Miletus a democracy.
Aristagoras then appealed to the states of mainland Greece for support, but only Athens and Eretria offered to send troops.
The involvement of Athens in the Ionian Revolt arose from a complex set of circumstances, beginning with the establishment of the Athenian Democracy in the late 6th century BC.
With Hippias's father Peisistratus, the family had ruled for 36 out of the previous 50 years and fully intended to continue Hippias's rule.
In the meantime, Cleomenes helped install a pro-Spartan tyranny under Isagoras in Athens, in opposition to Cleisthenes, the leader of the traditionally powerful Alcmaeonidae family, who considered themselves the natural heirs to the rule of Athens.
Cleisthenes, however, found himself being politically defeated by a coalition led by Isagoras and decided to change the rules of the game by appealing to the demos (the people), in effect making them a new faction in the political arena.
This tactic succeeded, but the Spartan King, Cleomenes I, returned at the request of Isagoras and so Cleisthenes, the Alcmaeonids and other prominent Athenian families were exiled from Athens.
When Isagoras attempted to create a narrow oligarchic government, the Athenian people, in a spontaneous and unprecedented move, expelled Cleomenes and Isagoras.
Cleisthenes was thus restored to Athens (507 BC), and at breakneck speed began to reform the state with the aim of securing his position.
The result was not actually a democracy or a real civic state, but he enabled the development of a fully democratic government, which would emerge in the next generation as the demos realized its power.
The new-found freedom and self-governance of the Athenians meant that they were thereafter exceptionally hostile to the return of the tyranny of Hippias, or any form of outside subjugation, by Sparta, Persia, or anyone else.
Cleomenes's attempts to restore Isagoras to Athens ended in a debacle, but fearing the worst, the Athenians had by this point already sent an embassy to Artaphernes in Sardis, to request aid from the Persian empire.
Artaphernes requested that the Athenians give him an 'earth and water', a traditional token of submission, to which the Athenian ambassadors acquiesced.
The Athenians dispatched ambassadors to Artaphernes to dissuade him from taking action, but Artaphernes merely instructed the Athenians to take Hippias back as tyrant.
Whilst there, the Greek army surprised and outmaneuvered Artaphernes, marching to Sardis and burning the lower city.
This was, however, as much as the Greeks achieved, and they were then repelled and pursued back to the coast by Persian horsemen, losing many men in the process.
Despite the fact that their actions were ultimately fruitless, the Eretrians and in particular the Athenians had earned Darius's lasting enmity, and he vowed to punish both cities.
The Persian naval victory at the Battle of Lade (494 BC) all but ended the Ionian Revolt, and by 493 BC, the last hold-outs were vanquished by the Persian fleet.
The revolt was used as an opportunity by Darius to extend the empire's border to the islands of the eastern Aegean and the Propontis, which had not been part of the Persian dominions before.
The pacification of Ionia allowed the Persians to begin planning their next moves; to extinguish the threat to the empire from Greece and to punish Athens and Eretria.
In 492 BC, after the Ionian Revolt had finally been crushed, Darius dispatched an expedition to Greece under the command of his son-in-law, Mardonius.
Mardonius re-subjugated Thrace and made Macedonia a fully subordinate part of the Persians; they had been vassals of the Persians since the late 6th century BC, but retained their general autonomy.
Not long after however, his fleet became wrecked by a violent storm, which brought a premature end to the campaign.
However, in 490 BC, following the successes of the previous campaign, Darius decided to send a maritime expedition led by Artaphernes, (son of the satrap to whom Hippias had fled) and Datis, a Median admiral.
Mardonius had been injured in the prior campaign and had fallen out of favor.
The expedition was intended to bring the Cyclades into the Persian empire, to punish Naxos (which had resisted a Persian assault in 499 BC) and then to head to Greece to force Eretria and Athens to submit to Darius or be destroyed.
After island-hopping across the Aegean, including successfully attacking Naxos, the Persian task force arrived off Euboea in mid summer.
The Persians then proceeded to besiege, capture and burn Eretria.
They then headed south down the coast of Attica, en route to complete the final objective of the campaign-punish Athens.
Prelude
The Persians sailed down the coast of Attica, and landed at the bay of Marathon, roughly from Athens, on the advice of the exiled Athenian tyrant Hippias (who had accompanied the expedition).
Under the guidance of Miltiades, the Athenian general with the greatest experience of fighting the Persians, the Athenian army marched quickly to block the two exits from the plain of Marathon, and prevent the Persians moving inland.
At the same time, Athens's greatest runner, Pheidippides (or Philippides in some accounts) had been sent to Sparta to request that the Spartan army march to the aid of Athens.
Pheidippides arrived during the festival of Carneia, a sacrosanct period of peace, and was informed that the Spartan army could not march to war until the full moon rose; Athens could not expect reinforcement for at least ten days.
The Athenians would have to hold out at Marathon for the time being, although they were reinforced by the full muster of 1,000 hoplites from the small city of Plataea; a gesture which did much to steady the nerves of the Athenians, Since every day brought the arrival of the Spartans closer, the delay worked in favor of the Athenians.
In addition, in overall charge, was the War-Archon (polemarch), Callimachus, who had been elected by the whole citizen body.
Herodotus suggests that command rotated between the strategoi, each taking in turn a day to command the army.
He further suggests that each strategos, on his day in command, instead deferred to Miltiades.
There does, however, seem to have been a delay between the Athenian arrival at Marathon, and the battle; Herodotus, who evidently believed that Miltiades was eager to attack, may have made a mistake whilst seeking to explain this delay.
This then raises the question of why the battle occurred when it did.
Herodotus explicitly tells us that the Greeks attacked the Persians (and the other sources confirm this), but it is not clear why they did this before the arrival of the Spartans.
There are many variations of this theory, but perhaps the most prevalent is that the cavalry were completing the time-consuming process of re-embarking on the ships, and were to be sent by sea to attack (undefended) Athens in the rear, whilst the rest of the Persians pinned down the Athenian army at Marathon.
Thus, this re-embarcation would have occurred before the battle (and indeed have triggered the battle).
Opposing forces
Athenians
Herodotus does not give a figure for the size of the Athenian army.
However, Cornelius Nepos, Pausanias and Plutarch all give the figure of 9,000 Athenians and 1,000 Plataeans; while Justin suggests that there were 10,000 Athenians and 1,000 Plataeans.
These numbers are highly comparable to the number of troops Herodotus says that the Athenians and Plataeans sent to the Battle of Plataea 11 years later.
Pausanias noticed on the monument to the battle the names of former slaves who were freed in exchange for military services.
Modern historians generally accept these numbers as reasonable.
The areas ruled by Athens (Attica) had a population of 315,000 at this time including slaves, which implies the full Athenian army at the times of both Marathon and Plataea numbered about 3% of the population.
Persians
According to Herodotus, the fleet sent by Darius consisted of 600 triremes.
Herodotus does not estimate the size of the Persian army, only saying that they were a "large infantry that was well packed".
Among ancient sources, the poet Simonides, another near-contemporary, says the campaign force numbered 200,000; while a later writer, the Roman Cornelius Nepos estimates 200,000 infantry and 10,000 cavalry, of which only 100,000 fought in the battle, while the rest were loaded into the fleet that was rounding Cape Sounion; Plutarch and Pausanias both independently give 300,000, as does the Suda dictionary.
Plato and Lysias give 500,000; and Justinus 600,000.
Modern historians have proposed wide-ranging numbers for the infantry, from 20,000-100,000 with a consensus of perhaps 25,000; estimates for the cavalry are in the range of 1,000.
The fleet included various contingents from different parts of the Achaemenid Empire, particularly Ionians and Aeolians, although they are not mentioned as participating directly to the battle and may have remained on the ships:
Regarding the ethnicities involved in the battle, Herodotus specifically mentions the presence of the Persians and the Sakae at the center of the Achaemenid line:
Strategic and tactical considerations
From a strategic point of view, the Athenians had some disadvantages at Marathon.
In order to face the Persians in battle, the Athenians had to summon all available hoplites;)
Since the Athenians seem to have taken up a strong defensive position at Marathon, the Persian hesitance was probably a reluctance to attack the Athenians head-on.
the strength of the hoplite was in the melee, and the sooner that could be brought about, the better, from the Athenian point of view.
Miltiades ordered the two tribes forming the center of the Greek formation, the Leontis tribe led by Themistocles and the Antiochis tribe led by Aristides, to be arranged in the depth of four ranks while the rest of the tribes at their flanks were in ranks of eight.
Some modern commentators have suggested this was a deliberate ploy to encourage a double envelopment of the Persian centre.
However, this suggests a level of training that the Greeks are thought not to have possessed.
There is little evidence for any such tactical thinking in Greek battles until Leuctra in 371 BC.
It is therefore possible that this arrangement was made, perhaps at the last moment, so that the Athenian line was as long as the Persian line, and would not therefore be outflanked.
When the Athenian line was ready, according to one source, the simple signal to advance was given by Miltiades: "At them".
More likely, they marched until they reached the limit of the archers' effectiveness, the "beaten zone" (roughly 200 meters), and then broke into a run towards their enemy.
Indeed, based on their previous experience of the Greeks, the Persians might be excused for this; Herodotus tells us that the Athenians at Marathon were "first to endure looking at Median dress and men wearing it, for up until then just hearing the name of the Medes caused the Hellenes to panic".
Some, unaware of the local terrain, ran towards the swamps where unknown numbers drowned.
The Athenians pursued the Persians back to their ships, and managed to capture seven ships, though the majority were able to launch successfully.
Herodotus recounts the story that Cynaegirus, brother of the playwright Aeschylus, who was also among the fighters, charged into the sea, grabbed one Persian trireme, and started pulling it towards shore.
A member of the crew saw him, cut off his hand, and Cynaegirus died.
He also reported that the Athenians lost 192 men and the Plataeans 11.
not as a result of a tactical planning.
It seems that the Persian centre tried to return, realizing that their wings had broken, and was caught in the flanks by the victorious Greek wings.
Lazenby (1993) believes that the ultimate reason for the Greek success was the courage the Greeks displayed:
Marathon was won because ordinary, amateur soldiers found the courage to break into a trot when the arrows began to fall, instead of grinding to a halt, and when surprisingly the enemy wings fled, not to take the easy way out and follow them, but to stop and somehow come to the aid of the hard pressured centre.
According to Vic Hurley, the Persian defeat is explained by the "complete failure ... to field a representative army", calling the battle the "most convincing" example of the fact that infantry-bowmen cannot defend any position while stationed in close-quarters and unsupported (i.e. by fortifications, or failing to support them by cavalry and chariots, as was the common Persian tactic).
Aftermath
In the immediate aftermath of the battle, Herodotus says that the Persian fleet sailed around Cape Sounion to attack Athens directly.
The two tribes which had been in the centre of the Athenian line stayed to guard the battlefield under the command of Aristides.
The Athenians arrived in time to prevent the Persians from securing a landing, and seeing that the opportunity was lost, the Persians turned about and returned to Asia.
On the next day, the Spartan army arrived at Marathon, having covered the in only three days.
The Spartans toured the battlefield at Marathon, and agreed that the Athenians had won a great victory.
The Athenian and Plataean dead of Marathon were buried on the battlefield in two tumuli.
On the tomb of the Athenians this epigram composed by Simonides was written:
:Ἑλλήνων προμαχοῦντες Ἀθηναῖοι Μαραθῶνι
:χρυσοφόρων Μήδων ἐστόρεσαν δύναμιν
:Fighting at the forefront of the Greeks, the Athenians at Marathon
:laid low the army of the gilded Medes.
Meanwhile, Darius began raising a huge new army with which he meant to completely subjugate Greece; however, in 486 BC, his Egyptian subjects revolted, indefinitely postponing any Greek expedition.
Darius then died whilst preparing to march on Egypt, and the throne of Persia passed to his son Xerxes I. Xerxes crushed the Egyptian revolt, and very quickly restarted the preparations for the invasion of Greece.
The epic second Persian invasion of Greece finally began in 480 BC, and the Persians met with initial success at the battles of Thermopylae and Artemisium.
However, defeat at the Battle of Salamis would be the turning point in the campaign, and the next year the expedition was ended by the decisive Greek victory at the Battle of Plataea.
Significance
The defeat at Marathon barely touched the vast resources of the Persian empire, yet for the Greeks it was an enormously significant victory.
It was the first time the Greeks had beaten the Persians, proving that the Persians were not invincible, and that resistance, rather than subjugation, was possible.
The battle was a defining moment for the young Athenian democracy, showing what might be achieved through unity and self-belief; indeed, the battle effectively marks the start of a "golden age" for Athens.
This was also applicable to Greece as a whole; "their victory endowed the Greeks with a faith in their destiny that was to endure for three centuries, during which western culture was born".
John Stuart Mill's famous opinion was that "the Battle of Marathon, even as an event in British history, is more important than the Battle of Hastings".
According to Isaac Asimov,"if the Athenians had lost in Marathon, . . .
Greece might have never gone to develop the peak of its civilization, a peak whose fruits we moderns have inherited."
It seems that the Athenian playwright Aeschylus considered his participation at Marathon to be his greatest achievement in life (rather than his plays) since on his gravestone there was the following epigram:
:This tomb the dust of Aeschylus doth hide,
:Euphorion's son and fruitful Gela's pride.
:How tried his valor, Marathon may tell,
:And long-haired Medes, who knew it all too well.
Militarily, a major lesson for the Greeks was the potential of the hoplite phalanx.
This style had developed during internecine warfare amongst the Greeks; since each city-state fought in the same way, the advantages and disadvantages of the hoplite phalanx had not been obvious.
Marathon was the first time a phalanx faced more lightly armed troops, and revealed how effective the hoplites could be in battle.
Sources
The main source for the Greco-Persian Wars is the Greek historian Herodotus.
Herodotus, who has been called the "Father of History", was born in 484 BC in Halicarnassus, Asia Minor (then under Persian overlordship).
He wrote his Enquiries (Greek - Historiai; English - (The) Histories) around 440-430 BC, trying to trace the origins of the Greco-Persian Wars, which would still have been relatively recent history (the wars finally ended in 450 BC).
Some subsequent ancient historians, despite following in his footsteps, criticised Herodotus, starting with Thucydides.
Nevertheless, Thucydides chose to begin his history where Herodotus left off (at the Siege of Sestos), and may therefore have felt that Herodotus's history was accurate enough not to need re-writing or correcting.
A negative view of Herodotus was passed on to Renaissance Europe, though he remained well read.
However, since the 19th century his reputation has been dramatically rehabilitated by archaeological finds which have repeatedly confirmed his version of events.
The prevailing modern view is that Herodotus generally did a remarkable job in his Historiai, but that some of his specific details should be viewed with skepticism.
The Sicilian historian Diodorus Siculus, writing in the 1st century BC in his Bibliotheca Historica, also provides an account of the Greco-Persian wars, partially derived from the earlier Greek historian Ephorus.
This account is fairly consistent with Herodotus's.
The Greco-Persian wars are also described in less detail by a number of other ancient historians including Plutarch, Ctesias of Cnidus, and are alluded by other authors, such as the playwright Aeschylus.
Archaeological evidence, such as the Serpent Column, also supports some of Herodotus's specific claims.
Legacy
Legends associated with the battle
The most famous legend associated with Marathon is that of the runner Pheidippides (or Philippides) bringing news to Athens of the battle, which is described below.
Pheidippides' run to Sparta to bring aid has other legends associated with it.
Herodotus mentions that Pheidippides was visited by the god Pan on his way to Sparta (or perhaps on his return journey).
Similarly, after the victory the festival of the Agroteras Thysia ("sacrifice to the Agrotéra") was held at Agrae near Athens, in honor of Artemis Agrotera .
This was in fulfillment of a vow made by the city before the battle, to offer in sacrifice a number of goats equal to that of the Persians slain in the conflict.
The number was so great, it was decided to offer 500 goats yearly until the number was filled.
Xenophon notes that at his time, 90 years after the battle, goats were still offered yearly.
Plutarch mentions that the Athenians saw the phantom of King Theseus, the mythical hero of Athens, leading the army in full battle gear in the charge against the Persians, and indeed he was depicted in the mural of the Stoa Poikile fighting for the Athenians, along with the twelve Olympian gods and other heroes.
Pausanias also tells us that: They say too that there chanced to be present in the battle a man of rustic appearance and dress.
Having slaughtered many of the foreigners with a plough he was seen no more after the engagement.
When the Athenians made enquiries at the oracle, the god merely ordered them to honor Echetlaeus ("he of the Plough-tail") as a hero.
Marathon run
According to Herodotus, an Athenian runner named Pheidippides was sent to run from Athens to Sparta to ask for assistance before the battle.
He ran a distance of over 225 kilometers (140 miles), arriving in Sparta the day after he left.
Then, following the battle, the Athenian army marched the 40 kilometers (25 miles) or so back to Athens at a very high pace (considering the quantity of armour, and the fatigue after the battle), in order to head off the Persian force sailing around Cape Sounion.
They arrived back in the late afternoon, in time to see the Persian ships turn away from Athens, thus completing the Athenian victory.
Later, in popular imagination, these two events were conflated, leading to a legendary but inaccurate version of events.
This myth has Pheidippides running from Marathon to Athens after the battle, to announce the Greek victory with the word "nenikēkamen!"
(Attic: ; we've won!), whereupon he promptly died of exhaustion.
Most accounts incorrectly attribute this story to Herodotus; actually, the story first appears in Plutarch's On the Glory of Athens in the 1st century AD, who quotes from Heracleides of Pontus's lost work, giving the runner's name as either Thersipus of Erchius or Eucles.
Lucian of Samosata (2nd century AD) gives the same story but names the runner Philippides (not Pheidippides).
In some medieval codices of Herodotus, the name of the runner between Athens and Sparta before the battle is given as Philippides, and this name is also preferred in a few modern editions.
When the idea of a modern Olympics became a reality at the end of the 19th century, the initiators and organizers were looking for a great popularizing event, recalling the ancient glory of Greece.
This would echo the legendary version of events, with the competitors running from Marathon to Athens.
So popular was this event that it quickly caught on, becoming a fixture at the Olympic games, with major cities staging their own annual events.
The distance eventually became fixed at 26 miles 385 yards, or 42.195 km, though for the first years it was variable, being around -the approximate distance from Marathon to Athens.
Notes
References
Ancient sources
* Cornelius Nepos Lives of the Eminent Commanders (Miltiades)
* Plutarch Parallel Lives (Aristides, Themistocles, Theseus), On the Malice of Herodotus
* Claudius Aelianus Various history & On the Nature of Animals
* Marcus Junianus Justinus Epitome of the Philippic History of Pompeius Trogus
* Photius, Bibliotheca or Myriobiblon: Epitome of Persica by Ctesias
Modern studies
* Hans W. Giessen, Mythos Marathon.
Von Herodot über Bréal bis zur Gegenwart.
Verlag Empirische Pädagogik, Landau (= Landauer Schriften zur Kommunikations- und Kulturwissenschaft.
Band 17) 2010. .
* Lacey, Jim.
The First Clash: The Miraculous Greek Victory at Marathon and Its Impact on Western Civilization (2011), popular
* Lazenby, J.F. The Defence of Greece 490-479 BC.
Aris & Phillips Ltd., 1993 ()
* Lloyd, Alan.
Marathon:
The Crucial Battle That Created Western Democracy.
Souvenir Press, 2004.
* Davis, Paul.
100 Decisive Battles.
Oxford University Press, 1999.
* Powell J., Blakeley D.W., Powell, T. Biographical Dictionary of Literary Influences: The Nineteenth Century, 1800-1914.
Greenwood Publishing Group, 2001.
* Fuller, J.F.C. A Military History of the Western World.
Funk & Wagnalls, 1954.
* Fehling, D. Herodotus and His "Sources": Citation, Invention, and Narrative Art. Translated by J.G. Howie.
Leeds: Francis Cairns, 1989.
* D.W. Olson et al., http:/ about 3309276.html
"The Moon and the Marathon", Sky & Telescope Sep. 2004
Historiography
* Fink, Dennis L.
The Battle of Marathon in Scholarship: Research, Theories and Controversies since 1850 (McFarland, 2014).
240 pp.
http:/ reviews/showpdf.php?id=43354 online review
