Donald Fauntleroy Duck is a cartoon character created in 1934 at Walt Disney Productions.
Donald is an anthropomorphic white duck with a yellow-orange bill, legs, and feet.
He typically wears a sailor shirt and cap with a bow tie.
Donald is most famous for his semi-intelligible speech and his mischievous and temperamental personality.
Along with his friend Mickey Mouse, Donald is one of the most popular Disney characters and was included in TV Guides list of the 50 greatest cartoon characters of all time in 2002.
He has appeared in more films than any other Disney character, and is the most published comic book character in the world outside of the superhero genre.
Donald Duck rose to fame with his comedic roles in animated cartoons.
Donald's first appearance was in 1934 in The Wise Little Hen, but it was his second appearance in Orphan's Benefit which introduced him as a temperamental comic foil to Mickey Mouse.
Throughout the next two decades, Donald appeared in over 150 theatrical films, several of which were recognized at the Academy Awards.
In the 1930s, he typically appeared as part of a comic trio with Mickey and Goofy and was given his own film series in 1937 starting with Don Donald.
These films introduced Donald's love interest Daisy Duck and often included his three nephews Huey, Dewey, and Louie.
After the 1956 film Chips Ahoy, Donald appeared primarily in educational films before eventually returning to theatrical animation in Mickey's Christmas Carol (1983).
His most recent appearance in a theatrical film was 1999's Fantasia 2000.
Donald has also appeared in direct-to-video features such as Mickey, Donald, Goofy: The Three Musketeers (2004), television series such as Mickey Mouse Clubhouse (2006-2016), and video games such as QuackShot (1991).
Beyond animation, Donald is primarily known for his appearances in comics.
Donald was most famously drawn by Al Taliaferro, Carl Barks, and Don Rosa.
Barks, in particular, is credited for greatly expanding the "Donald Duck universe", the world in which Donald lives, and creating many additional characters such as Donald's rich uncle Scrooge McDuck.
Donald has been a very popular character in Europe, particularly in Nordic countries where his weekly magazine was the most popular comics publication from the 1950s to 2009.
Donald is also very popular in Italy, where he is major character in many comics in which his juvenile version Paperino Paperotto and his superhero alter-ego Paperinik (Duck Avenger in the US and Superduck in the UK) were created.
Origin
The first mention of Donald Duck was made in 1931 for the storybook The Adventures of Mickey Mouse, as one of Mickey's barnyard friends.
The character featured in the cover is much different from the modern Donald Duck, being drawn more like a normal duck and sporting a green hat and pants.
The origins of Donald Duck's name may have been inspired by Australian cricket legend Donald Bradman.
In 1932 Bradman and the Australian team were touring North America and he made the news after being dismissed for a duck against New York West Indians.
Walt Disney was in the process of creating a friend for Mickey Mouse when he possibly read about Bradman's dismissal in the papers and decided to name the new character "Donald Duck".
Voice performer Clarence Nash auditioned for Walt Disney Studios when he learned that Disney was looking for people to create animal sounds for his cartoons.
Disney was particularly impressed with Nash's duck imitation and chose him to voice the new character.
Besides, during that period Mickey Mouse had lost some of his edge since becoming a role model towards children, and so Disney wanted to create a character to portray some of the more negative character traits that could no longer be bestowed on Mickey.
Disney came up with Donald's iconic attributes including his short-temper and his sailor suit (based on ducks and sailors both being associated with water).
While Dick Huemer and Art Babbit were first to animate Donald, Dick Lundy is credited for developing him as a character.
History
Donald was created by Walt Disney when he heard Clarence Nash doing a peculiar voice while reciting "Mary Had a Little Lamb".
Nash described the voice as a goat; Walt, however, insisted that it was a duck.
Nash was hired on the spot, and with a voice in place, a stage was needed to put this new duck character to the test.
The solution came in the form of Walt's experimental Silly Symphony cartoon series.
Donald made his first appearance in The Wise Little Hen on June 9, 1934.
In the cartoon, Donald and his friend, Peter Pig, lie their way out of helping the titular little hen tend to her corn.
Donald's appearance in the cartoon, as created by animators Art Babbitt and Dick Huemer, is similar to his modern look; the feather, and beak colors are the same, as is the blue sailor shirt and hat, but his features are more elongated, his body plumper, and his feet bigger.
His iconic voice, done by its originator Clarence Nash, is also the same.
Notably, the manner of speech in which the characters' voices are based on their respective animals is used for every character, rather than being a trait belonging solely to Donald.
Donald's personality is not developed either; in the short, he merely fills the role of the unhelpful friend from the original story.
Bert Gillett, director of The Wise Little Hen, brought Donald back in his Mickey Mouse cartoon, Orphan's Benefit on August 11, 1934.
Donald is one of a number of characters who are giving performances in a benefit for Mickey's Orphans.
Donald's act is to recite the poems Mary Had a Little Lamb and Little Boy Blue, but every time he tries, the mischievous orphans humiliate him, leading the duck to fly into a squawking fit of anger.
This explosive personality would remain with Donald for decades to come.
Although Orphan's Benefit was Donald's second appearance, the film was the first to significantly develop his character.
Many of Donald's personality traits first seen in Orphan's Benefit would become permanently associated with him, such as his love of showmanship, his fierce determination, belligerence, and most famously his easily provoked temper.
The film also introduced some of Donald's physical antics, such as his signature temper tantrum of hopping on one foot while holding out one fist and swinging the other.
This was the creation of animator Dick Lundy, who termed this Donald's "fighting pose."
Donald continued to be a hit with audiences.
The character began appearing in most Mickey Mouse cartoons as a regular member of the ensemble with Mickey, Minnie Mouse, Goofy, and Pluto.
Donald was redesigned in 1936 to be a bit fuller, rounder, and cuter, starting from Moving Day (1936).
He also began starring in solo cartoons, the first of these being Don Donald, released on January 9, 1937.
This short also marked the first appearance of Daisy Duck (here called "Donna Duck"), as well as Donald's car, 313.
Daisy went on to become Donald's longtime love interest and a recurring co-star in his cartoons, mirroring the relationship between Mickey and Minnie.
Donald's nephews, Huey, Dewey, and Louie, would make their first animated appearance a year later in the 1938 film, Donald's Nephews, directed by Jack King (they had earlier been introduced in the Donald Duck comic strip).
It is around this period that Donald began to surpass Mickey in popularity, both in the favor of audiences and even the animators, who found it increasingly difficult to create new and entertaining shorts for Mickey to star in.
According to Jack Hannah, there were several cartoons developed specifically for Mickey, but when the gags became too "rough", the story was changed to star Donald instead.
After the 1937 success of Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs, Walt Disney began development and planning for several animated feature films to follow suit.
However, with World War II hitting, Walt Disney Studios was forced to go on a standstill, only having the ability to produce package films.
There was a particular interest in the South America market, primarily due to the inability to import cartoons into Occupied Europe as a result of the war.
Donald, with his stardom rising, would appear in four of the package films-three set in South America.
The first of which was Donald's first appearance in a feature-length film, 1943's Saludos Amigos, which introduced Donald to a Brazilian parrot named José Carioca.
In 1944, Donald and José were paired with a bombastic rooster named Panchito Pistoles to form the titular trio in The Three Caballeros.
Donald's part in the Caballeros would go on to become one of his most recognizable and beloved roles.
Donald's other two appearances in the package film era included Fun and Fancy Free in 1947 (opposite Mickey and Goofy in the Mickey and the Beanstalk segment), and Melody Time in 1948 (alongside José Carioca and the Aracuan Bird).
Due to the fact that World War II was ongoing, most of Donald's cartoons of the era were developed as propaganda films, including a series in which Donald had been drafted, detailing the hardships and comedic mishaps during his time in the U.S. Army, with Pete as his sergeant.
The most notable of these wartime-era films is Der Fuehrer's Face, released in 1943.
Centered on Donald's nightmare as a prisoner forced to serve Nazi Germany, the short became the first, and only Donald Duck cartoon to win an Academy Award.
Walt Disney also approved to have Donald serve as a mascot for the Army Air Corps and U.S. Coast Guard, in which he was portrayed as a patriotic pirate.
Donald was officially relieved of duty in 1984, receiving an honorable discharge in honor of his 50th anniversary.
To commemorate his retirement, a ceremony and parade were held in Torrance, California.
After the war, Donald would be paired with several, recurring foils, most notably Chip and Dale, a pair of chipmunks who were first introduced to Donald in the 1947 short Chip an' Dale (though they first appeared as antagonists of the Pluto short Private Pluto).
The pairing of Donald and the chipmunks proved so popular that the trio costarred in eighteen cartoons together in a comical battle of wits.
At this time, Donald Duck had become one of the most recognizable icons in the world, as well as one of the most popular, surpassing Mickey Mouse as the company's biggest animated star.
Walt even referred to Donald as the "Gable of our stable", in reference to the renowned Hollywood actor, Clark Gable.
With such a title, Donald would begin appearing in every form of media and merchandise as Disney's poster-boy and primary audience draw.
Much like Mickey and Goofy, Donald's role became a tad tamer and most of his cartoons centered on struggling with everyday life, parenting his nephews, and battling Chip and Dale.
The 1950s also marked Walt Disney's entry into television, in which Donald would become a staple, making regular appearances in the Disneyland television series.
While many theatrical short subject series ended production during the 1953-1954 season, Donald Duck continued to appear in theatrical cartoons after that season.
In 1958, Donald co-hosted the 30th Academy Awards ceremony alongside a number of popular film personalities at the time.
The final Donald Duck short in the theatrical run was 1961's The Litterbug.
Walt Disney passed away five years later.
He would continue to appear in a number of educational films (including Donald in Mathmagic Land, How to Have an Accident at Work, and Donald's Fire Survival Plan) and a commercial until entering retirement.
Donald wouldn't reappear again until the 1983 short Mickey's Christmas Carol, where he played the role of Nephew Fred.
This was Clarence Nash's final theatrical portrayal of Donald, before passing away in 1985.
The mantle would be passed down to animator Tony Anselmo, whom Nash had trained for the role for several years prior to his death.
In 1984, Donald reached his 50th anniversary, which was commemorated with several events-Donald Duck's 50th Birthday aired on television; the Academy Awards held a special tribute to Donald, which Clarence Nash attended in Donald's honor; in May, Donald's footprints were marked in cement in front of the Grauman's Chinese Theater.
In 1987, Donald was the focus of Down and Out with Donald Duck, a television special in which he was fired from Disney due to his unstable temper.
That same year, DuckTales premiered on television, of which Donald was an occasional guest star, despite the series starring his three nephews and uncle, Scrooge McDuck.
Donald's limited role in the series was a result of two factors; for one, the Disney company was very protective of their mainline characters and feared that featuring him on daily television would lead to overexposure.
In a later interview, some of the crew members of DuckTales mentioned that they had wanted Donald to make more appearances, but that Disney was reluctant to let them do so, recalling the numerous meetings in which they asked whether they could bring Donald onto the show again, and how these request were only rarely accepted, with David Block jokingly referring to Donald as Disney's "sacred cow".
Secondly, it is said that producers believed Donald's voice in thirty minute episodes would put too much strain on viewers.
In 1988, Donald appeared at the 60th Academy Awards, where Mickey was set to present the award for Best Short.
Believing he was to co-present, Donald joined Mickey on the stage but was furious to find the position was already taken by a human.
1990-present
In the 1990 short, The Prince and the Pauper, Donald appeared as the valet of the prince (played by Mickey Mouse).
Tony Anselmo notably had a hand in animating Donald in the featurette.
In 1996, Donald was given his own sitcom series as part of the Disney Afternoon block with Quack Pack, in which he is the suburban guardian of a teenage Huey, Dewey and Louie.
The show was poorly received, however, and only lasted for one season.
In 1999, Donald made his final theatrical appearance in the Noah's Ark segment of Fantasia 2000 - a role inspired by Mickey Mouse in The Sorcerer's Apprentice.
The same year marked the debut of Mickey Mouse Works, which gave Donald a new series of made-for-television shorts.
In 2002, Donald and Goofy co-starred in Kingdom Hearts, an action role-playing game.
During development, Disney campaigned to have Donald serve as the protagonist, while Squaresoft wanted to use Mickey.
The opposing views were rectified with the creation of Sora.
Donald would nevertheless appear as a major character in the game, and a majority of its follow-up titles.
In 2003, Donald was given his own theme park attraction in Walt Disney World, though ironically named after Mickey: Mickey's Philharmagic.
Most of Donald's dialogue is actually compiled from archival recordings by Clarence Nash.
Tony Anselmo recorded only five new lines for the character in this attraction (such as when Donald hums to the tune of the song "Be Our Guest").
In 2005, Donald received his own star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame, joining other characters such as Mickey Mouse, Winnie the Pooh, Kermit the Frog, and Snow White.
The star is located at 6840 Hollywood Blvd.
In 2012, Donald appeared in the animated short starring Minnie Mouse, Electric Holiday, as a brief cameo.
In 2017, a DuckTales reboot premiered on television.
Though the show mainly centers on Scrooge McDuck and the nephews, Donald was given a much larger role as a main character.
He is portrayed as an overprotective single parent to the triplets and former sidekick to Scrooge.
The series is also significant for marking the first time Donald has shared the screen with a number of his comic co-stars; examples include Della Duck and Gladstone Gander.
Characteristics
Voice
The character is noted for his distinctive, only partly intelligible voice, developed by Donald's original performer, Clarence Nash.
The voice actor produces sounds by forcing air through the mouth using the muscles of the cheek, rather than from the lungs as in typical speech.
Nash reputedly originally developed the voice as that of a "nervous baby goat" before Walt Disney interpreted it as sounding like a duck.
Personality
Donald's two dominant personality traits are his fiery-temper and his upbeat attitude to life.
Many Donald shorts start with Donald in a happy mood, without a care in the world until something comes along and spoils his day.
His rage is a great cause of suffering in his life.
On multiple occasions, it has caused him to get in over his head and lose competitions.
There are times when he fights to keep his temper in check, and he sometimes succeeds in doing so temporarily, but he always returns to his normal angry self in the end.
Donald's vicious nature has its advantages, however.
While at times it is a hindrance, and even a handicap, it has also helped him in times of need.
When faced with a threat of some kind, for example, Pete's attempts to intimidate him, he is initially scared, but his fear is replaced by anger.
As a result, instead of running away, he fights-with ghosts, sharks, mountain goats, giant kites, and even the forces of nature.
More often than not, when he fights, he comes out on top.
Donald is something of a prankster, and as a result, he can sometimes come across as a bit of a bully, especially in the way he sometimes treats Chip n' Dale and Huey, Dewey and Louie, his nephews.
As the animator Fred Spencer has put it:
QTEMPLATE |The Duck gets a big kick out of imposing on other people or annoying them, but he immediately loses his temper when the tables are turned.
In other words, he can dish it out, but he can't take it.
However, with a few exceptions, there is seldom any harm in Donald's pranks.
He almost never intends to hurt anyone, and whenever his pranks go too far, he is always very apologetic.
In Truant Officer Donald, for example, when he is tricked into believing he has accidentally killed Huey, Dewey, and Louie, he shows great regret, blaming himself.
His nephews appear in the form of angels, and he willingly endures a kick by one of them-that is, of course, until he realizes he has been tricked, whereupon he promptly loses his temper.
Donald is also a bit of a poseur.
He likes to brag, especially about how skilled he is at something.
He does, in fact, have many skills-he is something of a Jack of all Trades.
Amongst other things, he is a talented fisher and a competent hockey player.
However, his love of bragging often leads him to overestimate his abilities, so that when he sets out to make good on his boasts, he gets in over his head, usually to hilarious effect.
Another of his personality traits is perseverance.
Even though he can at times be a slacker, and likes to say that his favorite place to be is in a hammock, once he has committed to accomplishing something he goes for it 100 percent, sometimes resorting to extreme measures to reach his goal.
Phrases
Donald has a few memorable phrases that he occasionally comes out with in certain situations.
For example, when he stumbles across other characters in the midst of planning some sort of retaliation or prank, or when things don't go as he'd planned or don't work properly, he often says, "What's the big idea!?
When he has given up on something he's been trying to do, or something he's been hoping will happen, he tends to say, "Aw, phooey!".
When he confronts someone who's been antagonizing him or something that's been frustrating him, he likes to exclaim, "So!!
He greets his girlfriend Daisy, and occasionally others, with, "Hiya, toots!".
And when he's very excited about something, he usually mutters, "Oh boy, oh boy, oh boy..." under his breath.
Health
There's a running gag in the Donald Duck comics about him being physically unhealthy and unmotivated to exercise.
Usually, some character close to Donald annoys him by saying he's being lazy and needs to get some exercise.
But despite his apparent idleness, Donald proves that he is muscular.
In the short film, Sea Scouts, Donald is traveling with his nephews in a boat when it's attacked by a shark.
Donald makes several attempts to defeat the shark, each of which proves ineffective, but then finally triumphs and defeats the shark with a single well-placed punch.
Additionally, as discussed below- Donald had a stint in the U.S. Army during World War II that culminated with him serving as a commando in the film Commando Duck, and he was frequently away serving in the U.S. Navy in the television cartoon series DuckTales.
Friendly rivalry with Mickey Mouse
Throughout his career, Donald has shown that he's jealous of Mickey and wants his job as Disney's greatest star, similar to the Bugs Bunny and Daffy Duck rivalry.
In most Disney theatrical cartoons, Mickey and Donald are shown as friends and have little to no rivalry (exceptions being The Band Concert, Magician Mickey and near the end of Symphony Hour, which were due to Donald's antagonistic schemes).
However, by the time The Mickey Mouse Club aired on television , it was shown that Donald always wanted the spotlight.
One animated short that rivaled the famous Mickey Mouse March song was showing Huey, Dewey, and Louie as Boy Scouts and Donald as their Scoutmaster at a cliff near a remote forest and Donald leads them in a song mirroring the Mouseketeers theme "D-O-N-A-L-D D-U-C-K! Donald Duck!"
The rivalry would cause Donald some problems, in a 1988 TV special, where Mickey is cursed by a sorcerer to become unnoticed, the world believes Mickey to be kidnapped.
Donald Duck is then arrested for the kidnapping of Mickey, as he is considered to be the chief suspect, due to their feud.
However, Donald did later get the charges dismissed, due to lack of evidence.
Walt Disney, in his Wonderful World of Color, would sometimes make reference to the rivalry.
Walt, one time, had presented Donald with a gigantic birthday cake and commented how it was "even bigger than Mickey's", which pleased Donald.
The clip was rebroadcast in November 1984 during a TV special honoring Donald's 50th birthday, with Dick Van Dyke substituting for Walt.
The rivalry between Mickey and Donald has also been shown in Disney's House of Mouse.
It was shown that Donald wanted to be the Club's founder and wanted to change the name from House of Mouse to House of Duck, which is obvious in the episodes "The Stolen Cartoons" and "Timon and Pumbaa".
In the episode "Everybody Loves Mickey", Donald's jealousy is explored and even joins sides with Mortimer Mouse.
However, Donald has a change of heart when Daisy reminds Donald how Mickey has always been there to support him.
Since then, Donald accepted that Mickey was the founder and worked with Mickey as a partner to make the club profitable and successful.
Enemies
Donald has numerous enemies, who range from comical foil to annoying nemesis: Chip 'n' Dale, Pete, Humphrey the Bear, Spike The Bee, Mountain Lion Louie, Bootle Beetle, Witch Hazel (in Trick or Treat), Aracuan Bird and Baby Shelby (in Mickey Mouse Works).
During the Second World War, Donald was often enemies with Adolf Hitler.
In the comics, he is often harassed or on the run from the Beagle Boys, Magica De Spell, Gladstone Gander and Mr. Jones.
In the video game Donald Duck: Goin' Quackers, he saves Daisy from Merlock.
The Italian-produced comic PKNA - Paperinik New Adventures stars Donald Duck as Paperinik, or Duck Avenger, in his battles against new alien enemies: Evronian Empire, founded by emperor Evron.
Animation
Appearances
Donald Duck first appeared in the 1934 cartoon The Wise Little Hen which was part of the Silly Symphonies series of theatrical cartoon shorts.
The film's release date of June 9 is officially recognized by the Walt Disney Company as Donald's birthday despite a couple of in-universe contradictions.
Donald's appearance in the cartoon, as created by animator Dick Lundy, is similar to his modern look - the feather and beak colors are the same, as is the blue sailor shirt and hat - but his features are more elongated, his body plumper, and his feet smaller.
Donald's personality is not developed either; in the short, he only fills the role of the unhelpful friend from the original story.
Burt Gillett brought Donald back in his Mickey Mouse cartoon, Orphan's Benefit, released August 11, 1934.
Donald is one of a number of characters who are giving performances in a benefit for Mickey's Orphans.
Donald's act is to recite the poems Mary had a little lamb and Little Boy Blue, but every time he tries, the mischievous orphans heckle him, leading the duck to fly into a squawking fit of anger.
This explosive personality would remain with Donald for decades to come.
Donald continued to be a hit with audiences.
The character began appearing regularly in most Mickey Mouse cartoons.
Cartoons from this period, such as the 1935 cartoon The Band Concert - in which Donald repeatedly disrupts the Mickey Mouse Orchestra's rendition of The William Tell Overture by playing Turkey in the Straw - are regularly hailed by critics as exemplary films and classics of animation.
Animator Ben Sharpsteen also minted the classic Mickey, Donald, and Goofy comedy in 1935, with the cartoon Mickey's Service Station.
In 1936, Donald was redesigned to be a bit fuller, rounder, and cuter, the first to feature this design was the cartoon Moving Day.
He also began starring in solo cartoons, the first of which was January 9, 1937, Ben Sharpsteen cartoon, Don Donald.
This short also introduced a love interest of Donald's, Donna Duck, who evolved into Daisy Duck.
Donald's nephews, Huey, Dewey and Louie, would make their first animated appearance a year later in the April 15, 1938, film, Donald's Nephews, directed by Jack King (they had been earlier introduced in the Donald Duck comic strip by Al Taliaferro, see below).
By 1938, most polls showed that Donald was more popular than Mickey Mouse.
Disney could, however, help Mickey regain popularity by redesigning him, giving him his most appealing design as production for the Fantasia segment "The Sorcerer's Apprentice" began in 1938.
After his early appearances, he went on to become part of the famed trio Mickey, Donald, and Goofy.
He appeared in many of the cartoons, including Moving Day.
Wartime
Several of Donald's shorts during the war were propaganda films, most notably Der Fuehrer's Face, released on January 1, 1943.
In it, Donald plays a worker in an artillery factory in "Nutzi Land" (Nazi Germany).
He struggles with long working hours, very small food rations, and having to salute every time he sees a picture of the Führer (Adolf Hitler).
These pictures appear in many places, such as on the assembly line in which he is screwing in the detonators of various sizes of shells.
In the end, he becomes little more than a small part in a faceless machine with no choice but to obey until he falls, suffering a nervous breakdown.
Then Donald wakes up to find that his experience was, in fact, a dream.
At the end of the short, Donald looks to the Statue of Liberty and the American flag with renewed appreciation.
Der Fuehrer's Face won the 1942 Academy Award for Animated Short Film.
Der Fuehrer's Face was also the first of two animated short films to be set during the War to win an Oscar, the other being Tom and Jerry's short film, The Yankee Doodle Mouse.
Other notable shorts from this period include a seven film mini-series that follows Donald's life in the U.S. Army from his drafting to his experiences in basic training under Sergeant Pete to his first actual mission as a commando having to sabotage a Japanese air base.
Titles in the series include:
* Donald Gets Drafted (May 1, 1942) (shown in his Selective Service Draft Card close up, we learn Donald's full name: Donald Fauntleroy Duck)
Thanks in part to these films, Donald graced the nose artwork of virtually every type of World War II Allied combat aircraft, from the L-4 Grasshopper to the B-29 Superfortress.
Donald also appears as a mascot-such as in the Army Air Corps 309th Fighter Squadron and the U.S. Coast Guard Auxiliary, which showed Donald as a fierce-looking pirate ready to defend the American coast from invaders.
Donald also appeared as a mascot emblem for 415th Fighter Squadron; 438th Fighter Squadron; 479th Bombardment Squadron; and 531st Bombardment Squadron.
He also appeared as the mascot for the Fire Department at Marine Corps Air Station El Toro, as well as the Army Air Corps (later United States Air Force) 319 Aircraft Maintenance Unit at Luke Air Force Base- where he is seen wearing an old-style pilot's uniform with a board with a nail in it in one hand and a lightning bolt in the other hand.
Donald's most famous appearance, however, was on North American Aviation B-25B
Mitchell medium bomber (S/N 40-2261) piloted by Lt. Ted W. Lawson of the 95th Bombardment Squadron, USAAF.
The aircraft, named the "Ruptured Duck" and carrying a picture of Donald's face above a pair of crossed crutches, was one of sixteen B-25Bs which took off from the aircraft carrier USS Hornet to bomb Tokyo on April 18, 1942.
The mission was led by Lieutenant Colonel (later General) Jimmy Doolittle.
Like most of the aircraft that participated in the mission, the Ruptured Duck was unable to reach its assigned landing field in China following the raid and ended up ditching off the coast near Shangchow, China.
The Ruptured Duck's pilot survived, with the loss of a leg, and later wrote about the Doolittle Raid in the book, later to be the movie, Thirty Seconds Over Tokyo (Random House pub. 1943).
During World War II, Disney cartoons were not allowed to be imported into Occupied Europe owing to their propagandistic content.
Since this cost Disney a lot of money, he decided to create a new audience for his films in South America.
He decided to make a trip through various Latin American countries with his assistants, and use their experiences and impressions to create two feature-length animation films.
The first was Saludos Amigos, which consisted of four short segments, two of them with Donald Duck.
In the first, he meets his parrot pal José Carioca.
The second film was The Three Caballeros, in which he meets his rooster friend Panchito.
Several decades after the war, on account of the fact that Donald was never officially separated from service in either his animated shorts or his comic strips- and as part of Donald's 50th Birthday celebrations-
the U.S. Army retired Donald Duck from active duty as a "Buck Sergeant" (i.e. "Buck Sergeant Duck") in a special ceremony and parade in Torrance, CA in 1984.
Post-war
Many of Donald's films made after the war recast the duck as the brunt of some other character's pestering.
Donald is seen repeatedly attacked, harassed, and ridiculed by his nephews, by the chipmunks Chip 'n' Dale, or by other characters such as Humphrey the Bear, Spike the Bee, Bootle Beetle, the Aracuan Bird, Louie the Mountain Lion, or a colony of ants.
In returning the favor (so to speak), Donald also has tempers and anger issues after returning from fighting in World War II; there is a theory on the Internet that says the reason why Donald is prone to having his tempers and anger issues is because Donald has Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder; said theory mentioned can also be found on YouTube.
In effect, much like Bugs Bunny cartoons from Warner Bros.
the Disney artists had reversed the classic screwball scenario perfected by Walter Lantz and others in which the main character is the instigator of these harassing behaviors, rather than the butt of them.
The short 'Clown of the Jungle' (1947) very much feels like either a Daffy Duck or a Woody Woodpecker cartoon.
The post-war Donald also starred in educational films, such as Donald in Mathmagic Land and How to Have an Accident at Work (both 1959), and made cameos in various Disney projects, such as The Reluctant Dragon (1941) and the Disneyland television show (1959).
For this latter show, Donald's uncles Ludwig von Drake (1961) and Scrooge McDuck (1967) were then created in animation.
In Who Framed Roger Rabbit, Donald has a piano duel scene with his Warner Brothers counterpart and rival Daffy Duck voiced by Mel Blanc.
Donald has since appeared in several different television shows and (short) animated movies.
He played roles in The Prince and the Pauper and made a cameo appearance in A Goofy Movie.
Donald had a rather small part in the animated television series DuckTales.
There, Donald joins the U.S. Navy and leaves his nephews Huey, Dewey, and Louie with their Uncle Scrooge, who then has to take care of them.
Donald's role in the overall series was fairly limited, as he only ended up appearing in a handful of episodes when home on leave.
Some of the stories in the series were loosely based on the comics by Carl Barks.
Donald made some cameo appearances in Bonkers, before getting his own television show Quack Pack.
This series featured a modernized Duck family.
Donald was no longer wearing his sailor suit and hat, but a Hawaiian shirt.
Huey, Dewey, and Louie now are teenagers, with distinct clothing, voices, and personalities.
Daisy Duck has lost her pink dress and bow and has a new haircut.
No other family members, besides Ludwig von Drake, appear in Quack Pack, and all other Duckburg citizens are humans and not dogs.
He made a comeback as the star of the "Noah's Ark" segment of Fantasia 2000, as first mate to Noah.
Donald musters the animals to the Ark and attempts to control them.
He tragically believes that Daisy has been lost, while she believes the same of him, but they are reunited at the end.
All this to Edward Elgar's Pomp and Circumstance Marches 1-4.
In an alternate opening for the 2005 Disney film Chicken Little, Donald would have made a cameo appearance as "Ducky Lucky".
This scene can be found on the Chicken Little DVD.
Donald also played an important role in Mickey Mouse Works and House of Mouse.
In the latter show, he is the co-owner of Mickey's nightclub.
He is part of the ensemble cast of classic characters in the TV show Mickey Mouse Clubhouse as well.
He also appears in the new 3-minute Mickey Mouse TV shorts for Disney Channel.
Donald also appears in the DuckTales reboot, in which he is a main character as opposed to his minor role in the original cartoon.
The series depicts him as having once been Scrooge's partner in adventure, apparently along with his sister; however, ten years prior to the series' beginning they went their separate ways and didn't speak throughout that time.
Donald later reluctantly brings the triplets-whom he is the guardian of-to Scrooge's mansion so he can babysit them, though he clearly hasn't forgiven Scoorge for their past history.
He ends up being hired by Scrooge's rival Flintheart Glomgold and ends up at the city of Atlantis, where Scrooge has also brought the boys; after some initial conflict Scrooge offers to let them stay with him in his mansion.
Donald owns a boat in the series, which is relocated to Scrooge's pool at the conclusion of the series premiere.
Voice actors
Donald's first voice was performed by Clarence Nash, who voiced him for 50 years.
Nash voiced Donald for the last time in Mickey's Christmas Carol in 1983, making Donald the only character in the film to be voiced by his original voice actor.
He did, however, continue to provide Donald's voice for commercials, promos, and other miscellaneous material until his death in 1985.
Since Nash's death, Donald's voice has been performed by Disney animator, Tony Anselmo, who was mentored by Nash for the role.
Anselmo's first performances as Donald is heard in a 1986 D-TV special, D-TV Valentine on The Disney Channel, and in his first feature film, Who Framed Roger Rabbit, in 1988.
Walt Disney insisted on character consistency, and integrity.
As long as Clarence was alive no one other than Clarence was permitted to provide Donald's voice.
Continuing in that tradition, in 1988 Roy E. Disney created the department of Disney Character Voices to insure continuation of character integrity, consistency, and quality in recording methods.
Roy named one official voice for all Walt Disney legacy characters.
Tony Anselmo was named by Roy E. Disney as Disney's official voice of Donald Duck.
For the TV series Mickey and the Roadster Racers, Donald is voiced by voice actor Daniel Ross, while Anselmo continues as the official voice of Donald on all other Disney projects, DuckTales, Mickey Mouse shorts, Legend of the Three Caballeros, Kingdom Hearts III, Disney Parks, attractions, and consumer products.
Comics
While Donald's cartoons enjoy vast popularity in the United States and around the world, his weekly and monthly comic books enjoy their greatest popularity in many European countries, especially Italy, Sweden, Denmark, Norway, Finland and Iceland, but also Germany, the Netherlands, and Greece.
Most of them are produced and published by the Italian branch of the Walt Disney Company in Italy (Disney Italy) and by Egmont in Denmark, Norway, Finland and Sweden.
In Germany, the comics are published by Ehapa which has since become part of the Egmont empire.
Donald-comics are also being produced in The Netherlands and France.
Donald also has been appeared in Japanese comics published by Kodansha and Tokyopop.
According to the INDUCKS, which is a database about Disney comics worldwide, American, Italian and Danish stories have been reprinted in the following countries.
In most of them, publications still continue: Australia, Austria, Argentina, Belgium, Brazil, Bulgaria, Canada, China, Colombia, Croatia, Czech Republic, Denmark (Faroe Islands), Egypt, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Guyana, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Israel, Italy, Japan, Latvia, Lithuania, Mexico, the Netherlands, Norway, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Romania, Russia, Saudi Arabia, Slovakia, Spain, Sweden, Thailand, Turkey, the United Kingdom, the United States, and the former Yugoslavia.
Early development
Though a 1931 Disney publication called Mickey Mouse Annual mentioned a character named Donald Duck, the character's first appearance in comic strip format was the 1934 Silly Symphony comic strip sequence based on the short The Wise Little Hen.
For the next few years, Donald made a few more appearances in Disney-themed strips, and by 1936, he had grown to be one of the most popular characters in the Silly Symphony strip.
Ted Osborne was the primary writer of these strips, with Al Taliaferro as his artist.
Osborne and Taliaferro also introduced several members of Donald's supporting cast, including his nephews, Huey, Dewey, and Louie.
In 1937, an Italian publisher named Mondadori created the first Donald Duck story intended specifically for comic books.
The eighteen-page story, written by Federico Pedrocchi, is the first to feature Donald as an adventurer rather than simply a comedic character.
Fleetway in England also began publishing comic-book stories featuring the duck.
Developments under Taliaferro
A daily Donald Duck comic strip drawn by Taliaferro and written by Bob Karp began running in the United States on February 2, 1938; the Sunday strip began the following year.
Taliaferro and Karp created an even larger cast of characters for Donald's world.
He got a new St. Bernard named Bolivar, and his family grew to include cousin Gus Goose and grandmother Elvira Coot.
Donald's new rival girlfriends were Donna and Daisy Duck.
Taliaferro also gave Donald his very own automobile, a 1934 Belchfire Runabout, in a 1938 story, which is often nicknamed by Donald's "313" car plate in the comic incarnation of Donald's world.
Developments under Barks
In 1942, Western Publishing began creating original comic-book stories about Donald and other Disney characters.
Bob Karp worked on the earliest of these, a story called "Donald Duck Finds Pirate Gold".
The new publisher meant new illustrators, however, Carl Barks and Jack Hannah would later repeat the treasure-hunting theme in many more stories.
Barks soon took over the major development of the duck as both writer and illustrator.
Under his pen, Donald became more adventurous, less temperamental and more eloquent.
Pete was the only other major character from the Mickey Mouse comic strip to feature in Barks' new Donald Duck universe.
Barks placed Donald in the city of Duckburg, which he populated with a host of supporting players, including Neighbor Jones (1944), Uncle Scrooge McDuck (1947), Gladstone Gander (1948), the Beagle Boys (1951), Gyro Gearloose (1952), April, May and June (1953), Flintheart Glomgold (1956), Magica de Spell (1961), and John D. Rockerduck (1961).
Many of Taliaferro's characters made the move to Barks' world as well, including Huey, Dewey, and Louie.
Barks placed Donald in both domestic and adventure scenarios, and Uncle Scrooge became one of his favorite characters to pair up with Donald.
Scrooge's popularity grew, and by 1952, the character had a comic book of his own.
At this point, Barks concentrated his major efforts on the Scrooge stories, and Donald's appearances became more focused on comedy or he was recast as Scrooge's helper, following his rich uncle around the globe.
Further developments
Dozens of writers continued to utilize Donald in their stories around the world.
For example, the Disney Studio artists, who made comics directly for the European market.
Two of them, Dick Kinney (1917-1985) and Al Hubbard (1915-1984) created Donald's cousin Fethry Duck.
The American artists Vic Lockman and Tony Strobl (1915-1991), who were working directly for the American comic books, created Moby Duck.
Strobl was one of the most productive Disney artists of all time and drew many stories which Barks wrote and sketched after his retirement.
In the 1990s and early 2000s, these scripts were re-drawn in a style closer to Barks' own by Dutch artist Daan Jippes.
Italian publisher Mondadori created many of the stories that were published throughout Europe.
They also introduced numerous new characters who are today well known in Europe.
One example is Donald Duck's alter-ego, a superhero called Paperinik in Italian, created in 1969 by Guido Martina (1906-1991) and Giovan Battista Carpi (1927-1999).
Giorgio Cavazzano and Carlo Chendi created Umperio Bogarto, a detective whose name is an obvious parody on Humphrey Bogart.
They also created O.K Quack, an extraterrestrial Duck who landed on earth in a spaceship in the shape of a coin.
He, however, lost his spaceship and befriended Scrooge, and now is allowed to search through his money bin time after time, looking for his ship.
Romano Scarpa (1927-2005), who was a very important and influential Italian Disney artist, created Brigitta McBridge, a female Duck who is madly in love with Scrooge.
Her affections are never answered by him, though, but she keeps trying.
Scarpa also came up with Dickie Duck, the granddaughter of Glittering Goldie (Scrooge's possible love-interest from his days in the Klondike) and Kildare Coot, a nephew of Grandma Duck.
Italian artist Corrado Mastantuono created Bum Bum Ghigno, a cynical, grumpy and not too good looking Duck who teams up with Donald and Gyro a lot.
The American artist William Van Horn also introduced a new character: Rumpus McFowl, an old and rather corpulent Duck with a giant appetite and laziness, who is first said to be a cousin of Scrooge.
Only later, Scrooge reveals to his nephews Rumpus is actually his half-brother.
Later, Rumpus also finds out.
Working for the Danish editor Egmont, artist Daniel Branca (1951-2005) and script-writers Paul Halas and Charlie Martin created Sonny Seagull, an orphan who befriends Huey, Dewey and Louie, and his rival, Mr. Phelps.
One of the most productive Duck-artist used to be Victor Arriagada Rios, (deceased 2012) better known under the name Vicar.
He had his own studio where he and his assistants drew the stories sent in by Egmont.
With writer/editors Stefan and Unn Printz-Påhlson, Vicar created the character Oona, a prehistoric duck princess who traveled to modern Duckburg by using Gyro's time-machine.
She stayed and is still seen in occasional modern stories.
The best-known and most popular Duck-artist of this time is American Don Rosa.
He started doing Disney comics in 1987 for the American publisher Gladstone.
He later worked briefly for the Dutch editors but moved to work directly for Egmont soon afterwards.
His stories contain many direct references to stories by Carl Barks, and he also wrote and illustrated a 12-part series of stories about the life of Scrooge McDuck, which won him two Eisner Awards.
Other important artists who have worked with Donald are Freddy Milton and Daan Jippes, who made 18 ten-pagers which experts claim, were very difficult to separate from Barks' own work from the late 1940s.
Japanese artist Shiro Amano worked with Donald on the graphic novel Kingdom Hearts based on the Disney-Square Enix video game.
Donald Duck has a slightly different character abroad.
Nordic countries
Donald Duck and Lustiges Taschenbuch.
Donald's dialogue in German comics tends to be more sophisticated and philosophical, he "quotes from German literature, speaks in grammatically complex sentences and is prone to philosophical musings, while the stories often take a more political tone than their American counterparts", Further along the years, he fashioned for himself the additional identities of QQ7, a bumbling secret agent protecting Scrooge's riches and DoubleDuck, a more confident and suave secret agent, in the mold of James Bond, a more equilibrate mold of the heroic Duck Avenger and the tricky QQ7, often accompanied by the beautiful spy Kay K. Donald's "secret identies" are hosted in the main Topolino comics, but also in several themed comics, like the now defunct Paperinik, PKNA, PK^2 and the current Paperinik AppGrade, the latter hosting reprints and new stories as well.
Having several full lives to live doesn't hamper Donald's ability to live adventures on his own: he still lives adventures with his uncle Scrooge and his nephews (often acting as a reluctant bumbler, a ballast to the enthusiasm of his nephews and the wanderlust of his uncle), and he lived a star-crossed love story with a princess from another planet, Reginella.
Despite Reginella leaving a deep trace in Donald's heart, he is still depicted as extremely faithful to Daisy, with a small hiccup deriving by Daisy Duck having a secret identity on her own (Paperinika), with Paperinik and Paperinika, both unaware of their secret identities, cultivating a permanent status of belligerent tension.
He also keeps a cheerful rivalry with his neighbour Bum Bum Ghigno, more a bumbler and a nuisance than he is, but still a good person at heart.
The Italian rendition of Donald Duck seldom, if ever, goes by his first name, having everyone, including his nephews, Daisy and Uncle Scrooge, address him as Paperino (his Italian surname).
He also appears in the Topolino comics depicting his childhood, called Paperino Paperotto (), which were first produced in Italy in 1998.
He lives in the fictional town, Quack Town with Grandma Duck and Billy Goat.
Disney theme parks
Donald Duck has played a major role in many Disney theme parks over the years.
He has actually been seen in more attractions and shows at the parks than Mickey Mouse has.
He has appeared over the years in such attractions as Animagique, Mickey Mouse Revue, Mickey's PhilharMagic, ".
He also is seen in the parks as a meet-and-greet character.
Children's books
Donald has been a frequent character in children's books beginning in 1935.
Most of these books were published by Whitman Publishing, later called Western Publishing, or one of its subsidiaries.
The following is a list of children's books in which Donald is the central character.
This does not include comic books or activity books such as coloring books.
Whitman/Western books
*Walt Disney's Donald Duck (1935), first published appearance
*Donald's Lucky Day (1939), adaptation of the cartoon short of the same name
*Donald Duck and the Wishing Star (1952), a Cozy Corner book
;Better Little Books
*Donald Duck and Ghost Morgan's Treasure (1946), based on Donald Duck Finds Pirate Gold (1942)
*Donald Duck and the Green Serpent (1947), based on the comic The Terror of the River!!
;Little Golden Books
*Donald's Toy Train (1950), based on cartoon short Out of Scale
*Donald Duck's Adventure (1950), a Mickey Mouse Club book
*Donald Duck and Santa Claus (1952), a Mickey Mouse Club book
*Donald Duck's Toy Sailboat (1954), based on the cartoon short Chips Ahoy
*Donald Duck's Christmas Tree (1954, 1991), based on cartoon short Toy Tinkers
*Donald Duck and the Mouseketeers (1956), a Mickey Mouse Club book
*Donald Duck: Prize Driver (1974), a Mickey Mouse Club book
*Donald Duck and the One Bear (1978), based on the fairy tale Goldilocks and the Three Bears
;Tell-a-Tale Books
;Little Big Books
*Donald Duck in Volcano Valley (1973), reprinting of 1949 Better Little Book
Grosset and Dunlap books
D.C. Heath and Co. books
*Donald Duck and His Friends (1939), a Disney Health book
*Donald Duck and His Nephews (1939), a Disney Health book
Random House books
Walt Disney Productions books
Grolier/Scholastic books
Beyond Disney
* Donald is the only popular film and television cartoon character to appear as a mascot for a major American university: a licensing agreement between Disney and the University of Oregon allows the school's sports teams to use Donald's image as its "Fighting Duck" mascot.
In 1984, Donald Duck was named an honorary alumnus of the University of Oregon during his 50th birthday celebration.
During a visit to the Eugene Airport, 3,000 to 4,000 fans gathered for the presentation of an academic cap and gown to Donald.
Thousands of area residents signed a congratulatory scroll for Donald, and that document is now part of Disney's corporate archives.
* In the 1940s, Donald was adopted as the mascot of Brazilian sports club Botafogo after Argentinean cartoonist Lorenzo Mollas, who was working in Brazil at the time, drew him with the club's soccer uniform.
Mollas chose Donald because he complains and fights for his rights, like the club's managers at those years, and also because, being a duck, he does not lose his elegance while moving in the water (an allusion to rowing).
He was eventually replaced so that the club would not have to pay royalties to Disney (Botafogo's current official mascot is Manequinho, a boy who represents the Manneken Pis statue in front of the club's head office), but has since retained the status of unofficial mascot.
* Donald's name and image are used on numerous commercial products, one example being Donald Duck brand orange juice, introduced by Citrus World in 1940.
* Donald Duck was temporarily listed as a "hired" employee in the database of the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development as late as 1978.
Given a $99,999 salary - more than double the $47,500 take federal civil servants were legally limited to be paid at the time - the name was unchallenged by a computer intended to catch government payroll fraud.
Picked as one of thirty fictitious names by the Government Accounting Office, the use of it was a test to see if the payroll system of the HUD could be manipulated to defraud the government.
* Donald Duck's head and neck, wearing a radio headset and wrapped in earphone wires with an expression of pain on his face and with crossed crutches below, was the nose art on Lieutenant Ted W. Lawson's B-25 Mitchell bomber, the Ruptured Duck, on the famous Doolittle Raid on Tokyo in 1942.
* In the 1950s, an early Mad Magazine parody of Mickey Mouse (called "Mickey Rodent", written by "Walt Dizzy") featured "Darnold Duck", whose quacky voice had to be "translated" for the readers, and who was shamed into finally wearing pants.
Although Donald's military service during his wartime cartoons has mostly been in the U.S. Army (and to a lesser extent in the U.S. Navy in DuckTales), Walt Disney authorized Donald to be used as a mascot for the U.S. Coast Guard.
The Coast Guard image shows a fierce-looking Donald Duck dressed in a pirate's outfit, appearing vigilant against any potential threats to the coastal regions in the United States.
This image is often used on Coast Guard bases and Coast Guard cutters.
* Donald Duck is referred to in the song "The Village Green Preservation Society" by The Kinks: "We are the Village Green Preservation Society/ God save Donald Duck, vaudeville, and variety..."
The reference is ironical, as the singer is lamenting the disappearance of perceived traditional English cultural artifacts.
* Donald Duck makes a cameo appearance in the cartoon sequence in 200 Motels (1971).
* During the late 1970s, Donald had his first and only disco song named 'Macho Duck', available as part of the Mickey Mouse Disco children's album.
* In Sweden, a comic book artist named Charlie Christensen got into a legal dispute with Disney when his creation Arne Anka looked similar to Donald Duck (albeit Arne is a pessimistic drunkard).
However, Charlie made a mockery of the legal action and staged a fake death for his character, which then had plastic surgery performed and reappeared as Arne X with a more crow-like beak.
He later purchased a strap-on duck beak from a novelty gift shop, pointing out that "If Disney is planning to give me any legal action; all I have to do is remove my fake beak."
* Donald Duck is a constant source of irritation for the eponymous hero of Donald Duk (1991), a coming-of-age novel by Frank Chin set in San Francisco's Chinatown.
* In 1991, the Disney Corporation sued the Israeli caricaturist Dudu Geva for copyright infringement, claiming his character "Donald Dach" in the story "Moby Duck" was a ripoff of Donald.
The Courts found in their favor and forced Geva to pay for the legal expenses and remove his book from the shelves.
More mildly, the character Howard the Duck's original design was modified to include pants allegedly due to pressure from Disney.
* In 2005, Donald received his own star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame at 6840 Hollywood Blvd joining other fictional characters such as Mickey Mouse, Bugs Bunny, Woody Woodpecker, The Simpsons, Winnie the Pooh, Kermit the Frog, Big Bird, Godzilla and Snow White.
* Donald's fame has led Disney to license the character for a number of video games, such as the Kingdom Hearts series, where Donald is the court magician of Disney Castle.
He accompanies Goofy and a young boy named Sora on a quest to find King Mickey Mouse, defeat the Heartless and Nobodies, and put an end to the evil Xehanort and Organization XIII.
He is voiced by Tony Anselmo in the English version and Kōichi Yamadera in the Japanese version.
* Italian Power Metal Band Trick or Treat have a song called "Like Donald Duck" in their debut album "Evil Needs Candy Too" (2006).
* In Italy, the city of Prato in Tuscany has a locale named Paperino, or Little Duck, after Donald Duck's Italian moniker.
* In the 2017 US Presidential election, according to Donna Brazile, DNC chair, who quotes Charlie Baker, the use of a protester in a Donald Duck costume was approved by Hillary Clinton's campaign to bring attention to Donald Trumps' "ducking the release of his taxes".
Appearances
Selected short films
Feature-length films
* Mickey's Magical Christmas: Snowed in at the House of Mouse (2001) DVD
The Lion King 1½ (2004) DVD - Silhouetted cameo
* Mickey, Donald, Goofy: The Three Musketeers (2004) DVD
Television series
* Donald Duck Presents (compilation of classic Disney shorts)
* Donald's Quack Attack (compilation of classic Disney shorts)
Video games
* World of Illusion Starring Mickey Mouse and Donald Duck (1992)
Disney's Magical Quest 3 starring Mickey & Donald (1995)
Notable illustrators
Further reading
