Columbidae is a bird family constituted of pigeons and doves.
These are stout-bodied birds with short necks, and short slender bills that in some species feature fleshy ceres.
They primarily feed on seeds, fruits, and plants.
The family occurs worldwide, but the greatest variety is in the Indomalaya and Australasia ecozones.
The animal order Columbiformes is also constituted of pigeons and doves, and includes about 42 genera and 310 species.
The distinction between "doves" and "pigeons" in English is not consistent, and does not exist in most other languages.
In contrast, in scientific and ornithological practice, "dove" tends to be used for smaller species and "pigeon" for larger ones, but this is in no way consistently applied.
Historically, the common names for these birds involve a great deal of variation between the terms.
The bird most commonly referred to as just "pigeon" is the domestic pigeon, which is common in many cities as the feral pigeon.
Pigeon is a French word that derives from the Latin pipio, for a "peeping" chick, while dove is a Germanic word that refers to the bird's diving flight.
The English dialectal word "" appears to derive from Latin columba.
Unlike most birds, both sexes of doves and pigeons produce "crop milk" to feed to their young, secreted by a sloughing of fluid-filled cells from the lining of the crop.
Young doves and pigeons are called "squabs".
Taxonomy and systematics
The family Columbidae was introduced by the English zoologist William Elford Leach in a guide to the contents of the British Museum published in 1820.
Columbidae is the only living family in the order Columbiformes.
The sandgrouses (Pteroclidae) were formerly placed here, but were moved to a separate order Pterocliformes based on anatomical differences (e.g., they are unable to drink by "sucking" or "pumping"); they are now considered to be more closely related to shorebirds.
Recent phylogenomic studies support the grouping of pigeons and sandgrouse together, along with mesites, forming the sister taxon to Mirandornithes.
The Columbidae are usually divided into five subfamilies, probably inaccurately.
For example, the American ground and quail doves (Geotrygon), which are usually placed in the Columbinae, seem to be two distinct subfamilies.
The order presented here follows Baptista etal.
(1997), with some updates.
The arrangement of genera and naming of subfamilies is in some cases provisional because analyses of different DNA sequences yield results that differ, often radically, in the placement of certain (mainly Indo-Australian) genera.
This ambiguity, probably caused by long branch attraction, seems to confirm the first pigeons evolved in the Australasian region, and that the "Treronidae" and allied forms (crowned and pheasant pigeons, for example) represent the earliest radiation of the group.
The family Columbidae previously also contained the family Raphidae, consisting of the extinct Rodrigues solitaire and the dodo.
These species are in all likelihood part of the Indo-Australian radiation that produced the three small subfamilies mentioned above, with the fruit doves and pigeons (including the Nicobar pigeon).
Therefore, they are here included as a subfamily Raphinae, pending better material evidence of their exact relationships.
Exacerbating these issues, columbids are not well represented in the fossil record.
No truly primitive forms have been found to date.
The genus Gerandia has been described from Early Miocene deposits in France, but while it was long believed to be a pigeon, it is now considered a sandgrouse.
Fragmentary remains of a probably "ptilinopine" Early Miocene pigeon were found in the Bannockburn Formation of New Zealand and described as Rupephaps; Apart from that, all other fossils belong to extant genera.
Taxonomy
Taxonomy based on the work by John H. Boyd, III, a professor of economics.
Description
Size and appearance
Pigeons and doves exhibit considerable variation in size, ranging in length from , and in weight from to above .
The largest species is the crowned pigeon of New Guinea, which is nearly turkey-sized, at a weight of .
The smallest is the New World ground dove of the genus Columbina, which is the same size as a house sparrow, weighing as little as .
Anatomy and physiology
Overall, the anatomy of Columbidae is characterized by short legs, short bills with a fleshy cere, and small heads on large, compact bodies.
Like some other birds, the Columbidae have no gall bladders.
Some medieval naturalists concluded they have no bile (gall), which in the medieval theory of the four humours explained the allegedly sweet disposition of doves.
In fact, however, they do have bile (as Aristotle had earlier realized), which is secreted directly into the gut.
The wings are large, and have eleven primary feathers; pigeons have strong wing muscles (wing muscles comprise 31-44% of their body weight) and are among the strongest fliers of all birds.
It was shown yet again in a 1978 experiment by Dr.Barrie J. Frost, in which pigeons were placed on treadmills; it was observed that they did not bob their heads, as their surroundings were constant.
Feathers
Columbidae have unique body feathers, with the shaft being generally broad, strong, and flattened, tapering to a fine point, abruptly.
Body feathers have very dense, fluffy bases, are attached loosely into the skin, and drop out easily.
Possibly serving as a predator avoidance mechanism, large numbers of feathers fall out in the attacker's mouth if the bird is snatched, facilitating the bird's escape.
The plumage of the family is variable.
Granivorous species tend to have dull plumage, with a few exceptions, whereas the frugivorous species have brightly coloured plumage.
In addition to bright colours, pigeons may sport crests or other ornamentation.
Flight
Columbidae are excellent fliers due to the lift provided by their large wings, which results in low wing loading; They are highly maneuverable in flight and have a low aspect ratio due to the width of their wings, allowing for quick flight launches and ability to escape from predators, but at a high energy cost.
Distribution and habitat
Pigeons and doves are distributed everywhere on Earth, except for the driest areas of the Sahara Desert, Antarctica and its surrounding islands, and the high Arctic.
Some species have large natural ranges.
The eared dove ranges across the entirety of South America from Colombia to Tierra del Fuego, the Eurasian collared dove has a massive (if discontinuous) distribution from Britain across Europe, the Middle East, India, Pakistan and China, and the laughing dove across most of sub-Saharan Africa, as well as India, Pakistan, and the Middle East.
Other species have tiny, restricted distributions; this is most common in island endemics.
The whistling dove is endemic to the tiny Kadavu Island in Fiji, the Caroline ground dove is restricted to two islands, Truk and Pohnpei in the Caroline Islands, and the Grenada dove is restricted to Grenada in the Caribbean.
Some continental species also have tiny distributions; for example, the black-banded fruit dove is restricted to a small area of the Arnhem Land of Australia, the Somali pigeon is restricted to a tiny area of northern Somalia, and Moreno's ground dove is restricted to the area around Salta and Tucuman in northern Argentina.
This species had a large natural distribution from Britain and Ireland to northern Africa, across Europe, Arabia, Central Asia, India, the Himalayas and up into China and Mongolia.
Feeding
Seeds and fruit form the major component of the diets of pigeons and doves.
In fact, the family can be divided into the seed-eating or granivorous species (subfamily Columbinae) and the fruit-and-mast-eating or frugivorous species (the other four subfamilies).
The granivorous species typically feed on seed found on the ground, whereas the frugivorous species tend to feed in trees.
Frugivores are capable of clinging to branches and even hang upside down to reach fruit.
The passenger pigeon was exceptional for a number of reasons.
In modern times, it is the only pigeon species that was not an island species to have become extinct The decline of the species was abrupt; in 1871, a breeding colony was estimated to contain over a hundred million birds, yet the last individual in the species was dead by 1914.
Although habitat loss was a contributing factor, the species is thought to have been massively over-hunted, being used as food for slaves and, later, the poor, in the United States throughout the 19thcentury.
The dodo, and its extinction, was more typical of the extinctions of pigeons in the past.
Like many species that colonise remote islands with few predators, it lost much of its predator avoidance behaviour, along with its ability to fly.
The arrival of people, along with a suite of other introduced species such as rats, pigs, and cats, quickly spelled the end for this species and all the other island forms that have become extinct.
Most of these are tropical and live on islands.
All of the species are threatened by introduced predators, habitat loss, hunting, or a combination of these factors.
In some areas, a lack of knowledge means the true status of a species is unknown; the Negros fruit dove has not been seen since 1953, and may or may not be extinct, and the Polynesian ground dove is classified as critically endangered, as whether it survives or not on remote islands in the far west of the Pacific Ocean is unknown.
Various conservation techniques are employed to prevent these extinctions, including laws and regulations to control hunting pressure, the establishment of protected areas to prevent further habitat loss, the establishment of captive populations for reintroduction back into the wild (ex situ conservation), and the translocation of individuals to suitable habitats to create additional populations.
Military
Cher Ami, a homing pigeon in World War I, was awarded the Croix de Guerre Medal, by France, with a palm Oak Leaf Cluster for her service in Verdun.
Despite having almost lost a leg and being shot in the chest, she managed to travel around twenty-five miles to deliver the message that saved 194 men of the Lost Battalion of the 77th Infantry Division in the Battle of the Argonne, in October 1918.
A grand ceremony was held in Buckingham Palace to commemorate a platoon of pigeons that braved the battlefields of Normandy to deliver vital plans to Allied forces on the fringes of Germany.
Three of the actual birds that received the medals are on show in the London Military Museum so that well-wishers can pay their respects.
It has been bred into several varieties kept by hobbyists, of which the best known is the homing pigeon or racing homer.
and release doves used in ceremonies.
White doves are also commonly used in magic acts.
In religion
In ancient Mesopotamia, doves were prominent animal symbols of Inanna-Ishtar, the goddess of love, sexuality, and war.
Doves are shown on cultic objects associated with Inanna as early as the beginning of the third millennium BC.
In the ancient Levant, doves were used as symbols for the Canaanite mother goddess Asherah.
The ancient Greek word for "dove" was peristerá, Aphrodite's associations with doves influenced the Roman goddesses Venus and Fortuna, causing them to become associated with doves as well.
In Genesis, Noah sends a dove out of the ark, but it came back to him because the floodwaters had not receded.
Seven days later, he sent it again and it came back with an olive branch in her mouth, indicating the waters had receded enough for an olive tree to grow.
"Dove" is also a term of endearment in the Song of Songs and elsewhere.
In Hebrew, Jonah (יוֹנָה) means dove.
The "sign of Jonas" in https:/ study nt 16.1-4?lang=eng is related to the "sign of the dove".
Jesus's parents sacrificed doves on his behalf after his circumcision (Luke).
As food
Several species of pigeons and doves are used as food; however, all types are edible.
Domesticated or hunted pigeons have been used as the source of food since the times of the Ancient Middle East, Ancient Rome, and Medieval Europe.
while rock pigeons were originally domesticated as a food species, and many breeds were developed for their meat-bearing qualities.
Mrs Beeton's Book of Household Management contains recipes for roast pigeon and pigeon pie, a popular, inexpensive food in Victorian industrial Britain.
Further reading
* Blechman, Andrew, Pigeons: The Fascinating Saga of the World's Most Revered and Reviled Bird (Grove Press 2007)
* Gibbs, Barnes and Cox, Pigeons and Doves (Pica Press 2001)
