The Battle of Harpers Ferry was fought September 12&ndash;15, 1862, as part of the Maryland Campaign of the American Civil War.
As Gen. Robert E. Lee's Confederate army invaded Maryland, a portion of his army under Maj. Gen. Thomas J. "Stonewall" Jackson surrounded, bombarded, and captured the Union garrison at Harpers Ferry, Virginia (now West Virginia), a major victory at relatively minor cost.
As Lee's Army of Northern Virginia advanced down the Shenandoah Valley into Maryland, he planned to capture the garrison at Harpers Ferry to secure his line of supply back to Virginia.
Although he was being pursued at a leisurely pace by Maj. Gen. George B. McClellan's Army of the Potomac, outnumbering him more than two to one, Lee chose the risky strategy of dividing his army and sent one portion to converge and attack Harpers Ferry from three directions.
Col. Dixon S. Miles, Union commander at Harpers Ferry, insisted on keeping most of the troops near the town instead of taking up commanding positions on the surrounding heights.
The slim defenses of the most important position, Maryland Heights, first encountered the approaching Confederates on September 12, but only brief skirmishing ensued.
Strong attacks by two Confederate brigades on September 13 drove the Union troops from the heights.
During the fighting on Maryland Heights, the other Confederate columns arrived and were astonished to see that critical positions to the west and south of town were not defended.
Jackson methodically positioned his artillery around Harpers Ferry and ordered Maj. Gen. A.P. Hill to move down the west bank of the Shenandoah River in preparation for a flank attack on the Federal left the next morning.
By the morning of September 15, Jackson had positioned nearly 50 guns on Maryland Heights and at the base of Loudoun Heights.
He began a fierce artillery barrage from all sides and ordered an infantry assault.
Miles realized that the situation was hopeless and agreed with his subordinates to raise the white flag of surrender.
Before he could surrender personally, he was mortally wounded by an artillery shell and died the next day.
After processing more than 12,000 Union prisoners, Jackson's men then rushed to Sharpsburg, Maryland, to rejoin Lee for the Battle of Antietam.
Background
File:Maryland Campaign.png|thumb|right|upright=1.5|Maryland Campaign, actions September 3&ndash;15, 1862
Harpers Ferry is a small town at the confluence of the Potomac River and the Shenandoah River, the site of a historic Federal arsenal founded by President George Washington in 1799 and a bridge for the critical Baltimore and Ohio Railroad across the Potomac.
In 1859 it was the site of the abolitionist John Brown's attack on the Federal arsenal.
The town was virtually indefensible, dominated on all sides by higher ground.
To the west, the ground rose gradually for about a mile and a half to Bolivar Heights, a plateau high, that stretches from the Potomac to the Shenandoah.
To the south, across the Shenandoah, Loudoun Heights overlooks from .
And to the northeast, across the Potomac, the southernmost extremity of Elk Ridge forms the 1,476-foot-high crest of Maryland Heights.
A Federal soldier wrote that if these three heights could not be held, Harpers Ferry would be "no more defensible than a well bottom."
As Gen. Robert E. Lee's Army of Northern Virginia advanced into Maryland, Lee expected that the Union garrisons that potentially blocked his supply line in the Shenandoah Valley, at Winchester, Martinsburg, and Harpers Ferry, would be cut off and abandoned without firing a shot .
But the Harpers Ferry garrison had not retreated.
Lee planned to capture the garrison and the arsenal, not only to seize its supplies of rifles and ammunition, but to secure his line of supply back to Virginia.
Although he was being pursued at a leisurely pace by Maj. Gen. George B. McClellan and the Union Army of the Potomac, which outnumbered him by more than two to one, Lee chose the risky strategy of dividing his army to seize the prize of Harpers Ferry.
While the corps of Maj. Gen. James Longstreet drove north in the direction of Hagerstown, Lee sent columns of troops to converge and attack Harpers Ferry from three directions.
The largest column, 11,500 men under Jackson, was to recross the Potomac and circle around to the west of Harpers Ferry and attack it from Bolivar Heights, while the other two columns, under Maj. Gen. Lafayette McLaws (8,000 men) and Brig.
Gen. John G. Walker (3,400), were to capture Maryland Heights and Loudoun Heights, commanding the town from the east and south.
McClellan had wanted to add the Harpers Ferry garrison to his field army, but general-in-chief Henry W. Halleck had refused, saying that the movement would be too difficult and that the garrison had to defend itself "until the latest moment," or until McClellan could relieve it.
Halleck had probably expected its commander, Col. Dixon S. Miles, to show some military knowledge and courage.
Miles was a 38-year veteran of the U.S. Army and the Mexican-American War, but who had been disgraced after the First Battle of Bull Run when a court of inquiry held that he had been drunk during the battle.
Miles swore off liquor and was sent to the supposedly quiet post at Harpers Ferry.
His garrison comprised 14,000 men, many inexperienced, including 2,500 who had been forced out of Martinsburg by the approach of Jackson's men on September 11.
Walker reentered Virginia, in Loudoun County on September 9, across from Point of Rocks.
Walker was escorted by Col. E.V. White, Loudoun native, and his 35th Battalion of Virginia Cavalry.
White was unhappy with the assignment and preferred to be with the rest of the army.
Unfortunately White had gotten into an altercation with Maj. Gen. J.E.B. Stuart in Frederick and was subsequently ordered back to Virginia by Lee.
Whether or not his disposition was to blame, White led Walker on a meandering route around the Short Hill Mountain to reach the base of Loudoun Heights four days later on September 13.
So the attack on Harpers Ferry that had been planned for September 11 was delayed, increasing the risk that McClellan might engage and destroy a portion of Lee's army while it was divided.
Battle
Miles insisted on keeping most of the troops near the town instead of taking up commanding positions on the surrounding heights.
He apparently was interpreting literally his orders to hold the town.
The defenses of the most important position, Maryland Heights, were designed to fight off raiders, but not to hold the heights themselves.
There was a powerful artillery battery halfway up the heights: two naval Dahlgren rifles, one 50-pounder Parrott rifle, and four 12-pounder smoothbores.
On the crest, Miles assigned Col. Thomas H. Ford of the 32nd Ohio Infantry to command parts of four regiments, 1,600 men.
Some of these men, including those of the 126th New York, had been in the Army only 21 days and lacked basic combat skills.
They erected primitive breastworks and sent skirmishers a quarter-mile in the direction of the Confederates.
On September 12 they encountered the approaching men from Kershaw's South Carolina brigade, who had been moving slowly through the very difficult terrain on Elk Ridge.
Rifle volleys from behind abatis caused the Confederates to stop for the night.
Kershaw began his attack at about 6:30 a.m., September 13.
He planned to push his own brigade directly against the Union breastworks while Barksdale's Mississippians flanked the Federal right.
Kershaw's men charged into the abatis twice and were driven back with heavy losses.
The inexperienced New York troops were holding their own.
Their commander, Col. Ford, felt ill that morning and stayed back two miles (3 km) behind the lines, leaving the fighting to Col. Eliakim Sherrill, the second-ranking officer.
Sherrill was wounded by a bullet through the cheek and tongue while rallying his men and had to be carried from the field, making the green troops grow panicky.
As Barksdale's Mississippians approached on the flank, the New Yorkers broke and fled rearward.
Although Maj.
Sylvester Hewitt ordered the remaining units to reform farther along the ridge, orders came at 3:30 p.m. from Col. Ford to retreat.
His men destroyed their artillery pieces and crossed a pontoon bridge back to Harpers Ferry.
Ford later insisted he had the authority from Miles to order the withdrawal, but a court of inquiry concluded that he had "abandoned his position without sufficient cause," and recommended his dismissal from the Army.
During the fighting on Maryland Heights, the other Confederate columns arrived&mdash;Walker to the base of Loudoun Heights at 10 a.m. and Jackson's three divisions (Brig.
Gen. John R. Jones to the north, Brig.
Gen. Alexander R. Lawton in the center, and Maj. Gen. A.P. Hill to the south) to the west of Bolivar Heights at 11 a.m.&mdash;and were astonished to see that these positions were not defended.
Inside the town, the Union officers realized they were surrounded and pleaded with Miles to attempt to recapture Maryland Heights, but he refused, insisting that his forces on Bolivar Heights would defend the town from the west.
He exclaimed, "I am ordered to hold this place and
God damn my soul to hell if I don't."
While battles raged at the passes on South Mountain, Jackson had methodically positioned his artillery around Harpers Ferry.
This included four Parrott rifles to the summit of Maryland Heights, a task that required 200 men wrestling the ropes of each gun.
Although Jackson wanted all of his guns to open fire simultaneously, Walker on Loudoun Heights grew impatient and began an ineffectual bombardment with five guns shortly after 1 p.m. Jackson ordered A.P. Hill to move down the west bank of the Shenandoah in preparation for a flank attack on the Federal left the next morning.
That night, the Union officers realized they had less than 24 hours left, but they made no attempt to recapture Maryland Heights.
Unbeknownst to Miles, only a single Confederate regiment now occupied the crest, after McLaws had withdrawn the remainder to meet the Union assault at Crampton's Gap.
By the morning of September 15, Jackson had positioned nearly 50 guns on Maryland Heights and at the base of Loudoun Heights, prepared to enfilade the rear of the Federal line on Bolivar Heights.
Jackson began a fierce artillery barrage from all sides and ordered an infantry assault for 8 a.m. Miles realized that the situation was hopeless.
He had no expectation that relief would arrive from McClellan in time and his artillery ammunition was in short supply.
At a council of war with his brigade commanders, he agreed to raise the white flag of surrender.
But he would not be personally present at any ceremony.
He was confronted by a captain of the 126th New York Infantry, who said, "For &mdash;&mdash;'s sake, Colonel, don't surrender us.
Don't you hear the signal guns?
Our forces are near us.
Let us cut our way out and join them."
But Miles replied, "Impossible.
They will blow us out of this place in half an hour."
As the captain turned away in disdain, a shell exploded, shattering Miles's left leg.
So disgusted were the men of the garrison with Miles's behavior, which some claimed involved being drunk again, it was difficult to find a man who would take him to the hospital.
He was mortally wounded and died the next day.
Some historians have speculated that Miles was struck deliberately by fire from his own men.
Aftermath
Jackson had won a great victory at minor expense.
The Confederate Army sustained 286 casualties (39 killed, 247 wounded), mostly from the fighting on Maryland Heights, while the Union Army sustained 12,636 (44 killed, 173 wounded, 12,419 captured).
The Union garrison also surrendered 13,000 small arms, 200 wagons, and 73 artillery pieces.
It was the largest surrender of Federal forces during the Civil War.
The list of captured artillery pieces included one 50-pounder Parrott rifle (spiked), six M1841 24-pounder howitzers, four 20-pounder Parrott rifles, eight M1841 12-pounder field guns (2 spiked), four 12-pounder Napoleons (2 spiked), six M1841 6-pounder field guns, two 10-pounder Dahlgren guns (spiked), 10 3-inch Ordnance rifles, and six 3-inch James rifles.
Confederate soldiers feasted on Union food supplies and helped themselves to fresh blue Federal uniforms, which would cause some confusion in the coming days.
About the only unhappy men in Jackson's force were the cavalrymen, who had hoped to replenish their exhausted mounts.
Jackson sent off a courier to Lee with the news.
"Through God's blessing, Harper's Ferry and its garrison are to be surrendered."
As he rode into town to supervise his men, Union prisoners lined the roadside, eager for a look at the famous Stonewall.
One of them observed Jackson's dirty, seedy uniform and remarked, "Boys, he isn't much for looks, but if we'd had him we wouldn't have been caught in this trap."
By early afternoon, Jackson received an urgent message from General Lee, telling him to get his troops to Sharpsburg as quickly as possible.
Jackson left A.P. Hill at Harpers Ferry to manage the parole of Federal prisoners and began marching to join the Battle of Antietam.
Additional areas are preserved within the Harpers Ferry Historic District and the National Register of Historic Places listed B & O Railroad Potomac River Crossing.
Notes
* Divine, John.
35th Battalion, Virginia Cavalry.
Lynchburg, VA: H. E. Howard, 1985. .
Eicher, David J. The Longest Night: A Military History of the Civil War.
New York: Simon & Schuster, 2001. .
* Esposito, Vincent J. West Point Atlas of American Wars.
New York: Frederick A. Praeger, 1959. .
The collection of maps (without explanatory text) is available online at the https:/ 20120829203141 history atlases West Point website.
* Kennedy, Frances H., ed.
The Civil War Battlefield Guide.
2nd ed.
Boston: Houghton Mifflin Co., 1998. .
* Rafuse, Ethan S. Antietam, South Mountain and Harpers Ferry.
Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press, 2008. .
* Robertson, James I., Jr.
Stonewall Jackson: The Man, the Soldier, the Legend.
New York: MacMillan Publishing, 1997. .
Sears, Stephen W. Landscape Turned Red: The Battle of Antietam.
Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1983. .
* Wolff, Robert S. "Harper's Ferry, (West) Virginia".
In Encyclopedia of the American Civil War: A Political, Social, and Military History, edited by David S. Heidler and Jeanne T. Heidler.
New York: W. W. Norton & Company, 2000. .
* http:/ hps battles history abpp WestVirginiaBattlefieldProfiles/Greenbrier%20River%20to%20Kesslers%20Cross%20Lanes.pdf CWSAC Report Update and Resurvey: Individual Battlefield Profiles
Further reading
* Carman, Ezra Ayers.
The Maryland Campaign of September 1862.
Vol. 1, South Mountain.
Edited by Thomas G. Clemens.
El Dorado Hills, CA: Savas Beatie, 2010. .
Gottfried, Bradley M. The Maps of Antietam: An Atlas of the Antietam (Sharpsburg) Campaign, Including the Battle of South Mountain, September 2&ndash;20, 1862.
El Dorado Hills, CA: Savas Beatie, 2012. .
* Hartwig, D. Scott.
To Antietam Creek: The Maryland Campaign of 1862.
Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins University Press, 2012. .
* Murfin, James V.
The Gleam of Bayonets: The Battle of Antietam and Robert E. Lee's Maryland Campaign, September 1862.
Baton Rouge: Louisiana State University Press, 1965. .
* Silkenat, David.
Raising the White Flag: How Surrender Defined the American Civil War.
Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 2019. .
* Teetor, Paul R.
A Matter of Hours: Treason at Harper's Ferry.
Rutherford, NJ:
Fairleigh Dickinson University Press, 1982. .
