Lommel is a municipality and a city in the Belgian province of Limburg.
The Kempen city has about 34,000 inhabitants and is part of the electoral district and the judicial district Lommel Neerpelt.
Besides residential town of Lommel also has a number of nature reserves, such as the nature reserve De Watering, the Lommel Sahara, and numerous forests and heathlands.
Lommel is the third shopping city in Belgian Limburg with a commercial and shopping center De Singel.
Importantly, the silver sand that is mined here for the benefit of the glass industry.
Some sand mining quarries are transformed into nature reserves and recreational areas, including Lommel Sahara.
The city of Lommel is the watershed of the basins of the Scheldt, and Meuse, and within these basins Nete Dommel respectively.
Language
The dialect of Lommel - the Lommel - is part of the East Brabant, and not to the West Limburg dialects, reflecting the particular history of the place.
Etymology
The name comes from Lommel Loemelo.
Loem means moist, swampy and Lo is forest or woodland.
Demographic development
All historical data relating to the current municipality, including towns such as arose after the merger of January 1, 1977.
Politics
Structure
The city of Lommel is located in the electoral district Neerpelt (which is identical to the county district Neerpelt) and the electoral district Hasselt Tongeren-Maaseik (same as the constituency Limburg).
List of mayors of Lommel
Results municipal elections since 1976
seats formed coalition 'bold' printed
Sport events
Since 2017 the European Open a Snooker ranking tournament of the World Snooker Tour took place in Lommel.
Notable people from Lommel
* Peter Maes, former soccer player, coach of Sporting Lokeren
* Louis Vanvelthoven, honorary-mayor, former chairman of the Flemish Parliament
* Peter Vanvelthoven, mayor, former Belgian Minister for Employment and Informatisation
* Steven Van Broeckhoven, professional windsurfer, two-time champion on the European Freestyle Pro Tour
*Lommel German war cemetery - Located along N764, on the road from Lommel to Leopoldsdorp is the largest German military cemetery in Western Europe outside Germany itself.
Established after World War II, the 16 ha cemetery holds 39,102 burials, mainly from World War II.
