Oliver Twist; or, the Parish Boy's Progress is Charles Dickens's second novel, and was first published as a serial from 1837 to 1839.
The story centres on orphan Oliver Twist, born in a workhouse and sold into apprenticeship with an undertaker.
After escaping, Oliver travels to London, where he meets the "Artful Dodger", a member of a gang of juvenile pickpockets led by the elderly criminal Fagin.
Oliver Twist is notable for its unromantic portrayal of criminals and their sordid lives, as well as for exposing the cruel treatment of the many orphans in London in the mid-19th century.
The alternative title, The Parish Boy's Progress, alludes to Bunyan's The Pilgrim's Progress, as well as the 18th-century caricature series by William Hogarth, A Rake's Progress and A Harlot's Progress.
In this early example of the social novel, Dickens satirises the hypocrisies of his time, including child labour, the recruitment of children as criminals, and the presence of street children.
The novel may have been inspired by the story of Robert Blincoe, an orphan whose account of working as a child labourer in a cotton mill was widely read in the 1830s.
It is likely that Dickens's own experiences as a youth contributed as well.
Oliver Twist has been the subject of numerous adaptations for various media, including a highly successful musical play, Oliver!, and the multiple Academy Award-winning 1968 motion picture.
Disney also put its spin on the novel with the animated film called Oliver & Company in 1988.
Publications
The novel was originally published in monthly instalments in the magazine Bentley's Miscellany, from February 1837 to April 1839.
It was originally intended to form part of Dickens's serial, The Mudfog Papers.
George Cruikshank provided one steel etching per month to illustrate each instalment.
The novel first appeared in book form six months before the initial serialisation was completed, in three volumes published by Richard Bentley, the owner of Bentley's Miscellany, under the author's pseudonym, "Boz".
It included 24 steel-engraved plates by Cruikshank.
The first edition was titled: Oliver Twist, or, The Parish Boy's Progress.
Serial publication dates:
* XVIII - October 1838
Plot summary
Workhouse years
Oliver Twist is born into a life of poverty and misfortune, raised in a workhouse in the fictional town of Mudfog, located north of London.
Poverty and social class
Poverty is a prominent concern in Oliver Twist.
Throughout the novel, Dickens enlarged on this theme, describing slums so decrepit that whole rows of houses are on the point of ruin.
In an early chapter, Oliver attends a pauper's funeral with Mr. Sowerberry and sees a whole family crowded together in one miserable room.
This prevalent misery makes Oliver's encounters with charity and love more poignant.
Oliver owes his life several times over to kindness both large and small.
The apparent plague of poverty that Dickens describes also conveyed to his middle-class readers how much of the London population was stricken with poverty and disease.
Nonetheless, in Oliver Twist, he delivers a somewhat mixed message about social caste and social injustice.
Oliver's illegitimate workhouse origins place him at the nadir of society; as an orphan without friends, he is routinely despised.
His "sturdy spirit" keeps him alive despite the torment he must endure.
Most of his associates, however, deserve their place among society's dregs and seem very much at home in the depths.
Noah Claypole, a charity boy like Oliver, is idle, stupid, and cowardly; Sikes is a thug; Fagin lives by corrupting children, and the Artful Dodger seems born for a life of crime.
Many of the middle-class people Oliver encounters-Mrs. Sowerberry, Mr. Bumble, and the savagely hypocritical "gentlemen" of the workhouse board, for example-are, if anything, worse.
On the other hand, Oliver-who has an air of refinement remarkable for a workhouse boy-proves to be of gentle birth.
Although he has been abused and neglected all his life, he recoils, aghast, at the idea of victimising anyone else.
This apparently hereditary gentlemanliness makes Oliver Twist something of a changeling tale, not just an indictment of social injustice.
Oliver, born for better things, struggles to survive in the savage world of the underclass before finally being rescued by his family and returned to his proper place-a commodious country house.
Director Roman Polanski's 2005 film adaptation of the novel dispenses with the paradox of Oliver's genteel origins by eliminating his origin story completely, making him just another anonymous orphan like the rest of Fagin's gang.
Symbolism
Dickens makes considerable use of symbolism.
The "merry old gentleman" Fagin, for example, has satanic characteristics: he is a veteran corrupter of young boys who presides over his own corner of the criminal world; he makes his first appearance standing over a fire holding a toasting-fork, and he refuses to pray on the night before his execution.
The London slums, too, have a suffocating, infernal aspect; the dark deeds and dark passions are concretely characterised by dim rooms and pitch-black nights, while the governing mood of terror and brutality may be identified with uncommonly cold weather.
In contrast, the countryside where the Maylies take Oliver is a bucolic heaven.
The novel is also concerned with social class, and the stark injustice in Oliver's world.
When the half-starved child dares to ask for more, the men who punish him are fat, and a remarkable number of the novel's characters are overweight.
Toward the end of the novel, the gaze of knowing eyes becomes a potent symbol.
For years, Fagin avoids daylight, crowds, and open spaces, concealing himself most of the time in a dark lair.
When his luck runs out at last, he squirms in the "living light" of too many eyes as he stands in the dock, awaiting sentence.
Similarly, after Sikes kills Nancy at dawn, he flees the bright sunlight in their room, out to the countryside, but is unable to escape the memory of her dead eyes.
In addition, Charley Bates turns his back on crime when he sees the murderous cruelty of the man who has been held up to him as a model.
Characters
In the tradition of Restoration Comedy and Henry Fielding, Dickens fits his characters with appropriate names.
Oliver himself, though "badged and ticketed" as a lowly orphan and named according to an alphabetical system, is, in fact, "all of a twist."
However, Oliver and his name may have been based on a young workhouse boy named Peter Tolliver whom Dickens knew while growing up.
Mr. Grimwig is so called because his seemingly "grim", pessimistic outlook is actually a protective cover for his kind, sentimental soul.
Other character names mark their bearers as semi-monstrous caricatures.
Mrs. Mann, who has charge of the infant Oliver, is not the most motherly of women; Mr. Bumble, despite his impressive sense of his own dignity, continually mangles the King's English he tries to use; and the Sowerberries are, of course, "sour berries", a reference to Mrs. Sowerberry's perpetual scowl, to Mr. Sowerberry's profession as an undertaker, and to the poor provender Oliver receives from them.
Rose Maylie's name echoes her association with flowers and springtime, youth and beauty while Toby Crackit's is a reference to his chosen profession of housebreaking.
Bill Sikes's dog, Bull's-eye, has "faults of temper in common with his owner" and is an emblem of his owner's character.
The dog's viciousness represents Sikes's animal-like brutality while Sikes's self-destructiveness is evident in the dog's many scars.
The dog, with its willingness to harm anyone on Sikes's whim, shows the mindless brutality of the master.
Sikes himself senses that the dog is a reflection of himself and that is why he tries to drown the dog.
He is really trying to run away from who he is.
This is also illustrated when Sikes dies and the dog immediately dies as well.
After Sikes murders Nancy, Bull's-eye also comes to represent Sikes's guilt.
The dog leaves bloody footprints on the floor of the room where the murder is committed.
Not long after, Sikes becomes desperate to get rid of the dog, convinced that the dog's presence will give him away.
Yet, just as Sikes cannot shake off his guilt, he cannot shake off Bull's-eye, who arrives at the house of Sikes's demise before Sikes himself does.
Bull's-eye's name also conjures up the image of Nancy's eyes, which haunt Sikes until the bitter end and eventually cause him to hang himself accidentally.
Dickens employs polarised sets of characters to explore various dual themes throughout the novel; Mr. Brownlow and Fagin, for example, personify "good vs. evil".
Dickens also juxtaposes honest, law-abiding characters such as Oliver himself with those who, like the Artful Dodger, seem more comfortable on the wrong side of the law.
Crime and punishment is another important pair of themes, as is sin and redemption: Dickens describes criminal acts ranging from picking pockets to murder, and the characters are punished severely in the end.
Most obviously, he shows Bill Sikes hounded to death by a mob for his brutal acts and sends Fagin to cower in the condemned cell, sentenced to death by due process.
Neither character achieves redemption; Sikes dies trying to run away from his guilt, and on his last night alive, the terrified Fagin refuses to see a rabbi or to pray, instead asking Oliver to help him escape.
Nancy, by contrast, redeems herself at the cost of her own life and dies in a prayerful pose.
She is one of the few characters in Oliver Twist to display much ambivalence.
Her storyline in the novel strongly reflects themes of domestic violence and psychological abuse at the hands of Bill, who ultimately murders her.
Although Nancy is a full-fledged criminal, indoctrinated and trained by Fagin since childhood, she retains enough empathy to repent her role in Oliver's kidnapping, and to take steps to try to atone.
As one of Fagin's victims, corrupted but not yet morally dead, she gives eloquent voice to the horrors of the old man's little criminal empire.
She wants to save Oliver from a similar fate; at the same time, she recoils from the idea of turning traitor, especially to Bill Sikes, whom she loves.
When he was later criticised for giving a "thieving, whoring slut of the streets" such an unaccountable reversal of character, Dickens ascribed her change of heart to "the last fair drop of water at the bottom of a dried-up, weed-choked well".
Allegations of antisemitism
Dickens has been accused of following antisemitic stereotypes because of his portrayal of the Jewish character Fagin in Oliver Twist.
Paul Vallely writes that Fagin is widely seen as one of the most grotesque Jews in English literature, and the most vivid of Dickens's 989 characters.
Nadia Valdman, who writes about the portrayal of Jews in literature, argues that Fagin's representation was drawn from the image of the Jew as inherently evil, that the imagery associated him with the Devil, and with beasts.
The novel refers to Fagin 274 times in the first 38 chapters as "the Jew", while the ethnicity or religion of the other characters is rarely mentioned.
Dickens commented that by calling Fagin a Jew he had meant no imputation against the Jewish faith, saying in a letter, "I have no feeling towards the Jews but a friendly one.
I always speak well of them, whether in public or private, and bear my testimony (as I ought to do) to their perfect good faith in such transactions as I have ever had with them."
Eliza Davis, whose husband had purchased Dickens's home in 1860 when he had put it up for sale, wrote to Dickens in protest at his portrayal of Fagin, arguing that he had "encouraged a vile prejudice against the despised Hebrew", and that he had done a great wrong to the Jewish people.
While Dickens first reacted defensively upon receiving Davis's letter, he then halted the printing of Oliver Twist, and changed the text for the parts of the book that had not been set, which explains why after the first 38 chapters Fagin is barely called "the Jew" at all in the next 179 references to him.
* Oliver!
is a 1968 British adaptation, winner in the Best Picture category at the 41st Academy Awards.
It is based on the Lionel Bart musical version.
* Manik is a 1961 Bengali film directed by Bijalibaran Sen which was based on this novel.
The film starred Pahari Sanyal, Chhabi Biswas, Sombhu Mitra, Tripti Mitra etc.
* Oliver & Company is a 1988 Disney full-length animated feature inspired by the story of Oliver Twist.
* Oliver Twist (1997), directed by Tony Bill and starring Richard Dreyfuss and Elijah Wood.
* Oliver Twist (2005), directed by Roman Polanski and starring Barney Clark and Ben Kingsley.
Television
* Oliver Twist, a 12 episode 1985 BBC One miniseries directed by Gareth Davies, starring Eric Porter and Michael Attwell.
*Oliver Twist, 1999 ITV miniseries adaptation starring Andy Serkis and Keira Knightley.
* Oliver Twist, a five episode 2007 BBC One miniseries directed by Coky Giedroyc, starring Timothy Spall and Tom Hardy.
* Saban's Adventures of Oliver Twist, a 52 episode animated American-French co-production that aired between 1996 and 1997, where the story is downplayed for younger viewers, where Oliver loses his mother in a crowd rather than being dead and the characters are represented by anthropomorphic animals.
Oliver in this version is a young dog.
Theatre
* Oliver!, a West End theatre stage musical adaptation by Lionel Bart.
