Hanoi ( or ; ) is the capital of Vietnam.
It covers an area of .
With an estimated population of 7.7 million as of 2018, it is the second largest city in Vietnam.
The metropolitan area, encompassing nine additional neighbouring provinces, has an estimated population of 16 million.
Located in the central area of the Red River Delta, Hanoi is the commercial, cultural, and educational centre of Northern Vietnam.
Having an estimated nominal GDP of US$32.8 billion, it is the second most productive economic centre of Vietnam, following Ho Chi Minh City.
Originally a small settlement along the banks of the Red River, the city was founded as Thăng Long, the capital of Imperial Vietnam, in 1010 by monarch Lý Thái Tổ.
Thăng Long would remain the most important political and cultural centre of Vietnam until 1802, when the Nguyễn dynasty, the last imperial dynasty of Vietnam, moved the capital to Huế.
Thăng Long renamed to its current name Hanoi in 1831.
In 1873, Hanoi was conquered by the French, and from 1883 to 1945, the city was the administrative centre of French Indochina.
The French colonisation left a lasting impact on the city's architecture that is visible today, as showcased through the juxtaposition of French-styled avenues, bridges, buildings, and traditional Vietnamese architecture.
From 1940 to 1945, Hanoi was occupied by the Japanese forces.
On 6 January 1946, the National Assembly of the Democratic Republic of Vietnam designated Hanoi as the capital of the newly-independent country, which would last during the First Indochina War (1946-1954) and the Vietnam War (1955-1975).
Following North Vietnamese victory in 1975, Hanoi has been the capital of a reunified Vietnam since 1976.
On 16 July 1999, the UNESCO presented the title "City for Peace" to Hanoi.
Today, Hanoi is a thriving economic hub and one of the most popular tourist destinations in Vietnam.
It hosts various venerable educational institutions and cultural venues of national significance, including the National University, the Mỹ Đình National Stadium, and the National Museum of Fine Arts.
Names
Hanoi had many official and unofficial names throughout history.
* During the Chinese occupation of Vietnam, it was known first as Long Biên (, "dragon edge"), then Tống Bình (, "Song peace") and Long Đỗ (, "dragon belly").
Long Biên later gave its name to the famed Long Biên Bridge, built during French colonial times, and more recently to a new district to the east of the Red River.
Several older names of Hanoi feature long (, "dragon"), linked to the curved formation of the Red River around the city, which was symbolized as a dragon.
* In 866, it was turned into a citadel and named Đại La (, "big net").
This gave it the nickname La Thành (, "net citadel").
Both Đại La and La Thành are names of major streets in modern Hanoi.
When Lý Thái Tổ established the capital in the area in 1010, it was named Thăng Long (, "rising dragon").
Thăng Long later became the name of a major bridge on the highway linking the city center to Noi Bai Airport, and the Thăng Long Boulevard expressway in the southwest of the city center.
In modern time, the city is usually referred to as Thăng Long - Hà Nội, when its long history is discussed.
* During the Hồ dynasty, it was called Đông Đô (, "eastern metropolis").
* During the Minh dynasty, it was called Đông Quan (, "eastern gate").
* During the Lê dynasty, Hanoi was known as Đông Kinh (, "eastern capital").
This gave the name to Tonkin and Gulf of Tonkin.
A square adjacent to the Hoàn Kiếm lake was named Đông Kinh Nghĩa Thục after the reformist Tonkin Free School under French colonization.
* After the end of the Tây Sơn had expanded further south, the city was named Bắc Thành (, "northern citadel").
* Minh Mạng renamed the city Hà Nội (, "inside the rivers") in 1831.
This has remained its official name until modern times.
* Several unofficial names of Hanoi include: Kẻ Chợ (marketplace), Tràng An (long peace), Hà Thành (short for Thành phố Hà Nội, "city of Hanoi"), and Thủ Đô (capital).
History
Pre-Thăng Long period
Hanoi has been inhabited since at least 3000 BC.
The Cổ Loa Citadel in Đông Anh District served as the capital of the Âu Lạc kingdom founded by the Thục emigrant Thục Phán after his 258 BC conquest of the native Văn Lang.
In 197 BC, the Âu Lạc Kingdom was annexed by Nanyue, which ushered in more than a millennium of Chinese domination.
By the middle of the 5th century, in the center of ancient Hanoi, the Liu Song dynasty set up a new district (縣, huyện) called Songping (Tong Binh), which later became a commandery (郡, quận), including two districts Yihuai (義懷) and Suining (綏寧) in the south of the Red River (now Từ Liêm and Hoài Đức districts) with a metropolis (the domination centre) in the present inner Hanoi.
By the year 679, the Tang dynasty changed the region's name into Annan (Pacified South), with Songping as its capital.
In order to defeat the people's uprisings, in the later half of the 8th century, Zhang Boyi (張伯儀), a Tang dynasty viceroy, built Luocheng (羅城, La Thanh or La citadel, from Thu Le to Quan Ngua in present-day Ba Dinh precinct).
In the earlier half of the 9th century, it was further built up and called Jincheng (金城, Kim Thanh or Kim Citadel).
In 866, Gao Pian, the Chinese Jiedushi, consolidated and named it Daluocheng (大羅城, Đại La Citadel, running from Quần Ngựa to Bách Thảo), the largest citadel of ancient Hanoi at the time.
who later founded the Lê dynasty and renamed Đông Quan Đông Kinh (, "Eastern Capital"-not Tokyo) or Tonkin.
Right after the end of the Tây Sơn dynasty, it was named Bắc Thành (, "Northern Citadel").
During Nguyễn dynasty and the French colonial period
When the Nguyễn dynasty was established in 1802, Gia Long moved the capital to Huế.
Thăng Long was no longer the capital, its Hán tự was changed from ("Rising dragon") to ("Ascent and prosperity"), aiming to reduce the sentiment of Lê dynasty.
Emperors of Vietnam usually used dragon ( long) as a symbol of their imperial strength and power.
In 1831, the Nguyễn emperor Minh Mạng renamed it Hà Nội (, "Between Rivers" or "River Interior").
Hanoi was occupied by the French in 1873 and passed to them ten years later.
As Hanoï, it was located in the protectorate of Tonkin became the capital of French Indochina after 1887.
The high-rise commercial buildings did not begin to appear until ten years later due to the international investment community being skeptical of the security of their investments in Vietnam.
Hanoi's total area then increased to 334,470 hectares in 29 subdivisions with the new population being 6,232,940.,
The city experiences the typical climate of northern Vietnam, with four distinct seasons.
Summer, from May to August, is characterized by hot and humid weather with abundant rainfall.
In the year 2013, Hanoi contributed 12.6% to GDP, exported 7.5% of total exports, contributed 17% to the national budget and attracted 22% investment capital of Vietnam.
The city's nominal GDP at current prices reached 451,213 billion VND (21.48 billion USD) in 2013, which made per capita GDP stand at 63.3 million VND (3,000 USD).
Industrial production in the city has experienced a rapid boom since the 1990s, with average annual growth of 19.1 percent from 1991-95, 15.9 percent from 1996-2000, and 20.9 percent during 2001-2003.
In addition to eight existing industrial parks, Hanoi is building five new large-scale industrial parks and 16 small- and medium-sized industrial clusters.
The non-state economic sector is expanding fast, with more than 48,000 businesses currently operating under the Enterprise Law (as of 3/2007).
Trade is another strong sector of the city.
In 2003, Hanoi had 2,000 businesses engaged in foreign trade, having established ties with 161 countries and territories.
The city's export value grew by an average 11.6 percent each year from 1996-2000 and 9.1 percent during 2001-2003.
The economic structure also underwent important shifts, with tourism, finance, and banking now playing an increasingly important role.
Hanoi's traditional business districts are Hoàn Kiếm, Hai Bà Trưng and Đống Đa; and newly developing Cầu Giấy and Nam Từ Liêm in the west.
Similar to Ho Chi Minh City, Hanoi enjoys a rapidly developing real estate market.
The current most notable new urban areas are central Trung Hòa Nhân Chính, Mỹ Đình, the luxurious zones of The Manor, Ciputra, Royal City in the Nguyễn Trãi Street (Thanh Xuân District) and Times City in the Hai Bà Trưng District.
Agriculture, previously a pillar in Hanoi's economy, has striven to reform itself, introducing new high-yield plant varieties and livestock, and applying modern farming techniques.
After the economic reforms that initiated economic growth, Hanoi's appearance has also changed significantly, especially in recent years.
Infrastructure is constantly being upgraded, with new roads and an improved public transportation system.
Hanoi has allowed many fast-food chains into the city, such as Jollibee, Lotteria, Pizza Hut, KFC, and others.
Locals in Hanoi perceive the ability to purchase "fast-food" as an indication of luxury and permanent fixtures.
Over three-quarters of the jobs in Hanoi are state-owned.
9% of jobs are provided by collectively owned organizations.
13.3% of jobs are in the private sector.
The structure of employment has been changing rapidly as state-owned institutions downsize and private enterprises grow.
Development
Infrastructural development
A development master plan for Hanoi was designed by Ernest Hebrard in 1924, but was only partially implemented.
It was never realized because it appeared to be incompatible with Hanoi's existing layout.
Most of the civic organizations in Hanoi were established after 1995, at a rate much slower than in Ho Chi Minh City.
Organizations in Hanoi are more "tradition-bound," focused on policy, education, research, professional interests, and appealing to governmental organizations to solve social problems.
and boasts more than 1,000 years of history; that of the past few hundred years has been well preserved.
Old Quarter
The Old Quarter, near Hoàn Kiếm Lake, maintains most of the original street layout and some of the architecture of old Hanoi.
At the beginning of the 20th century Hanoi consisted of the "36 streets", the citadel, and some of the newer French buildings south of Hoàn Kiếm lake, most of which are now part of Hoàn Kiếm district.
Each street had merchants and households specializing in a particular trade, such as silk, jewelry or even bamboo.
The street names still reflect these specializations, although few of them remain exclusively in their original commerce.
The area is famous for its specializations in trades such as traditional medicine and local handicrafts, including silk shops, bamboo carpenters, and tin smiths.
Local cuisine specialties as well as several clubs and bars can be found here also.
A night market (near Đồng Xuân Market) in the heart of the district opens for business every Friday, Saturday, and Sunday evening with a variety of clothing, souvenirs and food.
Some other prominent places include the Temple of Literature (Văn Miếu), site of the oldest university in Vietnam which was started in 1010, the One Pillar Pagoda (Chùa Một Cột) which was built based on the dream of king Lý Thái Tông (1028-1054) in 1049, and the Flag Tower of Hanoi (Cột cờ Hà Nội).
In 2004, a massive part of the 900-year-old Hanoi Citadel was discovered in central Hanoi, near the site of Ba Đình Square.
Lakes
A city between rivers built on lowlands, Hanoi has many scenic lakes and is sometimes called the "city of lakes."
Among its lakes, the most famous are Hoàn Kiếm Lake, West Lake/Hồ Tây, and Bảy Mẫu Lake (inside Thống Nhất Park).
Hoàn Kiếm Lake, also known as Sword Lake, is the historical and cultural center of Hanoi, and is linked to the legend of the magic sword.
West Lake (Hồ Tây) is a popular place for people to spend time.
It is the largest lake in Hanoi, with many temples in the area.
The lakeside road in the Nghi Tam - Quang Ba area is perfect for bicycling, jogging and viewing the cityscape or enjoying the lotus ponds in the summer.
The best way to see the majestic beauty of a West Lake sunset is to view it from one of the many bars around the lake, especially from The Summit at Pan Pacific Hanoi (formally known as Summit Lounge at Sofitel Plaza Hanoi).
Colonial Hanoi
Under French rule, as an administrative centre for the French colony of Indochina, the French colonial architecture style became dominant, and many examples remain today: the tree-lined boulevards (e.g. Phan Dinh Phung street) and its many villas, mansions, and government buildings.
Many of the colonial structures are an eclectic mixture of French and traditional Vietnamese architectural styles, such as the National Museum of Vietnamese History, the Vietnam National Museum of Fine Arts and the old Indochina Medical College.
Gouveneur-Général Paul Doumer (1898-1902) played a crucial role in colonial Hanoi's urban planning.
Under his tenure there was a major construction boom.
Notable French Colonial landmarks in Hanoi include:
Museums
Hanoi is home to a number of museums:
Tourism
Hanoi is sometimes dubbed the "Paris of the East" for its French influences.
With its tree-fringed boulevards, more than two dozen lakes and thousands of French colonial-era buildings, Hanoi is a popular tourist destination.
The tourist destinations in Hanoi are generally grouped into two main areas: the Old Quarter and the French Quarter (s).
The "Old Quarter" is in the northern half of Hoàn Kiếm District with small street blocks and alleys, and a traditional Vietnamese atmosphere.
Many streets in the Old Quarter have names signifying the goods ("hàng") the local merchants were or are specialized in.
For example, "Hàng Bạc" (silver stores) still have many stores specializing in trading silver and jewelries.
Two areas are generally called the "French Quarters": the governmental area in Ba Đình District and the south of Hoàn Kiếm District.
Both areas have distinctive French Colonial style villas and broad tree-lined avenues.
The political center of Vietnam, Ba Đình has a high concentration of Vietnamese government headquarters, including the Presidential Palace, the National Assembly and several ministries and embassies, most of which used administrative buildings of colonial French Indochina.
The One Pillar Pagoda, the Lycée du Protectorat and the Ho Chi Minh Mausoleum are also in Ba Dinh.
South of Hoàn Kiếm's "French Quarter" has several French-Colonial landmarks, including the Hanoi Opera House, the Sofitel Legend Metropole Hanoi hotel, the National Museum of Vietnamese History (formerly the École française d'Extrême-Orient), and the St. Joseph's Cathedral.
Most of the French-Colonial buildings in Hoan Kiem are now used as foreign embassies.
Since 2014, Hanoi has consistently been voted in the world's top ten destinations by TripAdvisor.
It ranked 8th in 2014, 4th in 2015 and 8th in 2016.
Hanoi is the most affordable international destination in TripAdvisor's annual TripIndex report.
In 2017, Hanoi will welcome more than 5 million international tourists.
Entertainment
A variety of options for entertainment in Hanoi can be found throughout the city.
Modern and traditional theaters, cinemas, karaoke bars, dance clubs, bowling alleys, and an abundance of opportunities for shopping provide leisure activity for both locals and tourists.
Hanoi has been named one of the top 10 cities for shopping in Asia by Water Puppet Tours.
The number of art galleries exhibiting Vietnamese art has dramatically increased in recent years, now including galleries such as "Nhat Huy" of Huynh Thong Nhat.
Nhà Triển Lãm at 29 Hang Bai street hosts regular photo, sculpture, and paint exhibitions in conjuncture with local artists and travelling international expositions.
A popular traditional form of entertainment is Water puppetry, which is shown, for example, at the Thăng Long Water Puppet Theatre.
Shopping
To adapt to Hanoi's rapid economic growth and high population density, many modern shopping centers and megamalls have been opened in Hanoi.
Major malls are:
* Trang Tien Plaza, High-end Mall on Trang Tien street (right next to Hoàn Kiếm Lake), Hoàn Kiếm District
* Vincom Center, a modern mall with hi-end CGV cineplex, Ba Trieu Street (just 2 km from Hoan Kiem lake), Hai Bà Trưng District
* Parkson Department Store, Tây Sơn Street, Đống Đa District;
* The Garden Shopping Center, Me Tri - Mỹ Đình, Nam Từ Liêm District
* Indochina Plaza, Xuan Thuy street, Cầu Giấy District
* Vincom Royal City Megamall, the largest underground mall in Asia with 230,000 square metres of shops, restaurants, cineplex, waterpark, ice skating rink; Nguyen Trai street (approx 6 km from Hoan Kiem Lake), Thanh Xuân District
* Vincom Times City Megamall, another megamall of 230,000 square metres including shops, restaurants, cineplex, huge musical fountain on central square and a giant aquarium; Minh Khai street (approx 5 km from Hoan Kiem Lake), Hai Ba Trung district
*Lotte Department Store, opened September 2014, Liễu Giai Street, Ba Đình District
* Aeon Mall Long Bien opened last October 2015, Long Bien District
Cuisine
Hanoi has rich culinary traditions.
Many of Vietnam's most famous dishes, such as phở, chả cá, bánh cuốn and cốm are believed to have originated in Hanoi.
Perhaps most widely known is Phở-a simple rice noodle soup often eaten as breakfast at home or at street-side cafes, but also served in restaurants as a meal.
Two varieties dominate the Hanoi scene: Phở Bò, containing beef and Phở Gà, containing chicken.
Bún chả, a dish consisting of charcoal roasted pork served in a sweet/salty soup with rice noodle vermicelli and lettuce, is by far the most popular food item among locals.
President Obama famously tried this dish at a Le Van Huu eatery with Anthony Bourdain in 2016, prompting the opening of a Bún chả restaurant bearing his name in the Old Quarter.
Vietnam's national dish phở has been named as one of the Top 5 street foods in the world by globalpost.
Hanoi has a number of restaurants whose menus specifically offer dishes containing snake and various species of insects.
Insect-inspired menus can be found at a number of restaurants in Khuong Thuong village, Hanoi.
The signature dishes at these restaurant are those containing processed ant-eggs, often in the culinary styles of Thai people or Vietnam's Muong and Tay ethnic people.
Dog eating used to be popular in Hanoi in 1990s and early 2000s but is now dying out quickly due to strong objections.
Education
Hanoi, as the capital of French Indochina, was home to the first Western-style universities in Indochina, including: Indochina Medical College (1902) - now Hanoi Medical University, Indochina University (1904) - now Hanoi National University (the largest), and École Supérieure des Beaux-Arts de l'Indochine (1925) - now Hanoi University of Fine Art.
After the Communist Party of Vietnam took control of Hanoi in 1954, many new universities were built, among them, Hanoi University of Science and Technology, still the largest technical university in Vietnam.
Recently ULIS (University of Languages and International Studies) was rated as one of the top universities in south-east Asia for languages and language studies at the undergraduate level.
Other universities that are not part of Vietnam National University or Hanoi University include Hanoi School for Public Health, Hanoi School of Agriculture, Electric Power University and University of Transport and Communications.
Hanoi is the largest center of education in Vietnam.
It is estimated that 62% of the scientists in the whole country are living and working in Hanoi.
Admissions to undergraduate study are through entrance examinations, which are conducted annually and open to everyone (who has successfully completed his/her secondary education) in the country.
The majority of universities in Hanoi are public, although in recent years a number of private universities have begun operation.
Thăng Long University, founded in 1988, by Vietnamese mathematics professors in Hanoi and France was the first private university in Vietnam.
Because many of Vietnam's major universities are located in Hanoi, students from other provinces wishing to enter university often travel to Hanoi for the annual entrance examination.
Such events usually take place in June and July, during which a large number of students and their families converge on the city for several weeks around the intense examination period.
In recent years, these entrance exams have been centrally coordinated by the Ministry of Education, but entrance requirements are decided independently by each university.
Although there are state owned kindergartens, there are also many private ventures that serve both local and international needs.
Pre-tertiary (elementary and secondary) schools in Hanoi are generally state run, but there are also some independent schools.
Education is equivalent to the K-12 system in the U.S., with elementary school between grades 1 and 5, middle school (or junior high) between grades 6 and 9, and high school from grades 10 to 12.
Education levels are much higher within the city of Hanoi in comparison to the suburban areas outside the city.
About 33.8% of the labor force in the city has completed secondary school in contrast to 19.4% in the suburbs.
According to Hanoi government publications, the national system of education was reformed in 1950, 1956 and 1970.
The Reunification Express between Hanoi and Ho Chi Minh City covers a distance of and takes approximately 33 hours.
As of 2005, there were 278 stations on the Vietnamese railway network, of which 191 were located along the North-South line.
The main means of transport within Hanoi city are motorbikes, buses, taxis, and a rising number of cars.
In recent decades, motorbikes have overtaken bicycles as the main form of transportation.
Cars however are probably the most notable change in the past five years as many Vietnamese people purchase the vehicles for the first time.
The increased number of cars are the main cause gridlock as roads and infrastructure in the older parts of Hanoi were not designed to accommodate them.
On 4 July 2017, the Hanoi government voted to ban motorbikes entirely by 2030, in order to reduce pollution, congestion, and encourage the expansion and use of public transport.
There are two metro lines under construction in Hanoi now, as part of the master plan for the future Hanoi Metro system.
The first line is expected to be operational later this year, and the second in 2022.
Persons on their own or traveling in a pair who wish to make a fast trip around Hanoi to avoid traffic jams or to travel at an irregular time or by way of an irregular route often use "xe ôm" (literally, "hug bike").
Motorbikes can also be rented from agents within the Old Quarter of Hanoi, although this falls inside a rather grey legal area.
Sports
There are several gymnasiums and stadiums throughout the city of Hanoi.
The biggest ones are Mỹ Đình National Stadium (Lê Đức Thọ Boulevard), Quan Ngua Sporting Palace (Văn Cao Avenue), Hanoi Aquatics Sports Complex and Hanoi Indoor Games Gymnasium.
The others include Hàng Đẫy Stadium.
The third Asian Indoor Games were held in Hanoi in 2009.
The others are Hai Bà Trưng Gymnasium, Trịnh Hoài Đức Gymnasium, Vạn Bảo Sports Complex.
On 6 November 2018, it was announced that in 2020, Hanoi would become the host of the first FIA Formula 1 Vietnamese Grand Prix on a street circuit on the outskirts of the city.
Hanoi has two basketball teams that compete in the Vietnam Basketball Association (VBA), the Hanoi Buffaloes and Thang Long Warriors.
Health care and other facilities
Some medical facilities in Hanoi:
City for Peace
On 16 July 1999, the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) presented the title "City for Peace" to Hanoi because the city met the following criteria:
Exemplary action against exclusion and in support of the dialogue between communities; Exemplary urban action; Exemplary environmental action; Exemplary action to promote culture; Exemplary action in the field of education and especially civic education.
Hanoi is the only city in Asia-Pacific that was granted this title.
International relations
Hanoi is a member of the Asian Network of Major Cities 21 and the C40 Cities Climate Leadership Group.
Twin towns and sister cities
Hanoi is twinned with:
Image gallery
File:Pen Tower in Hanoi.jpg|Tháp Bút (Pen Tower) with a phrase "Tả thanh thiên" (meaning "Write on the sky") next to Hoàn Kiếm Lake (2007)
File:Cau The Huc (Pont du soleil levant).jpg|Thê Húc Bridge on Hoàn Kiếm Lake
File:Presidential Palace Hanoi 388606781 40a24f0ceb.jpg|Presidential Palace, Hanoi (formerly Place of The Governor-General of French Indochina)
File:Hanoi_opera_house._Made_as_a_copy_of_the_Opera_Garnier_in_Paris_ (22334215449).jpg|Hanoi Opera House modeled on the Palais Garnier in Paris
File:Bâtiments_172.jpg|Museum of Vietnamese History in Hanoi, formerly the first École française d'Extrême-Orient
File:Bacbophu.jpg|State Guest House
File:St. Joseph's Cathedral - Hanoi, Vietnam.jpg|The St-Joseph Cathedral
File:bao tang my thuat.jpg|National Museum of Fine Art
File:Nha-quoc-hoi.jpg|National Assembly building
File:Vietnam_national_convention_center.jpg|Vietnam National Convention Center
File:Lotte_Center_Hanoi_2.jpg|Lotte Center Hanoi in western Ba Đình
File:LANDMARK72_night.jpg|AON Landmark 72 in Nam Từ Liêm
Bibliography
* Forbes, Andrew, and Henley, David: Vietnam Past and Present: The North (History and culture of Hanoi and Tonkin).
Chiang Mai.
Cognoscenti Books, 2012.
ASIN:
B006DCCM9Q.
