The Bahamas (), known officially as the Commonwealth of The Bahamas, is a country within the Lucayan Archipelago, in the West Indies.
The archipelagic state consists of more than 700 islands, cays, and islets in the Atlantic Ocean, and is located north of Cuba and Hispaniola Island (Haiti and the Dominican Republic), northwest of the Turks and Caicos Islands, southeast of the U.S. state of Florida, and east of the Florida Keys.
The capital is Nassau on the island of New Providence.
The Royal Bahamas Defence Force describes The Bahamas' territory as encompassing of ocean space.
The Bahamas were inhabited by the Lucayans, a branch of the Arawakan-speaking Taíno people, for many centuries.
Columbus was the first European to see the islands, making his first landfall in the 'New World' in 1492.
Later, the Spanish shipped the native Lucayans to slavery on Hispaniola, after which The Bahama islands were mostly deserted from 1513 until 1648, when English colonists from Bermuda settled on the island of Eleuthera.
The Bahamas became a British crown colony in 1718, when the British clamped down on piracy.
After the American Revolutionary War, the Crown resettled thousands of American Loyalists to the Bahamas; they took their slaves with them and established plantations on land grants.
African slaves and their descendants constituted the majority of the population from this period on.
The slave trade was abolished by the British in 1807; slavery in the Bahamas was abolished in 1834.
Subsequently, the Bahamas became a haven for freed African slaves.
Africans liberated from illegal slave ships were resettled on the islands by the Royal Navy, while some North American slaves and Seminoles escaped to the Bahamas from Florida.
Bahamians were even known to recognize the freedom of slaves carried by the ships of other nations which reached the Bahamas.
Today Afro-Bahamians make up 90% of the population of 332,634.
Etymology
The name Bahamas is most likely derived from either the Taíno ("big upper middle land"), which was a term for the region used by the indigenous people, or possibly from the Spanish ("shallow water or sea" or "low tide") reflecting the shallow waters of the area.
Alternatively, it may originate from , a local name of unclear meaning.
The word The constitutes an integral part of the short form of the name and is, therefore, capitalized.
Soin contrast to "the Congo" and "the United Kingdom"it is proper to write "The Bahamas".
The name The Bahamas is thus comparable with certain non-English names that also use the definite article, such as Las Vegas or Los Angeles.
The Constitution of the Commonwealth of The Bahamas, the country's fundamental law, capitalizes the "T" in "The Bahamas".
History
Pre-colonial era
The first inhabitants of the Bahamas were the Taino people, who moved into the uninhabited southern islands from Hispaniola and Cuba around the 800s-1000s AD, having migrated there from South America; they came to be known as the Lucayan people.
An estimated 30,000 Lucayans inhabited the Bahamas at the time of Christopher Columbus's arrival in 1492.
Arrival of the Spanish
Columbus's first landfall in what was to Europeans a 'New World' was on an island he named San Salvador (known to the Lucayans as Guanahani).
As a result of these depredations the population of the Bahamas was severely diminished.
Arrival of the English
The English had expressed an interest in the Bahamas as early as 1629, and in 1703, a joint Franco-Spanish expedition briefly occupied Nassau during the War of the Spanish Succession.
18th century
During proprietary rule, the Bahamas became a haven for pirates, including Blackbeard (circa 1680-1718).
To put an end to the 'Pirates' republic' and restore orderly government, Great Britain made the Bahamas a crown colony in 1718 under the royal governorship of Woodes Rogers.
In 1720, Rogers led local militia to drive off a Spanish attack during the War of the Quadruple Alliance.
In 1729, a local assembly was established giving a degree of self-governance for the English settlers.
The reforms had been planned by the previous Governor George Phenney and authorised in July 1728.
During the American War of Independence in the late 18th century, the islands became a target for US naval forces under the command of Commodore Esek Hopkins; US Marines occupied Nassau for a brief period in 1776.
and at least 1,033 whites, 2,214 blacks and a few Native American Creeks from East Florida.
Most of the refugees resettled from New York had fled from other colonies, including West Florida, which the Spanish captured during the war.
The government granted land to the planters to help compensate for losses on the continent.
Some of their descendants in Red Bays continue African Seminole traditions in basket making and grave marking.
In 1818, the Home Office in London had ruled that "any slave brought to the Bahamas from outside the British West Indies would be manumitted."
This led to a total of nearly 300 slaves owned by US nationals being freed from 1830 to 1835.
The American slave ships Comet and Encomium used in the United States domestic coastwise slave trade, were wrecked off Abaco Island in December 1830 and February 1834, respectively.
When wreckers took the masters, passengers and slaves into Nassau, customs officers seized the slaves and British colonial officials freed them, over the protests of the Americans.
There were 165 slaves on the Comet and 48 on the Encomium.
The United Kingdom finally paid an indemnity to the United States in those two cases in 1855, under the Treaty of Claims of 1853, which settled several compensation cases between the two countries.
Slavery was abolished in the British Empire on 1 August 1834.
The most notable case was that of the Creole in 1841: as a result of a slave revolt on board, the leaders ordered the US brig to Nassau.
It was carrying 135 slaves from Virginia destined for sale in New Orleans.
The Bahamian officials freed the 128 slaves who chose to stay in the islands.
The Creole case has been described as the "most successful slave revolt in U.S. history".
These incidents, in which a total of 447 slaves belonging to US nationals were freed from 1830 to 1842, increased tension between the United States and the United Kingdom.
They had been co-operating in patrols to suppress the international slave trade.
However, worried about the stability of its large domestic slave trade and its value, the United States argued that the United Kingdom should not treat its domestic ships that came to its colonial ports under duress as part of the international trade.
The United States worried that the success of the Creole slaves in gaining freedom would encourage more slave revolts on merchant ships.
During the American Civil War of the 1860s, the islands briefly prospered as a focus for blockade runners aiding the Confederate States.
Early 20th century
The early decades of the 20th century were ones of hardship for many Bahamians, characterised by a stagnant economy and widespread poverty.
He did not enjoy the position, and referred to the islands as "a third-class British colony".
He opened the small local parliament on 29 October 1940.
The couple visited the "Out Islands" that November, on Axel Wenner-Gren's yacht, which caused controversy; the British Foreign Office strenuously objected because they had been advised by United States intelligence that Wenner-Gren was a close friend of the Luftwaffe commander Hermann Göring of Nazi Germany.
The Duke was praised at the time for his efforts to combat poverty on the islands.
A 1991 biography by Philip Ziegler, however, described him as contemptuous of the Bahamians and other non-European peoples of the Empire.
He was praised for his resolution of civil unrest over low wages in Nassau in June 1942, when there was a "full-scale riot".
Ziegler said that the Duke blamed the trouble on "mischief makers - communists" and "men of Central European Jewish descent, who had secured jobs as a pretext for obtaining a deferment of draft".
The Duke resigned from the post on 16 March 1945.
Post-Second World War
Modern political development began after the Second World War.
The first political parties were formed in the 1950s, split broadly along ethnic lines - the United Bahamian Party (UBP) representing the English-descended Bahamians (known informally as the 'Bay Street Boys'), and the Progressive Liberal Party (PLP) representing the Afro-Bahamian majority.
In 1967, Lynden Pindling of the PLP became the first black Premier of the Bahamian colony; in 1968, the title of the position was changed to Prime Minister.
In 1968, Pindling announced that the Bahamas would seek full independence.
A new constitution giving the Bahamas increased control over its own affairs was adopted in 1968.
In 1971, the UBP merged with a disaffected faction of the PLP to form a new party, the Free National Movement (FNM), a de-racialised, centre-right party which aimed to counter the growing power of Pindling's PLP.
The British House of Lords voted to give the Bahamas its independence on 22 June 1973.
Prince Charles delivered the official documents to Prime Minister Lynden Pindling, officially declaring the Bahamas a fully independent nation on 10 July 1973.
It joined the Commonwealth of Nations on the same day.
Sir Milo Butler was appointed the first governor-general of the Bahamas (the official representative of Queen Elizabeth II) shortly after independence.
Post-independence
Shortly after independence, the Bahamas joined the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank on 22 August 1973, and later the United Nations on 18 September 1973.
Politically, the first two decades were dominated by Pindling's PLP, who went on to win a string of electoral victories.
with 1,300 people still missing.
Geography
The Bahamas consists of a chain of islands spread out over some 500 miles in the Atlantic Ocean, located to the east of Florida in the United States, north of Cuba and Hispaniola and west of the British Overseas Territory of the Turks and Caicos Islands (with which it forms the Lucayan archipelago).
It lies between latitudes 20° and 28°N, and longitudes 72° and 80°W and straddles the Tropic of Cancer.
Nassau, capital city of the Bahamas, lies on the island of New Providence; the other main inhabited islands are Grand Bahama, Eleuthera, Cat Island, Rum Cay, Long Island, San Salvador Island, Ragged Island, Acklins, Crooked Island, Exuma, Berry Islands, Mayaguana, the Bimini islands, Great Abaco and Great Inagua.
The largest island is Andros.
The Bahamas are often sunny and dry for long periods of time, and average more than 3,000 hours or 340 days of sunlight annually.
Tropical storms and hurricanes can on occasion impact the Bahamas.
In 1992, Hurricane Andrew passed over the northern portions of the islands, and Hurricane Floyd passed near the eastern portions of the islands in 1999.
Hurricane Dorian of 2019 passed over the archipelago at destructive Category 5 strength with sustained winds of 185 mph , becoming the strongest tropical cyclone on record to impact the northwestern islands of Grand Bahama and Great Abaco.
Geology
The Bahamas is part of the Lucayan Archipelago, which continues into the Turks and Caicos Islands, the Mouchoir Bank, the Silver Bank, and the Navidad Bank.
Coral growth was greater through the Tertiary, until the start of the Ice Ages, and hence those deposits are more abundant below a depth of 36 m. In fact, an ancient extinct reef exists half a km seaward of the present one, 30 m below sea level.
Oolites form when oceanic water penetrate the shallow banks, increasing the temperature about 3 °C and the salinity by 0.5 per cent.
Cemented ooids are referred to as grapestone.
Additionally, giant stromatolites are found off the Exuma Cays.
Government and politics
The Bahamas is a parliamentary constitutional monarchy, with the queen of the Bahamas (Elizabeth II) as head of state represented locally by a governor-general.
Constitutional safeguards include freedom of speech, press, worship, movement and association.
The Judiciary of the Bahamas is independent of the executive and the legislature.
Jurisprudence is based on English law.
Each councillor or town committee member is responsible for the proper use of public funds for the maintenance and development of their constituency.
The districts other than New Providence are:
National flag
The Bahamian flag was adopted in 1973.
Its colours symbolise the strength of the Bahamian people; its design reflects aspects of the natural environment (sun and sea) and economic and social development.
"Forward, Upward, Onward Together."
National flower
The yellow elder was chosen as the national flower of the Bahamas because it is native to the Bahama islands, and it blooms throughout the year.
Selection of the yellow elder over many other flowers was made through the combined popular vote of members of all four of New Providence's garden clubs of the 1970s-the Nassau Garden Club, the Carver Garden Club, the International Garden Club and the YWCA Garden Club.
They reasoned that other flowers grown there-such as the bougainvillea, hibiscus and poinciana-had already been chosen as the national flowers of other countries.
The yellow elder, on the other hand, was unclaimed by other countries (although it is now also the national flower of the United States Virgin Islands) and also the yellow elder is native to the family islands.
Economy
By the terms of GDP per capita, the Bahamas is one of the richest countries in the that the Bahamas is the jurisdiction with the most offshore entities or companies.
Tourism
The Bahamas relies heavily on tourism to generate most of its economic activity.
Tourism as an industry not only accounts for about 50% of the Bahamian GDP, but also provides jobs for about half of the country's workforce.
The Bahamas attracted 5.8 million visitors in 2012, more than 70% of whom were cruise visitors.
Financial services
After tourism, the next most important economic sector is banking and offshore international financial services, accounting for some 15% of GDP.
In 2010, overall tax revenue as a percentage of GDP was 17.2%.
Agriculture and manufacturing
Agriculture and manufacturing form the third largest sector of the Bahamian economy, representing 5-7% of total GDP.
The infant mortality rate is 23.21 deaths/1,000 live births.
Residents have a life expectancy at birth of 69.87 years: 73.49 years for females, 66.32 years for males.
The total fertility rate is 2.0 children born/woman (2010).
and Grand Bahama, home to the second largest city of Freeport.
Racial and ethnic groups
According to the 99% response rate obtained from the race question on the 2010 Census questionnaire, 90.6% of the population identified themselves as being Black, 4.7% White and 2.1% of a mixed race (African and European).
Three centuries prior, in 1722 when the first official census of the Bahamas was taken, 74% of the population was native European and 26% native African.
The white Bahamian population are mainly the descendants of the English Puritans and American Loyalists escaping the American Revolution who arrived in 1649 and 1783, respectively.
Many Southern Loyalists went to the Abaco Islands, half of whose population was of European descent as of 1985.
The term white is usually used to identify Bahamians with Anglo ancestry, as well as "light-skinned" Afro-Bahamians.
Sometimes Bahamians use the term Conchy Joe to describe people of Anglo descent.
A small portion of the Euro-Bahamian population are Greek Bahamians, descended from Greek labourers who came to help develop the sponging industry in the 1900s.
They make up less than 2% of the nation's population, but have still preserved their distinct Greek Bahamian culture.
Bahamians typically identify themselves simply as either black or white.
There are also smaller communities of Jews, Muslims, Baha'is, Hindus, Rastafarians and practitioners of traditional African religions such as Obeah.
Languages
The official language of the Bahamas is English.
Many people speak an English-based creole language called Bahamian dialect (known simply as "dialect") or "Bahamianese".
Laurente Gibbs, a Bahamian writer and actor, was the first to coin the latter name in a poem and has since promoted its usage.
Both are used as https:/ wiki/autoglossonym autoglossonyms.
Haitian Creole, a French-based creole language is spoken by Haitians and their descendants, who make up of about 25% of the total population.
It is known simply as Creole
Culture
The culture of the islands is a mixture of African (Afro-Bahamians being the largest ethnicity), British (as the former colonial power) and American (as the dominant country in the region and source of most tourists).
The practice of obeah is illegal in the Bahamas and punishable by law.
In the less developed outer islands (or Family Islands), handicrafts include basketry made from palm fronds.
This material, commonly called "straw", is plaited into hats and bags that are popular tourist items.
Another use is for so-called "Voodoo dolls", even though such dolls are the result of foreign influences and not based in historic fact.
Junkanoo is a traditional Afro-Bahamian street parade of 'rushing', music, dance and art held in Nassau (and a few other settlements) every Boxing Day and New Year's Day.
Junkanoo is also used to celebrate other holidays and events such as Emancipation Day.
Bahamas culture is rich with beliefs, traditions, folklore and legend.
The best-known folklore and legends in the Bahamas include the lusca and chickcharney creatures of Andros, Pretty Molly on Exuma Bahamas and the Lost City of Atlantis on Bimini Bahamas.
Sport
Sport is a significant part of Bahamian culture.
The national sport is cricket.
Cricket has been played in the Bahamas from 1846, the oldest sport being played in the country today.
The Bahamas Cricket Association was formed in 1936, and from the 1940s to the 1970s, cricket was played amongst many Bahamians.
Bahamas is not a part of the West Indies Cricket Board, so players are not eligible to play for the West Indies cricket team.
The late 1970s saw the game begin to decline in the country as teachers, who had previously come from the United Kingdom with a passion for cricket, were replaced by teachers who had been trained in the United States.
The Bahamian physical education teachers had no knowledge of the game and instead taught track and field, basketball, baseball, .
Cricket is played on Saturdays and Sundays at Windsor Park and Haynes Oval.
The only other sporting event that began before cricket was horse racing, which started in 1796.
The most popular spectator sports are those imported from the United States, such as basketball, American football, and baseball, rather than from the British Isles, due to the country's close proximity to the United States, unlike their other Caribbean counterparts, where cricket, rugby, and netball have proven to be more popular.
Dexter Cambridge, Rick Fox, Ian Lockhart, Magnum Rolle, Buddy Hield and Deandre Ayton are a few Bahamians who joined Bahamian Mychal Thompson of the Los Angeles Lakers in the NBA ranks.
Over the years American football has become much more popular than soccer, though not implemented in the high school system yet.
Leagues for teens and adults have been developed by the Bahamas American Football Federation.
However soccer, as it is commonly known in the country, is still a very popular sport amongst high school pupils.
Leagues are governed by the Bahamas Football Association.
Recently, the Bahamian government has been working closely with Tottenham Hotspur of London to promote the sport in the country as well as promoting the Bahamas in the European market.
In 2013, 'Spurs' became the first Premier League club to play an exhibition match in the Bahamas, facing the Jamaican national team.
Joe Lewis, the owner of the club, is based in the Bahamas.
Other popular sports are swimming, due to their success over the years.
Triathlons are gaining popularity in Nassau and the Family Islands.
Bahamians have gone on to win numerous track and field medals at the Olympic Games, IAAF World Championships in Athletics, Commonwealth Games and Pan American Games.
Frank Rutherford is the first athletics olympic medallist for the country.
He won a bronze medal for triple jump during the 1992 Summer Olympics.
Pauline Davis-Thompson, Debbie Ferguson, Chandra Sturrup, Savatheda Fynes and Eldece Clarke-Lewis teamed up for the first athletics Olympic Gold medal for the country when they won the 4 × 100 m relay at the 2000 Summer Olympics.
They are affectionately known as the "Golden Girls".
Tonique Williams-Darling became the first athletics individual Olympic gold medallist when she won the 400m sprint in 2004 Summer Olympics.
In 2007, with the disqualification of Marion Jones, Pauline Davis-Thompson was advanced to the gold medal position in the 200 metres at the 2000 Olympics, predating William-Darling.
The Bahamas were hosts of the first men's senior FIFA tournament to be staged in the Caribbean, the 2017 FIFA Beach Soccer World Cup.
The Bahamas also hosted the first 3 editions of the IAAF World Relays.
Education
According to 1995 estimates, 98.2% of the Bahamian adult population are literate.
The University of the Bahamas (UB) is the national higher education/tertiary system.
Offering baccalaureate, masters and associate degrees, UB has three campuses, and teaching and research centres throughout the Bahamas.
The University of the Bahamas was chartered on 10 November 2016.
Transport
The Bahamas contains about of paved roads.
Inter-island transport is conducted primarily via ship and air.
The country has 61 airports, the chief of which are Lynden Pindling International Airport on New Providence, Grand Bahama International Airport on Grand Bahama Island and Leonard M. Thompson International Airport (formerly Marsh Harbour Airport) on Abaco Island.
Sources
Further reading
General history
* Cash Philip et al.
(Don Maples, Alison Packer).
The Making of The Bahamas: A History for Schools.
London: Collins, 1978.
* Miller, Hubert W.
The Colonization of The Bahamas, 1647-1670, The William and Mary Quarterly 2 no.1 (January 1945): 33-46.
* Craton, Michael.
A History of The Bahamas.
London: Collins, 1962.
* Craton, Michael and Saunders, Gail.
Islanders in the Stream: A History of the Bahamian People.
Athens: University of Georgia Press, 1992
* Collinwood, Dean.
"Columbus and the Discovery of Self," Weber Studies, Vol. 9 No. 3 (Fall) 1992: 29-44.
* Dodge, Steve.
Abaco:
The History of an Out Island and its Cays, Tropic Isle Publications, 1983.
* Dodge, Steve.
The Compleat Guide to Nassau, White Sound Press, 1987.
* Boultbee, Paul G. The Bahamas.
Oxford: ABC-Clio Press, 1990.
* Wood, David E., comp., A Guide to Selected Sources to the History of the Seminole Settlements of Red Bays, Andros, 1817-1980, Nassau: Department of Archives
Economic history
* Johnson, Howard.
The Bahamas in Slavery and Freedom.
Kingston: Ian Randle Publishing, 1991.
* Johnson, Howard.
The Bahamas from Slavery to Servitude, 1783-1933.
Gainesville: University of Florida Press, 1996.
* Alan A. Block.
Masters of Paradise, New Brunswick and London, Transaction Publishers, 1998.
* Storr, Virgil H. Enterprising Slaves and Master Pirates: Understanding Economic Life in the Bahamas.
New York: Peter Lang, 2004.
Social history
* Johnson, Wittington B. Race Relations in the Bahamas, 1784-1834:
The Nonviolent Transformation from a Slave to a Free Society, Fayetteville: University of Arkansas, 2000.
* Shirley, Paul.
"Tek Force Wid Force", History Today 54, no. 41 (April 2004): 30-35.
Saunders, Gail.
The Social Life in the Bahamas 1880s-1920s.
Nassau: Media Publishing, 1996.
Saunders, Gail.
Bahamas Society After Emancipation.
Kingston: Ian Randle Publishing, 1990.
* Curry, Jimmy.
Filthy Rich Gangster First Bahamian Rap/Hip Hop Song.
Royal Crown Records, 1985.
* Collinwood, Dean.
The Bahamas Between Worlds, White Sound Press, 1989.
* Collinwood, Dean and Steve Dodge.
Modern Bahamian Society, Caribbean Books, 1989.
* Dodge, Steve, Robert McIntire and Dean Collinwood.
The Bahamas Index, White Sound Press, 1989.
* Collinwood, Dean.
"The Bahamas," in The Whole World Handbook 1992-1995, 12th ed., New York: St. Martin's Press, 1994.
* Collinwood, Dean.
"The Bahamas," chapters in Jack W. Hopkins, ed., Latin American and Caribbean Contemporary Record, Vols.
1,2,3,4, Holmes and Meier Publishers, 1983, 1984, 1985, 1986.
* Collinwood, Dean.
"Problems of Research and Training in Small Islands with a Social Science Faculty," in Social Science in Latin America and the Caribbean, UNESCO, No. 48, 1982.
* Collinwood, Dean and Rick Phillips, "The National Literature of the New Bahamas," Weber Studies, Vol.7, No. 1 (Spring) 1990: 43-62.
* Collinwood, Dean.
"Writers, Social Scientists and Sexual Norms in the Caribbean," Tsuda Review, No. 31 (November) 1986: 45-57.
* Collinwood, Dean.
"Terra Incognita: Research on the Modern Bahamian Society," Journal of Caribbean Studies,Vol. 1, Nos.
2-3 (Winter) 1981: 284-297.
* Collinwood, Dean and Steve Dodge.
"Political Leadership in the Bahamas," The Bahamas Research Institute, No.1, May 1987.
