The Assumption of Mary into Heaven (often shortened to the Assumption) is, according to the beliefs of the Catholic Church, Eastern and Oriental Orthodoxy, the bodily taking up of the Virgin Mary into Heaven at the end of her earthly life.
In the churches that observe it, the Assumption is a major feast day, commonly celebrated on 15 August.
In many countries, the feast is also marked as a Holy Day of Obligation in the Roman Catholic Church.
The Catholic Church teaches as dogma that the Virgin Mary "having completed the course of her earthly life, was assumed body and soul into heavenly glory".
This doctrine was dogmatically defined by Pope Pius XII on 1 November 1950, in the apostolic constitution Munificentissimus Deus by exercising papal infallibility.
While the Catholic Church and Eastern Orthodox Church believe in the Dormition of the Mother of God (Dormition of the Theotokos or "the Falling Asleep of the Mother of God"), whether Mary had a physical death has not been dogmatically defined.
In Munificentissimus Deus (item 39) Pope Pius XII pointed to the Book of Genesis .
The Catholic Church itself interprets of the Book of Revelation as referring to it.
The earliest known narrative is the so-called Liber Requiei Mariae (The Book of Mary's Repose), which survives intact only in an Ethiopic translation.
Probably composed by the 4th century, this Christian apocryphal narrative may be as early as the 3rd century.
Also quite early are the very different traditions of the "Six Books" Dormition narratives.
The earliest versions of this apocryphon are preserved in several Syriac manuscripts of the 5th and 6th centuries, although the text itself probably belongs to the 4th century.
Later apocrypha based on these earlier texts include the De Obitu S. Dominae, attributed to St. John, a work probably from around the turn of the 6th century that is a summary of the "Six Books" narrative.
The story also appears in De Transitu Virginis, a late 5th-century work ascribed to St. Melito of Sardis that presents a theologically redacted summary of the traditions in the Liber Requiei Mariae.
The Transitus Mariae tells the story of the apostles being transported by white clouds to the deathbed of Mary, each from the town where he was preaching at the hour.
The Decretum Gelasianum in the 490s declared some transitus Mariae literature apocryphal.
An Armenian letter attributed to Dionysus the Areopagite also mentioned the supposed event, although this was written sometime after the 6th century.
John of Damascus, from this period, is the first church authority to advocate the doctrine under his own name.
His contemporaries, Gregory of Tours and Modestus of Jerusalem, helped promote the concept to the wider church.
In some versions of the story, the event is said to have taken place in Ephesus, in the House of the Virgin Mary.
This is a much more recent and localized tradition.
The earliest traditions say that Mary's life ended in Jerusalem (see "Mary's Tomb").
By the 7th century, a variation emerged, according to which one of the apostles, often identified as St Thomas, was not present at the death of Mary but his late arrival precipitates a reopening of Mary's tomb, which is found to be empty except for her grave clothes.
In a later tradition, Mary drops her girdle down to the apostle from heaven as testament to the event.
This incident is depicted in many later paintings of the Assumption.
Teaching of the Assumption of Mary became widespread across the Christian world, having been celebrated as early as the 5th century and having been established in the East by Emperor Maurice around AD 600.
St. John Damascene records the following:
QTEMPLATE |St.
Juvenal, Bishop of Jerusalem, at the Council of Chalcedon (451), made known to the Emperor Marcian and Pulcheria, who wished to possess the body of the Mother of God, that Mary died in the presence of all the Apostles, but that her tomb, when opened upon the request of St. Thomas, was found empty; wherefrom the Apostles concluded that the body was taken up to heaven.
The Assumption of Mary was celebrated in the West under Pope Sergius
I in the 8th century and Pope Leo IV confirmed the feast as official.
Catholic theologian Ludwig Ott stated, "The idea of the bodily assumption of Mary is first expressed in certain transitus-narratives of the fifth and sixth centuries. ...
The first Church author to speak of the bodily assumption of Mary, in association with an apocryphal transitus of the B.M.V., is St. Gregory of Tours."
The Catholic writer Eamon Duffy states that "there is, clearly, no historical evidence whatever for it."
However, the Catholic Church has never asserted nor denied that its teaching is based on the apocryphal accounts.
The Church documents are silent on this matter and instead rely upon other sources and arguments as the basis for the doctrine.
Psychologist Carl Jung, who was deeply interested in archetypes and comparative religion, celebrated that the Catholic Church had officially elevated the Virgin Mary (whom he noted as symbolizing the feminine principle) to standing with three masculine figures in the panoply of the church.
Catholic teaching
Dogmatic definition
On 1 November 1950, in the Apostolic Constitution Munificentissimus Deus Pope Pius XII declared the Assumption of Mary as a dogma:
QTEMPLATE |By the authority of our Lord Jesus Christ, of the Blessed Apostles Peter and Paul, and by our own authority, we pronounce, declare, and define it to be a divinely revealed dogma: that the Immaculate Mother of God, the ever Virgin Mary, having completed the course of her earthly life, was assumed body and soul into heavenly glory.
Pope Pius XII deliberately left open the question of whether Mary died before her Assumption.
Before the dogmatic definition, in Deiparae Virginis Mariae Pope Pius XII sought the opinion of Catholic Bishops.
A large number of them pointed to the Book of Genesis on the same date, preceded by a 14-day fast period.
Eastern Christians believe that Mary died a natural death, that her soul was received by Christ upon death, and that her body was resurrected on the third day after her death and that she was taken up into heaven bodily in anticipation of the general resurrection.
QTEMPLATE |Orthodox tradition is clear and unwavering in regard to the central point of the Dormition: the Holy Virgin underwent, as did her Son, a physical death, but her body - like His - was afterwards raised from the dead
and she was taken up into heaven, in her body as well as in her soul.
She has passed beyond death and judgement, and lives wholly in the Age to Come.
The Resurrection of the Body ... has in her case been anticipated and is already an accomplished fact.
That does not mean, however, that she is dissociated from the rest of humanity and placed in a wholly different category: for we all hope to share one day in that same glory of the Resurrection of the Body which she enjoys even now.
Protestant views
Views differ within Protestantism, with those with a theology closer to Catholicism sometimes believing in a bodily assumption, while most Protestants do not.
Anglican views
Within Anglican doctrine, the Assumption of Mary is either rejected, or regarded as adiaphora ("a thing indifferent"); it therefore disappeared from Anglican worship in 1549, partially returning in some branches of Anglicanism during the 20th century under different names.
A Marian feast on 15 August is celebrated by the Church of England as a non-specific feast of the Blessed Virgin Mary, a feast called by the Scottish Episcopal Church simply "Mary the Virgin", and in the US-based Episcopal Church it is observed as the feast of "Saint Mary the Virgin: Mother of Our Lord Jesus Christ",
while other Anglican provinces have a feast of the Dormition
The Anglican-Roman Catholic International Commission, which seeks to identify common ground between the two communions, released in 2004 an non-authoritative declaration meant for study and evaluation, the "Seattle Statement"; this "agreed statement" concludes that "the teaching about Mary in the two definitions of the Assumption and the Immaculate Conception, understood within the biblical pattern of the economy of hope and grace, can be said to be consonant with the teaching of the Scriptures and the ancient common traditions".
Other Protestant views
The Protestant Reformer Heinrich Bullinger believed in the assumption of Mary.
His 1539 polemical treatise against idolatry expressed his belief that Mary's sacrosanctum corpus ("sacrosanct body") had been assumed into heaven by angels:
QTEMPLATE |Hac causa credimus ut Deiparae virginis
Mariae purissimum thalamum et spiritus sancti templum, hoc est, sacrosanctum corpus ejus deportatum esse ab angelis in coelum.
For this reason, we believe that the Virgin Mary, Begetter of God, the most pure bed and temple of the Holy Spirit, that is, her most holy body, was carried to heaven by angels.
Most modern Protestants neither teach nor believe in the Assumption of Mary, as they see no biblical basis or extra-biblical basis for it.
Although many churches within Lutheranism do not teach the Assumption of Mary, 15 August remains a Lesser Feast in celebration of "Mary, Mother of Our Lord", according to the Calendar of Saints.
Feasts
The Assumption is important to many Catholic and Orthodox Christians as the Virgin Mary's heavenly birthday (the day that Mary was received into Heaven).
Belief about her acceptance into the glory of Heaven is seen by some Christians as the symbol of the promise made by Jesus to all enduring Christians that they too will be received into paradise.
The Assumption of Mary is symbolised in the Fleur-de-lys Madonna.
The present Italian name of the holiday, "Ferragosto", may derive from the Latin name, Feriae Augusti ("Holidays of the Emperor Augustus"), since the month of August took its name from the emperor.
The Solemnity of the Assumption on 15 August was celebrated in the eastern Church from the 6th Century.
The Catholic Church adopted this date as a Holy Day of Obligation to commemorate the Assumption of the Blessed Virgin Mary, a reference to the belief in a real, physical elevation of her sinless soul and incorrupt body into Heaven.
Public holidays
Assumption Day on 15 August is a nationwide public holiday in Andorra, Austria, Belgium, Burundi, Cameroon, Central African Republic, Chile, Republic of Congo, Côte d'Ivoire, Croatia, Colombia, Costa Rica, Cyprus, East Timor, France, Gabon, Greece, Georgia, Republic of Guinea, Haiti, Italy, Lebanon, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Republic of North Macedonia, Madagascar, Malta, Mauritius, Republic of Moldova, Monaco, Montenegro (Albanian Catholics), Paraguay, Poland (Polish Army Day), Portugal, Romania, Rwanda, Senegal, Seychelles, Slovenia, Spain, Syria, Tahiti, Togo, and Vanuatu; and was also in Hungary until 1948.
It is also a public holiday in parts of Germany and Switzerland (in 14 of the 26 cantons).
In Guatemala, it is observed in Guatemala City and in the town of Santa Maria Nebaj, both of which claim her as their patron saint.
Also, this day is combined with Mother's Day in Costa Rica and parts of Belgium.
Prominent Catholic and Orthodox countries in which Assumption Day is an important festival but is not recognized by the state as a public holiday include the Czech Republic, Ireland, Mexico, the Philippines and Russia.
In Bulgaria, the Feast of the Assumption is the biggest Orthodox Christian celebration of the Holy Virgin.
Celebrations include liturgies and votive offerings.
In Varna, the day is celebrated with a procession of a holy icon, and with concerts and regattas.
In many places, religious parades and popular festivals are held to celebrate this day.
In Canada, Assumption Day is the Fête Nationale of the Acadians, of whom she is the patron saint.
Some businesses close on that day in heavily francophone parts of New Brunswick, Canada.
The Virgin Assumed in Heaven is also patroness of the Maltese Islands and her feast, celebrated on 15 August, apart from being a public holiday in Malta is also celebrated with great solemnity in the local churches especially in the seven localities known as the Seba' Santa Marijiet.
The Maltese localities which celebrate the Assumption of Our Lady are: Il-Mosta, Il-Qrendi, Ħal-Kirkop, Il-Gudja, Ħ' Attard, L-Imqabba and Victoria.
The hamlet of Praha, Texas holds a festival during which its population swells from approximately 25 to 5,000 people.
In Anglicanism and Lutheranism, the feast is now often kept, but without official use of the word "Assumption".
In Eastern Orthodox churches following the Julian Calendar, the feast day of Assumption of Mary falls on 28 August.
Bibliography
* Shoemaker, Stephen J. (2002, 2006).
https:/ web http:/ uk ?ci=9780199210749
Ancient Traditions of the Virgin Mary's Dormition and Assumption.
Oxford University Press, Oxford.
(Hardcover 2004, Reprint), (Paperback 2006)
* Williams, Paul (2007).
The English Reformers and the Blessed Virgin Mary.
In Boss, Sarah Jane (editor): Mary: The Complete Resource.
Oxford University Press, https:/ books?id
-KGvAwAAQBAJ&pg
PA238 pp. 238-55, , accessed 17 July 2018
Further reading
* Duggan, Paul E. (1989).
The Assumption Dogma: Some Reactions and Ecumenical Implications in the Thought of English-speaking Theologians.
Emerson Press, Cleveland, Ohio.
* Mimouni, Simon Claude (1995).
Dormition et assomption de Marie: Histoire des traditions anciennes.
Beauchesne, Paris.
