Arnold Alois Schwarzenegger (; ; born July 30, 1947) is an Austrian-American politician, actor, filmmaker, businessman, author, and former professional bodybuilder.
He served as the 38th Governor of California from 2003 to 2011.
As of 2019, he is the most recent Republican governor of California.
Schwarzenegger began lifting weights at the age of 15.
He won the Mr. Universe title at age 20 and went on to win the Mr. Olympia contest seven times, remaining a prominent presence in bodybuilding and writing many books and articles on the sport.
The Arnold Sports Festival, considered the second most important professional bodybuilding event in recent years, is named after him.
He is widely considered to be one of the greatest bodybuilders of all time, as well as the sport's most charismatic ambassador.
Schwarzenegger gained worldwide fame as a Hollywood action film icon.
His breakthrough film was the sword-and-sorcery epic Conan the Barbarian in 1982, a box-office hit that resulted in a sequel.
and (1994).
Schwarzenegger married Maria Shriver, a niece of the 35th U.S. President John F. Kennedy and daughter of the 1972 Democratic vice presidential candidate and former Ambassador to France Sargent Shriver, in 1986.
They separated in 2011 after he admitted to having fathered a child with another woman in 1997; the divorce was finalized in 2017.
As a Republican, Schwarzenegger was first elected on October 7, 2003, in a special recall election to replace then-Governor Gray Davis.
He was sworn in on November 17, to serve the remainder of Davis' term.
He was then re-elected in the 2006 California gubernatorial election, to serve a full term as governor.
In 2011, he completed his second term as governor and returned to acting.
Schwarzenegger was nicknamed "the Austrian Oak" in his bodybuilding days, "Arnie" or "Schwarzy" during his acting career, "The Governator" (a portmanteau of "Governor" and "Terminator") during his political career, and is commonly known in Japan as "Shuwa-chan" (シュワちゃん).
Early life
Arnold Alois Schwarzenegger was born on July 30, 1947 in Thal, Styria to Aurelia (née Jadrny; 1922-1998) and Gustav Schwarzenegger (1907-1972).
His father was the local chief of police and had served in World War II as a Hauptfeldwebel after voluntarily joining the Nazi Party in 1938.
He was wounded in the Battle of Stalingrad, but was discharged in 1943 following a bout of malaria.
and she was 23.
According to Arnold Schwarzenegger, his parents were very strict: "Back then in Austria it was a very different world ...
if we did something bad or we disobeyed our parents, |accessdate
August 20, 2012 |location
New York
Gustav had a preference for his elder son, Meinhard, over Arnold.
His favoritism was "strong and blatant", which stemmed from unfounded suspicion that Arnold was not his biological child.
Schwarzenegger has said that his father had "no patience for listening or understanding your problems."
In later life, he commissioned the Simon Wiesenthal Center to research his father's wartime record, which came up with no evidence of Gustav being involved in atrocities, despite his membership in the Nazi Party and Sturmabteilung (SA).
At school, Schwarzenegger was reportedly academically average, but stood out for his "cheerful, good-humored, and exuberant" character.
He later said, "I actually started weight training when I was 15, but I'd been participating in sports, like soccer, for years, so I felt that although I was slim, I was well-developed, at least enough so that I could start going to the gym and start olympic lifting."
During a speech in 2001, he said, "My own plan formed when I was 14 years old.
My father had wanted me to be a police officer like he was.
My mother wanted me to go to trade school."
Schwarzenegger took to visiting a gym in Graz, where he also frequented the local movie theaters to see bodybuilding idols such as Reg Park, Steve Reeves, and Johnny Weissmuller on the big screen.
Schwarzenegger's brother, Meinhard, died in a car crash on May 20, 1971.
However, Barbara Baker, his first serious girlfriend, recalled that he informed her of his father's death without emotion and that he never spoke of his brother.
Over time, he has given at least three versions of why he was absent from his father's funeral.
Living with the Bennetts also changed him as a person: "Being with them made me so much more sophisticated.
When you're the age I was then, you're always looking for approval, for love, for attention and also for guidance.
At the time, I wasn't really aware of that.
But now, looking back, I see that the Bennett family fulfilled all those needs.
Especially my need to be the best in the world.
To be recognized and to feel unique and special.
They saw that I needed that care and attention and love."
Also in 1966, while at Bennett's home, Schwarzenegger had the opportunity to meet childhood idol Reg Park, who became his friend and mentor.
The training paid off and, in 1967, Schwarzenegger won the title for the first time, becoming the youngest ever Mr. Universe at the age of 20.
Schwarzenegger, who dreamed of moving to the U.S. since the age of 10, and saw bodybuilding as the avenue through which to do so, realized his dream by moving to the United States in October 1968 at the age of 21, speaking little English.
Schwarzenegger also became good friends with professional wrestler Superstar Billy Graham.
In 1970, at age 23, he captured his first Mr. Olympia title in New York, and would go on to win the title a total of seven times.
LA Weekly would later say in 2002 that Schwarzenegger is the most famous immigrant in America, who "overcame a thick Austrian accent and transcended the unlikely background of bodybuilding to become the biggest movie star in the world in the 1990s".
Due to taking an assortment of courses at Santa Monica College in California (including English classes), well as further upper division classes at the University of California, Los Angeles as part of UCLA's extension program, Schwarzenegger had by then accumulated enough credits so as to be "within striking distance" of graduation.
In 1979 he enrolled in the University of Wisconsin-Superior as a distance education student, completing most of his coursework by correspondence and flying out to Superior in order to meet professors and take final exams.
In May 1980, he formally graduated and received his bachelor's degree in business administration and marketing.
He got his United States citizenship in 1983.
Schwarzenegger said that during this time he encountered a friend who told him he was teaching Transcendental Meditation (TM), which prompted Schwarzenegger to reveal that he had been struggling with anxiety for the first time in his life: "Even today, I still benefit from the year of TM because I don't merge and bring things together and see everything as one big problem."
Bodybuilding career
Schwarzenegger is considered among the most important figures in the history of bodybuilding, Consequently, Schwarzenegger relinquished the executive editor role in 2005.
Powerlifting/weightlifting
During Schwarzenegger's early years in bodybuilding, he also competed in several Olympic weightlifting and powerlifting contests.
Schwarzenegger's first professional competition was in 1963 and he won two weightlifting contests in 1964 and 1965, as well as two powerlifting contests in 1966 and 1968.
* Deadlift - and subpar conditioning shouldn't have allowed him to come ahead of a very competitive lineup that year;
Steroid use
Schwarzenegger has admitted to using performance-enhancing anabolic steroids while they were legal, writing in 1977 that "steroids were helpful to me in maintaining muscle size while on a strict diet in preparation for a contest.
I did not use them for muscle growth, but rather for muscle maintenance when cutting up."
He has called the drugs "tissue building".
In 1999, Schwarzenegger sued Willi Heepe, a German doctor who publicly predicted his early death on the basis of a link between his steroid use and his later heart problems.
As the doctor had never examined him personally, Schwarzenegger collected a US$10,000 libel judgment against him in a German court.
In 1999, Schwarzenegger also sued and settled with Globe, a U.S. tabloid which had made similar predictions about the bodybuilder's future health.
List of competitions
Statistics
* Contest weight: - the lightest in 1980 Mr. Olympia: around , the heaviest in 1974 Mr. Olympia: around
Acting career
Early roles
Schwarzenegger wanted to move from bodybuilding into acting, finally achieving it when he was chosen to play the role of Hercules in 1969's Hercules in New York.
Credited under the stage name "Arnold Strong", his accent in the film was so thick that his lines were dubbed after production.
In 1977, he made guest appearances in single episodes of the ABC sitcom The San Pedro Beach Bums and the ABC police procedural The Streets of San Francisco.
Schwarzenegger auditioned for the title role of The Incredible Hulk, but did not win the role because of his height.
Later, Lou Ferrigno got the part of Dr. David Banner's alter ego.
Schwarzenegger appeared with Kirk Douglas and Ann-Margret in the 1979 comedy The Villain.
In 1980, he starred in a biographical film of the 1950s actress Jayne Mansfield as Mansfield's husband, Mickey Hargitay.
Action superstar
Schwarzenegger's breakthrough film was the sword-and-sorcery epic Conan the Barbarian in 1982, which was a box-office hit.
In 1983, Schwarzenegger starred in the promotional video, Carnival in Rio.
In 1984, he made his first appearance as the eponymous character, and what some would say was his acting career's signature role, in James Cameron's science fiction thriller film The Terminator.
and then with the 1992 telemovie Christmas in Connecticut.
He has not directed since.
Schwarzenegger's commercial peak was his return as the title character in 1991's Terminator 2: Judgment Day, which was the highest-grossing film of 1991.
In 1993, the National Association of Theatre Owners named him the "International Star of the Decade".
In tribute to Schwarzenegger in 2002, Forum Stadtpark, a local cultural association, proposed plans to build a Terminator statue in a park in central Graz.
Schwarzenegger reportedly said he was flattered, but thought the money would be better spent on social projects and the Special Olympics.
Retirement
His film appearances after becoming Governor of California included a three-second cameo appearance in The Rundown, and the 2004 remake of Around the World in 80 Days.
In 2005, he appeared as himself in the film The Kid & I.
He voiced Baron von Steuben in the Liberty's Kids episode "Valley Forge".
He had been rumored to be appearing in Terminator Salvation as the original T-800; he denied his involvement, but he ultimately did appear briefly via his image being inserted into the movie from stock footage of the first Terminator movie.
Schwarzenegger appeared in Sylvester Stallone's The Expendables, where he made a cameo appearance.
Return to acting
In January 2011, just weeks after leaving office in California, Schwarzenegger announced that he was reading several new scripts for future films, one of them being the World War II action drama With Wings as Eagles, written by Randall Wallace, based on a true story.
On March 6, 2011, at the Arnold Seminar of the Arnold Classic, Schwarzenegger revealed that he was being considered for several films, including sequels to The Terminator and remakes of Predator and The Running Man, and that he was "packaging" a comic book character.
The character was later revealed to be the Governator, star of the comic book and animated series of the same name.
Schwarzenegger inspired the character and co-developed it with Stan Lee, who would have produced the series.
Schwarzenegger would have voiced the Governator.
On May 20, 2011, Schwarzenegger's entertainment counsel announced that all movie projects currently in development were being halted: "Schwarzenegger is focusing on personal matters and is not willing to commit to any production schedules or timelines."
On July 11, 2011, it was announced that Schwarzenegger was considering a comeback film, despite the legal problems related to his divorce.
He appeared in The Expendables 2 (2012), and starred in The Last Stand (2013), his first leading role in 10 years, and Escape Plan (2013), his first co-starring role alongside Sylvester Stallone.
He starred in Sabotage, released in March 2014, and appeared in The Expendables 3, released in August 2014.
He starred in the fifth Terminator movie Terminator Genisys in 2015 and would reprise his role as Conan the Barbarian in The Legend of Conan, later renamed Conan the Conqueror.
However, in April 2017, producer Chris Morgan stated that Universal had dropped the project, although there was a possibility of a TV show.
The story of the film was supposed to be set 30 years after the first, with some inspiration from Clint Eastwood's Unforgiven.
In August 2016, his filming of action-comedy Why We're Killing Gunther was temporarily interrupted by bank robbers near filming location in Surrey, British Columbia.
He was announced to star and produce in a film about the ruins of Sanxingdui called The Guest of Sanxingdui, as an ambassador.
On February 6, 2018, Amazon Studios announced they were working with Schwarzenegger to develop a new series entitled Outrider in which he will star and executive produce.
The western-drama set in the Oklahoma Indian Territory in the late 1800s will follow a deputy (portrayed by Schwarzenegger) who is tasked with apprehending a legendary outlaw in the wilderness but is forced to partner with a ruthless Federal Marshal to make sure justice is properly served.
The series will also mark as Schwarzenegger's first major scripted TV role.
Schwarzenegger returned to the Terminator franchise with |language
es |publisher
Vocento
The Celebrity Apprentice
In September 2015, the media announced that Schwarzenegger was to replace Donald Trump as host of The New Celebrity Apprentice.
This show, the 15th season of The Apprentice, aired during the 2016-2017 TV season.
In the show, he used the phrases "you're terminated" and "get to the choppa", which are quotes from some of his famous roles (The Terminator and Predator, respectively), when firing the contestants.
In March 2017, following repeated criticisms from Trump, Schwarzenegger announced that he would not return for another season on the show.
Schwarzenegger had reacted to Trump's most recent remarks in January 2017 via an Instagram clip: "Hey, Donald, I have a great idea.
Why don't we switch jobs?
You take over TV because you're such an expert in ratings, and I take over your job, and then people can finally sleep comfortably again."
Filmography
Political career
Early politics
Schwarzenegger has been a registered Republican for many years.
When he was an actor, his political views were always well known as they contrasted with those of many other prominent Hollywood stars, who are generally considered to be a liberal and Democratic-leaning community.
At the 2004 Republican National Convention, Schwarzenegger gave a speech and explained he was a Republican because the Democrats of the 1960s sounded too much like Austrian socialists.
QTEMPLATE |I finally arrived here in 1968.
What a special day it was.
I remember I arrived here with empty pockets but full of dreams, full of determination, full of desire.
The presidential campaign was in full swing.
I remember watching the Nixon-Humphrey presidential race on TV.
A friend of mine who spoke German and English translated for me.
I heard Humphrey saying things that sounded like socialism, which I had just left.
But then I heard Nixon speak.
He was talking about free enterprise, getting the government off your back, lowering the taxes and strengthening the military.
Listening to Nixon speak sounded more like a breath of fresh air.
I said to my friend, I said, "What party is he?"
My friend said, "He's a Republican."
I said, "Then I am a Republican."
And I have been a Republican ever since.
In 1985, Schwarzenegger appeared in "Stop the Madness", an anti-drug music video sponsored by the Reagan administration.
He first came to wide public notice as a Republican during the 1988 presidential election, accompanying then-Vice President George H. W. Bush at a campaign rally.
Schwarzenegger's first political appointment was as chairman of the President's Council on Physical Fitness and Sports, on which he served from 1990 to 1993.
Governor of California
Arnold Schwarzenegger is a moderate Republican.
He says he is fiscally conservative and socially liberal.
On the issue of abortion, he describes himself as pro-choice, but supports parental notification for minors and a ban on partial-birth abortion.
He has supported gay rights, such as domestic partnerships, and he performed a same-sex marriage as Governor.
Schwarzenegger announced his candidacy in the 2003 California recall election for Governor of California on the August 6, 2003, episode of The Tonight Show with Jay Leno.
On October 7, 2003, the recall election resulted in Governor Gray Davis being removed from office with 55.4% of the Yes vote in favor of a recall.
Schwarzenegger was elected Governor of California under the second question on the ballot with 48.6% of the vote to choose a successor to Davis.
Schwarzenegger defeated Democrat Cruz Bustamante, fellow Republican Tom McClintock, and others.
His nearest rival, Bustamante, received 31% of the vote.
In total, Schwarzenegger won the election by about 1.3 million votes.
Under the regulations of the California Constitution, no runoff election was required.
Schwarzenegger was the second foreign-born governor of California after Irish-born Governor John G. Downey in 1862.
Schwarzenegger was entrenched in what he considered to be his mandate in cleaning up political gridlock.
Building on a catchphrase from the sketch "Hans and Franz" from Saturday Night Live , Schwarzenegger called the Democratic State politicians "girlie men".
Schwarzenegger's early victories included repealing an unpopular increase in the vehicle registration fee as well as preventing driver's licenses being given out to illegal immigrants, but later he began to feel the backlash when powerful state unions began to oppose his various initiatives.
Key among his reckoning with political realities was a special election he called in November 2005, in which four ballot measures he sponsored were defeated.
Schwarzenegger accepted personal responsibility for the defeats and vowed to continue to seek consensus for the people of California.
He would later comment that "no one could win if the opposition raised 160 million dollars to defeat you".
The U.S. Supreme Court later found the public employee unions' use of compulsory fundraising during the campaign had been illegal in Knox v. Service Employees International Union, Local 1000.
Schwarzenegger, against the advice of fellow Republican strategists, appointed a Democrat, Susan Kennedy, as his Chief of Staff.
He gradually moved towards a more politically moderate position, determined to build a winning legacy with only a short time to go until the next gubernatorial election.
Schwarzenegger ran for re-election against Democrat Phil Angelides, the California State Treasurer, in the 2006 elections, held on November 7, 2006.
Despite a poor year nationally for the Republican party, Schwarzenegger won re-election with 56.0% of the vote compared with 38.9% for Angelides, a margin of well over 1 million votes.
Around this time, many commentators saw Schwarzenegger as moving away from the right and towards the center of the political spectrum.
After hearing a speech by Schwarzenegger at the 2006 Martin Luther King Jr. Day breakfast, in which Schwarzenegger said, in part "How wrong I was when I said everyone has an equal opportunity to make it in America ... the state of California does not provide (equal) education for all of our children", San Francisco mayor Gavin Newsom said that "He's becoming a Democrat ...
He's running back, not even to the center.
I would say center-left".
Some speculated that Schwarzenegger might run for the United States Senate in 2010, as his governorship would be term-limited by that time.
Such rumors turned out to be false.
Wendy Leigh, who wrote an unofficial biography on Schwarzenegger, claims he plotted his political rise from an early age using the movie business and bodybuilding as the means to escape a depressing home.
He has held Austrian citizenship since birth and U.S. citizenship since becoming naturalized in 1983.
Being Austrian and thus European, he was able to win the 2007 European Voice campaigner of the year award for taking action against climate change with the California Global Warming Solutions Act of 2006 and plans to introduce an emissions trading scheme with other US states and possibly with the EU.
Because of his personal wealth from his acting career, Schwarzenegger did not accept his governor's salary of $175,000 per year.
Schwarzenegger's endorsement in the Republican primary of the 2008 U.S. presidential election was highly sought; despite being good friends with candidates Rudy Giuliani and Senator John McCain, Schwarzenegger remained neutral throughout 2007 and early 2008.
Giuliani dropped out of the presidential race on January 30, 2008, largely because of a poor showing in Florida, and endorsed McCain.
Later that night, Schwarzenegger was in the audience at a Republican debate at the Ronald Reagan Presidential Library in California.
The following day, he endorsed McCain, joking, "It's Rudy's fault!"
(in reference to his friendships with both candidates and that he could not make up his mind).
Schwarzenegger's endorsement was thought to be a boost for Senator McCain's campaign; both spoke about their concerns for the environment and economy.
In its April 2010 report, Progressive ethics watchdog group Citizens for Responsibility and Ethics in Washington named Schwarzenegger one of 11 "worst governors" in the United States because of various ethics issues throughout Schwarzenegger's term as governor.
Governor Schwarzenegger played a significant role in opposing Proposition 66, a proposed amendment of the Californian Three Strikes Law, in November 2004.
This amendment would have required the third felony to be either violent or serious to mandate a 25-years-to-life sentence.
In the last week before the ballot, Schwarzenegger launched an intensive campaign against Proposition 66.
He stated that "it would release 26,000 dangerous criminals and rapists".
Although he began his tenure as governor with record high approval ratings (as high as 65% in May 2004), he left office with a record low 23%, only one percent higher than that of Gray Davis, when he was recalled in October 2003.
Death of Louis Santos
In May 2010, Esteban Núñez pleaded guilty to involuntary manslaughter and was sentenced to 16 years in prison for the death of Louis Santos.
Núñez is the son of Fabian Núñez, then California Assembly Speaker of the House and a close friend and staunch political ally of then governor Schwarzenegger.
As a personal favor to "a friend", just hours before he left office, and as one of his last official acts, Schwarzenegger commuted Núñez's sentence by more than half, to seven years.
Against protocol, Schwarzenegger did not inform Santos' family or the San Diego County prosecutors about the commutation.
They learned about it in a call from a reporter.
Núñez was released from prison after serving less than six years.
Allegations of sexual misconduct and drug use
During his initial campaign for governor in 2003, allegations of sexual and personal misconduct were raised against Schwarzenegger.
Within the last five days before the election, news reports appeared in the Los Angeles Times recounting allegations of sexual misconduct from several individual women, six of whom eventually came forward with their personal stories.
Three of the women claimed he had grabbed their breasts, a fourth said he placed his hand under her skirt on her buttock.
A fifth woman claimed Schwarzenegger tried to take off her bathing suit in a hotel elevator, and the last said he pulled her onto his lap and asked her about a sex act.
Schwarzenegger is shown smoking a marijuana joint after winning Mr. Olympia in the 1975 documentary film Pumping Iron.
In an interview with GQ magazine in October 2007, Schwarzenegger said, "Marijuana is not a drug.
It's a leaf.
My drug was pumping iron, trust me."
His spokesperson later said the comment was meant to be a joke.
A joint statement read: "The parties are content to put this matter behind them and are pleased that this legal dispute has now been settled."
She claimed Walsh and Main libeled her in a Los Angeles Times article when they contended she encouraged his behavior.
Shortly before he gained his citizenship, he asked the Austrian authorities for the right to keep his Austrian citizenship, as Austria does not usually allow dual citizenship.
His request was granted, and he retained his Austrian citizenship.
In 2005, Peter Pilz, a member of the Austrian Parliament from the Austrian Green Party, unsuccessfully advocated for Parliament to revoke Schwarzenegger's Austrian citizenship due to his decision not to prevent the executions of Donald Beardslee and Stanley Williams.
Pilz argued that Schwarzenegger caused damage to Austria's reputation in the international community because Austria abolished the death penalty in 1968.
Pilz based his argument on the Austrian Citizenship Act, which states: "A citizen, who is in the public service of a foreign country, shall be deprived of his citizenship if he heavily damages the reputation or the interests of the Austrian Republic."
Schwarzenegger signed another executive order on October 17, 2006, allowing California to work with the Northeast's Regional Greenhouse Gas Initiative.
They plan to reduce carbon dioxide emissions by issuing a limited amount of carbon credits to each power plant in participating states.
Any power plants that exceed emissions for the number of carbon credits will have to purchase more credits to cover the difference.
The plan took effect in 2009.
In addition to using his political power to fight global warming, the governor has taken steps at his home to reduce his personal carbon footprint.
Schwarzenegger has adapted one of his Hummers to run on hydrogen and another to run on biofuels.
He has also installed solar panels to heat his home.
In respect of his contribution to the direction of the US motor industry, Schwarzenegger was invited to open the 2009 SAE World Congress in Detroit, on April 20, 2009.
In 2011, Schwarzenegger founded the R20 Regions of Climate Action to develop a sustainable, low-carbon economy.
Electoral history
Presidential ambitions
The Equal Opportunity to Govern Amendment in 2003 was widely accredited as the "Amend for Arnold" bill, which would have added an amendment to the U.S. Constitution allowing his run, as he was not a natural born citizen.
In 2004, the "Amend for Arnold" campaign was launched, featuring a website and TV advertising promotion.
In June 2007, Schwarzenegger was featured on the cover of TIME magazine with Michael Bloomberg, and subsequently, the two joked about a Presidential ticket together.
In October 2013, the New York Post reported that Schwarzenegger was exploring a future run for president.
The former California governor would face a constitutional hurdle; Article II, Section I, Clause V prevents individuals who are not natural-born citizens of the United States from assuming the office.
He has reportedly been lobbying legislators about a possible constitutional change, or filing a legal challenge to the provision.
Columbia University law professor Michael Dorf observed that Schwarzenegger's possible lawsuit could ultimately win him the right to run for the office, noting, "The law is very clear, but it's not 100 percent clear that the courts would enforce that law rather than leave it to the political process."
Business career
Schwarzenegger has had a highly successful business career.
Schwarzenegger and Columbu used profits from their bricklaying venture to start a mail-order business, selling bodybuilding and fitness-related equipment and instructional tapes.
Schwarzenegger was a founding celebrity investor in the Planet Hollywood chain of international theme restaurants (modeled after the Hard Rock Cafe) along with Bruce Willis, Sylvester Stallone and Demi Moore.
Schwarzenegger severed his financial ties with the business in early 2000.
Schwarzenegger said the company had not had the success he had hoped for, claiming he wanted to focus his attention on "new US global business ventures" and his movie career.
Schwarzenegger is also the owner of Arnold's Sports Festival, which he started in 1989 and is held annually in Columbus, Ohio.
It is a festival that hosts thousands of international health and fitness professionals which has also expanded into a three-day expo.
He also owns a movie production company called Oak Productions, Inc. and Fitness Publications, a joint publishing venture with Simon & Schuster.
Restaurant
In 1992, Schwarzenegger and his wife opened a restaurant in Santa Monica called Schatzi On Main.
Schatzi literally means "little treasure," and colloquially "honey" or "darling" in German.
In 1998, he sold his restaurant.
Wealth
Schwarzenegger's net worth had been conservatively estimated at $100 million-$200 million.
After separating from his wife, Maria Shriver, in 2011, it has been estimated that his net worth has been approximately $400 million, and even as high as $800 million, based on tax returns he filed in 2006.
Over the years as an investor, he invested his bodybuilding and movie earnings in an array of stocks, bonds, privately controlled companies, and real estate holdings worldwide, making his net worth as an accurate estimation difficult to calculate, particularly in light of declining real estate values owing to economic recessions in the U.S. and Europe since the late 2000s.
In June 1997, Schwarzenegger spent $38 million of his own money on a private Gulfstream jet.
Schwarzenegger once said of his fortune, "Money doesn't make you happy.
I now have $50 million, but I was just as happy when I had $48 million."
Personal life
Early relationships
In 1969, Schwarzenegger met Barbara Outland (later Barbara Outland Baker), an English teacher with whom he lived until 1974.
Schwarzenegger said of Baker in his 1977 memoir, "Basically it came down to this: she was a well-balanced woman who wanted an ordinary, solid life, and I was not a well-balanced man, and hated the very idea of ordinary life."
Baker published her memoir in 2006, entitled Arnold and Me: In the Shadow of the Austrian Oak.
Although Baker painted an unflattering portrait of her former lover at times, Schwarzenegger actually contributed to the tell-all book with a foreword, and also met with Baker for three hours.
They have four children: Katherine Eunice Schwarzenegger (born December 13, 1989), Christina Maria Aurelia Schwarzenegger (born July 23, 1991), Patrick Arnold Shriver Schwarzenegger (born September 18, 1993), and Christopher Sargent Shriver Schwarzenegger (born September 27, 1997).
All of their children were born in Los Angeles.
The family lived in a home in the Brentwood neighborhood of Los Angeles, California, with vacation homes in Sun Valley, Idaho and Hyannis Port, Massachusetts.
They attended St. Monica's Catholic Church.
Marital separation
On May 9, 2011, Shriver and Schwarzenegger ended their relationship after 25 years of marriage, with Shriver moving out of the couple's Brentwood mansion.
On May 16, 2011, the Los Angeles Times revealed that Schwarzenegger had fathered a son more than 14 years earlier with an employee in their household, Mildred Patricia "Patty" Baena.
"After leaving the governor's office I told my wife about this event, which occurred over a decade ago," Schwarzenegger said in a statement issued to The Times.
In the statement, Schwarzenegger did not mention that he had confessed to his wife only after she had confronted him with the information, which she had done after confirming with the housekeeper what she had suspected about the child.
Baena is of Guatemalan origin.
She was employed by the family for 20 years and retired in January 2011.
The pregnant Baena was working in the home while Shriver was pregnant with the youngest of the couple's four children.
Baena's son with Schwarzenegger, Joseph, was born on October 2, 1997, and Shriver gave birth to Christopher a few days before on September 27, 1997.
Schwarzenegger says it took seven or eight years before he found out that he had fathered a child with his housekeeper.
It was not until the boy "started looking like him ... that he put things together".
Schwarzenegger has taken financial responsibility for the child "from the start and continued to provide support".
KNX 1070 radio reported that in 2010 he bought a new four-bedroom house with a pool for Baena and their son in Bakersfield, California.
Baena separated from her husband, Rogelio, a few months after Joseph's birth.
She filed for divorce in 2008.
Rogelio says that the child's birth certificate was falsified and that he planned to sue Schwarzenegger for engaging in conspiracy to falsify a public document, a serious crime in California.
Pursuant to the divorce judgment, Schwarzenegger kept the Brentwood home, while Shriver purchased a new home nearby so that the children could travel between their parents' homes.
They shared custody of the two youngest children.
Schwarzenegger came under fire after the initial petition did not include spousal support and a reimbursement of attorney's fees.
Schwarzenegger and Shriver finalized their divorce in 2017, six years after separating.
After the scandal, Danish-Italian actress Brigitte Nielsen came forward and stated that she too had an affair with Schwarzenegger while he was in a relationship with Shriver, saying, "Maybe I wouldn't have got into it if he said 'I'm going to marry Maria' and this is deadly serious, but he didn't, and our affair carried on."
, Schwarzenegger was dating physical therapist Heather Milligan, 27 years his junior.
Accidents and injuries
Schwarzenegger was born with a bicuspid aortic valve, an aortic valve with only two leaflets (a normal aortic valve has three leaflets).
He opted in 1997 for a replacement heart valve made of his own transplanted tissue; medical experts predicted he would require heart valve replacement surgery in the following two to eight years as his valve would progressively degrade.
Schwarzenegger apparently opted against a mechanical valve, the only permanent solution available at the time of his surgery, because it would have sharply limited his physical activity and capacity to exercise.
On March 29, 2018, Schwarzenegger underwent emergency open-heart surgery.
He said about his recovery: "I underwent open-heart surgery this spring, I had to use a walker.
I had to do breathing exercises five times a day to retrain my lungs.
I was frustrated and angry, and in my worst moments, I couldn't see the way back to my old self."
On December 9, 2001, he broke six ribs and was hospitalized for four days after a motorcycle crash in Los Angeles.
Schwarzenegger saved a drowning man's life in 2004 while on vacation in Hawaii by swimming out and bringing him back to shore.
On January 8, 2006, while Schwarzenegger was riding his Harley Davidson motorcycle in Los Angeles, with his son Patrick in the sidecar, another driver backed into the street he was riding on, causing him and his son to collide with the car at a low speed.
While his son and the other driver were unharmed, Schwarzenegger sustained a minor injury to his lip, requiring 15 stitches.
"No citations were issued," said Officer Jason Lee, a Los Angeles Police Department spokesman.
Schwarzenegger did not obtain his motorcycle license until July 3, 2006.
Schwarzenegger tripped over his ski pole and broke his right femur while skiing in Sun Valley, Idaho, with his family on December 23, 2006.
On December 26, he underwent a 90-minute operation in which cables and screws were used to wire the broken bone back together.
He was released from the St. John's Health Center on December 30, 2006.
Schwarzenegger's private jet made an emergency landing at Van Nuys Airport on June 19, 2009, after the pilot reported smoke coming from the cockpit, according to a statement released by his press secretary.
No one was harmed in the incident.
On May 18, 2019, while on a visit to South Africa, Schwarzenegger was attacked, drop-kicked from behind by an unknown malefactor, while giving autographs to his fans at one of the local schools.
Despite the surprise and unprovoked nature of the attack, he reportedly suffered no injuries and continued to interact with fans.
The attacker was apprehended and Schwarzenegger declined to press charges against him.
Height
Schwarzenegger's official height of 6'2" (1.88 m) has been brought into question by several articles.
In his bodybuilding days in the late 1960s, he was measured to be 6'1.5" (1.87 m), a height confirmed by his fellow bodybuilders.
However, in 1988, both the Daily Mail and Time Out magazine mentioned that Schwarzenegger appeared noticeably shorter.
Prior to running for governor, Schwarzenegger's height was once again questioned in an article by the Chicago Reader.
As governor, Schwarzenegger engaged in a light-hearted exchange with Assemblyman Herb Wesson over their heights.
At one point, Wesson made an unsuccessful attempt to, in his own words, "settle this once and for all and find out how tall he is" by using a tailor's tape measure on the Governor.
Schwarzenegger retaliated by placing a pillow stitched with the words "Need a lift?" on the five-foot-five inch (165 cm) Wesson's chair before a negotiating session in his office.
Bob Mulholland also claimed Schwarzenegger was 5'10" (1.78 m) and that he wore risers in his boots.
In 1999, Men's Health magazine stated his height was 5'10".
Autobiography
Schwarzenegger's autobiography, Total Recall, was released in October 2012.
He devotes one chapter called "The Secret" to his extramarital affair.
The majority of his book is about his successes in the three major chapters in his life: bodybuilder, actor, and Governor of California.
Vehicles
Growing up during the Allied occupation of Austria, Schwarzenegger commonly saw heavy military vehicles such as tanks as a child.
As a result, he even had to pay $20,000 in order to bring his Austrian Army M47 Patton tank (331) to the United States, which he previously operated during his mandatory service in 1965.
However, he later obtained his vehicle in 1991/2, during his tenure as the Chairmen of the President's Council on Sports, Fitness, and Nutrition, and now uses it to support his charity.
Moreover, he came to develop an interest in large vehicles and became the first civilian in the U.S. to purchase a Humvee.
He was so enamored by the vehicle that he lobbied the Humvee's manufacturer, AM General, to produce a street-legal, civilian version, which they did in 1992; the first two Hummer H1s they sold were also purchased by Schwarzenegger.
In 2010, he had one regular and three running on non-fossil power sources; one for hydrogen, one for vegetable oil, and one for biodiesel.
Schwarzenegger was in the news in 2014 for buying a rare Bugatti Veyron Grand Sport Vitesse.
He was spotted and filmed in 2015 in his car, painted silver with bright aluminum forged wheels.
His Bugatti has its interior adorned in dark brown leather.
In 2017, Schwarzenegger acquired a Mercedes G-Class modified for all-electric drive.
The Hummers that Schwarzenegger bought in 1992 are so large-each weighs and is wide-that they are classified as large trucks, and U.S. fuel economy regulations do not apply to them.
During the gubernatorial recall campaign, he announced that he would convert one of his Hummers to burn hydrogen.
The conversion was reported to have cost about $21,000.
After the election, he signed an executive order to jump-start the building of hydrogen refueling plants called the California Hydrogen Highway Network, and gained a U.S. Department of Energy grant to help pay for its projected US$91,000,000 cost.
California took delivery of the first H2H (Hydrogen Hummer) in October 2004.
Public life
Schwarzenegger has been involved with the Special Olympics for many years after they were founded by his ex-mother-in-law, Eunice Kennedy Shriver.
In 2007, Schwarzenegger was the official spokesperson for the Special Olympics which were held in Shanghai, China.
Schwarzenegger believes that quality school opportunities should be made available to children who might not normally be able to access them.
In 1995, he founded the Inner City Games Foundation (ICG) which provides cultural, educational and community enrichment programming to youth.
ICG is active in 15 cities around the country and serves over 250,000 children in over 400 schools countrywide.
ASAS is an after school program provider, educating youth about health, fitness and nutrition.
On February 12, 2010, Schwarzenegger took part in the Vancouver Olympic Torch relay.
He handed off the flame to the next runner, Sebastian Coe.
Schwarzenegger had a collection of Marxist busts, which he requested from Russian friends at the end of the Soviet Union as they were being destroyed.
In 2011, he revealed that his wife had requested they be removed, but he kept the one of Vladimir Lenin present, since "he was the first".
In 2015, he said he kept the Lenin bust to "show losers".
Schwarzenegger is a lifelong supporter and "friend of Israel", and has participated in L.A.'s Pro-Israel rally among other similar events.
Schwarzenegger supported the 2003 invasion of Iraq.
Schwarzenegger also expressed support for the 2011 military intervention in Libya.
Schwarzenegger released a video message supporting protests against Ukraine's pro-Russian President Victor Yanukovych.
Schwarzenegger, who played football as a boy, grew up watching Bayern Munich and Sturm Graz.
Schwarzenegger Institute for State and Global Policy
In 2012, Schwarzenegger helped to found the Schwarzenegger Institute for State and Global Policy, which is a part of the USC Sol Price School of Public Policy at the University of Southern California.
The Institute's mission is to "advance post-partisanship, where leaders put people over political parties and work together to find the best ideas and solutions to benefit the people they serve" and to "seek to influence public policy and public debate in finding solutions to the serious challenges we face".
Schwarzenegger serves as chairman of the Institute.
Global warming
At a 2015 security conference, Arnold Schwarzenegger called climate change the issue of our time.
He also urged politicians to stop treating climate change as a political issue.
2016 Presidential election
For the 2016 Republican Party presidential primaries, Schwarzenegger endorsed fellow Republican John Kasich.
However, he announced in October that he would not vote for the Republican presidential candidate Donald Trump in that year's United States presidential election, with this being the first time he did not vote for the Republican candidate since becoming a citizen in 1983.
Post 2016
In recent years Schwarzenegger has been advocating for eating less meat, and he is an executive producer alongside James Cameron et al. behind the documentary The Game Changers, that documents the explosive rise of plant-based eating in professional sports, in which he is also featured.
In 2017, Schwarzenegger condemned white supremacists who were seen carrying Nazi and Confederate flags, by calling their heroes as "losers".
In 2019, while at the "Arnold Classic Africa" sports competition as an official, Schwarzenegger was attacked by an assailant in a flying kick.
The assailant was arrested.
Awards and honors
*Medal for Humanitary Merit of the Austrian Albert Schweitzer Society (2011)
* WWE Hall of Fame (class of 2015)
The trail is categorized as a black diamond, or most difficult, for its terrain.
* "A Day for Arnold" on July 30, 2007, in Thal, Austria.
For his 60th birthday the mayor sent Schwarzenegger the enameled address sign (Thal 145) of the house where Schwarzenegger was born, declaring "This belongs to him.
No one here will ever be assigned that number again".
Government orders and decorations
*Grand Decoration of Honour for Services to the Republic of Austria in Gold (1993)
*Cavalier (2011) and Commander (2017) of the French Legion of Honor
*Honorary Ring of the Federal State of Styria (Austria, June 2017)
Books
* List of U.S. state governors born outside the United States
Notes
Further reading
