File:Percentage Vietnamese.png|thumb|Percentage of the ethnic Vietnamese (Kinh), by province
Vietnamese () is an Austroasiatic language that originated in Vietnam, where it is the national and official language.
Spoken natively by an estimated 76 million people (as of 2009), it is the native language of the Vietnamese (Kinh) people, as well as a first or second language for the many ethnic minorities of Vietnam.
As a result of Vietnamese emigration and cultural influence, Vietnamese speakers are found throughout the world, notably in East and Southeast Asia, North America, Australia and Western Europe.
Vietnamese has also been officially recognized as a minority language in the Czech Republic.
Vietnamese is the Austroasiatic language with by far the most speakers, several times as many as the rest of the family combined.
Its vocabulary has borrowings from Chinese, and it formerly used a modified set of Chinese characters called Chữ Nôm, which were given vernacular pronunciation.
The Vietnamese alphabet (chữ quốc ngữ) in use today is a Latin alphabet with additional diacritics for tones and certain letters.
Geographic distribution
As a national language, Vietnamese is the official language used by everyone in Vietnam.
It is similar to Yue Yu (越语) spoken by the Gin in southern Guangxi Province in China.
However, the language spoken by the Gin is unintelligible to Vietnamese, although they share many similarities.
A significant number of native speakers also reside in neighboring Cambodia and Laos.
In the United States, Vietnamese is the fifth most spoken language, with over 1.5 million speakers, who are concentrated in a handful of states.
It is the third most spoken language in Texas and Washington; fourth in Georgia, Louisiana, and Virginia; and fifth in Arkansas and California.
Vietnamese is the seventh most spoken language in Australia.
In France, it is the most spoken Asian language and the eighth most spoken immigrant language at home.
Official status
Vietnamese is the sole official and national language of Vietnam.
It is the first language of the majority of the Vietnamese population, as well as a first or second language for the country's ethnic minority groups.
In the Czech Republic, Vietnamese has been recognized as one of 14 minority languages, on the basis of communities that have resided in the country either traditionally or on a long-term basis.
This status grants Czech citizens from the Vietnamese community the right to use Vietnamese with public authorities and at courts anywhere in the country.
Moreover, it also grants the use of Vietnamese in public signage, election information, cultural institutions, and access to legal information and assistance in municipalities where at least 10% of the population is of the minority group.
As a foreign language
Vietnamese is increasingly being taught in schools and institutions outside of Vietnam.
In countries with strongly established Vietnamese-speaking communities such as Australia, Canada, France, and the United States, Vietnamese language education largely serves as a cultural role to link descendants of Vietnamese immigrants to their ancestral culture.
Meanwhile, in countries near Vietnam such as Cambodia, Laos, South Korea, and Thailand, the increased role of Vietnamese in foreign language education is largely due to the growth and influence of Vietnam's economy.
Since the 1980s, Vietnamese language schools () have been established for youth in many Vietnamese-speaking communities around the world, notably in the United States.
Historic and stronger trade and diplomatic relations with Vietnam and a growing interest among the French Vietnamese population (one of France's most established non-European ethnic groups) of their ancestral culture have also led to an increasing number of institutions in France, including universities, to offer formal courses in the language.
Since the late 1980s, the Vietnamese German community has enlisted the support of city governments to bring Vietnamese into high school curricula for the purpose of teaching and reminding Vietnamese German students of their mother-tongue.
Furthermore, there has also been a number of Germans studying Vietnamese due to increased economic investment in Vietnam.
Vietnamese is taught in schools in the form of dual immersion to a varying degree in Cambodia, Laos, and the United States.
Classes teach students subjects in Vietnamese and another language.
Furthermore, in Thailand, Vietnamese is one of the most popular foreign languages in schools and colleges.
Linguistic classification
Vietnamese was identified more than 150 years ago as part of the Mon-Khmer branch of the Austroasiatic language family (a family that also includes Khmer, spoken in Cambodia, as well as various tribal and regional languages, such as the Munda and Khasi languages spoken in eastern India, and others in southern China).
Later, Muong was found to be more closely related to Vietnamese than other Mon-Khmer languages, and a Viet-Muong subgrouping was established, also including Thavung, Chut, Cuoi, etc.
The term "Vietic" was proposed by Hayes (1992), who proposed to redefine Viet-Muong as referring to a subbranch of Vietic containing only Vietnamese and Muong.
The term "Vietic" is used, among others, by Gérard Diffloth, with a slightly different proposal on subclassification, within which the term "Viet-Muong" refers to a lower subgrouping (within an eastern Vietic branch) consisting of Vietnamese dialects, Muong dialects, and Nguồn (of Quảng Bình Province).
Lexicon
As a result of 1000 years of Chinese rule, much of the Vietnamese lexicon relating to science and politics is derived from Chinese - see Sino-Vietnamese vocabulary.
Some 30% to 60% of the lexical stock has naturalized word borrowings from Chinese, although many compound words are composed of native Vietnamese words combined with naturalized word borrowings (i.e. having Vietnamese pronunciation).
From the French assistance to Nguyễn Ánh (1777) to the 1954 Geneva Conference (1954), Vietnamese has been influenced by the 177 years of French language in Vietnam, for example (from French ).
Nowadays, many new words are being added to the language's lexicon due to heavy Western cultural influence; these are usually borrowed from English, for example TV (though usually seen in the written form as ).
Sometimes these borrowings are calques literally translated into Vietnamese .
Some borrowings nowadays, usually names, are multi-syllabic, for example, (Cambodia).
Phonology
Vowels
Like other Southeast Asian languages, Vietnamese has a comparatively large number of vowels.
Below is a vowel diagram of Hanoi Vietnamese (including centering diphthongs):
Front and central vowels (i, ê, e, ư, â, ơ, ă, a) are unrounded, whereas the back vowels (u, ô, o) are rounded.
The vowels â and ă are pronounced very short, much shorter than the other vowels.
Thus, ơ and â are basically pronounced the same except that ơ is of normal length while â is short - the same applies to the vowels long a and short ă .
The centering diphthongs are formed with only the three high vowels (i, ư, u).
They are generally spelled as ia, ưa, ua when they end a word and are spelled iê, ươ, uô, respectively, when they are followed by a consonant.
In addition to single vowels (or monophthongs) and centering diphthongs, Vietnamese has closing diphthongs and triphthongs.
The closing diphthongs and triphthongs consist of a main vowel component followed by a shorter semivowel offglide or .
There are restrictions on the high offglides: cannot occur after a front vowel (i, ê, e) nucleus and cannot occur after a back vowel (u, ô, o) nucleus.
The correspondence between the orthography and pronunciation is complicated.
For example, the offglide is usually written as i; however, it may also be represented with y.
In addition, in the diphthongs and the letters y and i also indicate the pronunciation of the main vowel: ay
ă + , ai
a + .
Thus, tay "hand" is while tai "ear" is .
Similarly, u and o indicate different pronunciations of the main vowel: au
ă + , ao
a + .
Thus, thau "brass" is while thao "raw silk" is .
Consonants
The consonants that occur in Vietnamese are listed below in the Vietnamese orthography with the phonetic pronunciation to the right.
Some consonant sounds are written with only one letter (like "p"), other consonant sounds are written with a digraph (like "ph"), and others are written with more than one letter or digraph (the velar stop is written variously as "c", "k", or "q").
Not all dialects of Vietnamese have the same consonant in a given word (although all dialects use the same spelling in the written language).
See the language variation section for further elaboration.
The analysis of syllable-final orthographic ch and nh in Hanoi Vietnamese has had different analyses.
One analysis has final ch, nh as being phonemes contrasting with syllable-final t, c and n, ng and identifies final ch with the syllable-initial ch .
The other analysis has final ch and nh as predictable allophonic variants of the velar phonemes and that occur after the upper front vowels i and ê ; although they also occur after a, but in such cases are believed to have resulted from an earlier e which diphthongized to ai (cf. ach from aic, anh from aing).
Tones
Each Vietnamese syllable is pronounced with an inherent tone, centered on the main vowel or group of vowels.
Tones differ in:
Tone is indicated by diacritics written above or below the vowel (most of the tone diacritics appear above the vowel; however, the nặng tone dot diacritic goes below the vowel).
The six tones in the northern varieties (including Hanoi), with their self-referential Vietnamese names, are:
Other dialects of Vietnamese have fewer tones (typically only five).
In Vietnamese poetry, tones are classed into two groups: (tone pattern)
Words with tones belonging to a particular tone group must occur in certain positions within the poetic verse.
Vietnamese Catholics practice a distinctive style of prayer recitation called , in which each tone is assigned a specific note or sequence of notes.
Language variation
The Vietnamese language has several mutually intelligible regional varieties (or dialects).
The five main dialects are as follows:
Vietnamese has traditionally been divided into three dialect regions: North, Central, and South.
However, Michel Ferlus and Nguyễn Tài Cẩn offer evidence for considering a North-Central region separate from Central.
The term Haut-Annam refers to dialects spoken from northern Nghệ
An Province to southern (former) Thừa Thiên Province that preserve archaic features (like consonant clusters and undiphthongized vowels) that have been lost in other modern dialects.
These dialect regions differ mostly in their sound systems (see below), but also in vocabulary (including basic vocabulary, non-basic vocabulary, and grammatical words) and grammar.
The North-central and Central regional varieties, which have a significant amount of vocabulary differences, are generally less mutually intelligible to Northern and Southern speakers.
There is less internal variation within the Southern region than the other regions due to its relatively late settlement by Vietnamese speakers (in around the end of the 15th century).
The North-central region is particularly conservative; its pronunciation has diverged less from Vietnamese orthography than the other varieties, which tend to merge certain sounds.
Along the coastal areas, regional variation has been neutralized to a certain extent, while more mountainous regions preserve more variation.
As for sociolinguistic attitudes, the North-central varieties are often felt to be "peculiar" or "difficult to understand" by speakers of other dialects, despite the fact that their pronunciation fits the written language the most closely; this is typically because of various words in their vocabulary which are unfamiliar to other speakers (see the example vocabulary table below).
The large movements of people between North and South beginning in the mid-20th century and continuing to this day have resulted in a sizeable number of Southern residents speaking in the Northern accent dialect.
Following the Geneva Accords of 1954 that called for the temporary division of the country, about a million northerners (mainly from Hanoi, Haiphong and the surrounding Red River Delta areas) moved south (mainly to Saigon and heavily to Biên Hòa and Vũng Tàu, and the surrounding areas) as part of Operation Passage to Freedom.
About 3% (~30,000) of that number of people made the move in the reverse direction (Tập kết ra Bắc, literally "go to the North".)
Following the reunification of Vietnam in 1975, Northern and North-Central speakers from the densely populated Red River Delta and the traditionally poorer provinces of Nghệ An, Hà Tĩnh and Quảng Bình have continued to move South to look for better economic opportunities, beginning with the new government's "New Economic Zones program" which lasted from 1975-85.
The first half of the program (1975-80), resulted in 1.3 million people sent to the New Economic Zones (NEZs), majority of which were relocated in the southern half of the country in previously uninhabited areas, of which 550,000 were Northerners.
The consonant clusters that were originally present in Middle Vietnamese (of the 17th century) have been lost in almost all modern Vietnamese varieties (but retained in other closely related Vietic languages).
However, some speech communities have preserved some of these archaic clusters: "sky" is with a cluster in Hảo Nho (Yên Mô, Ninh Bình Province)
but trời in Southern Vietnamese and in Hanoi Vietnamese (initial single consonants , respectively).
Tones
Generally, the Northern varieties have six tones while those in other regions have five tones.
The hỏi and ngã tones are distinct in North and some North-central varieties (although often with different pitch contours) but have merged in Central, Southern, and some North-Central varieties (also with different pitch contours).
Some North-Central varieties (such as Vietnamese) have a merger of the ngã and nặng tones while keeping the hỏi tone distinct.
Still, other North-Central varieties have a three-way merger of hỏi, ngã, and nặng resulting in a four-tone system.
In addition, there are several phonetic differences (mostly in pitch contour and phonation type) in the tones among dialects.
The table above shows the pitch contour of each tone using Chao tone number notation (where 1 represents the lowest pitch, and 5 the highest); glottalization (creaky, stiff, harsh) is indicated with the symbol; murmured voice with ; glottal stop with ; sub-dialectal variants are separated with commas.
Grammar
Vietnamese, like many languages in Southeast Asia, is an analytic language.
Vietnamese does not use morphological marking of case, gender, number or tense (and, as a result, has no finite/nonfinite distinction).
Also like other languages in the region, Vietnamese syntax conforms to subject-verb-object word order, is head-initial (displaying modified-modifier ordering), and has a noun classifier system.
Additionally, it is pro-drop, wh-in-situ, and allows verb serialization.
Some Vietnamese sentences with English word glosses and translations are provided below.
Dates and numbers writing formats
Vietnameses speak date in the format "day month year".
Each month's name is just the ordinal of that month appended after the word tháng, which means "month".
Traditional Vietnamese however assigns other names to some months; these names are mostly used in the lunar calendar and in poetry.
When written in the short form, "DD YYYY" is preferred.
Historically, the Vietnamese order was the same as Chinese, Korean and Japanese , but it changed because of French influence in the 20th century.
Today, the latter format is still comprehensible by most Vietnamese.
Example:
The Vietnamese prefer writing numbers with a comma as the decimal separator in lieu of dots, and either spaces or dots to group the digits.
An example is 1 629,15 (one thousand six hundred twenty-nine point fifteen).
Because a comma is used as the decimal separator, a semicolon is used to separate two numbers instead.
Writing systems
Up to the late 19th century, two writing systems based on Chinese characters were used in Vietnam.
All formal writing, including government business, scholarship and formal literature, was done in Classical Chinese (chữ nho "scholar's characters").
Folk literature in Vietnamese was recorded using the chữ Nôm script, in which many Chinese characters were borrowed and many more modified and invented to represent native Vietnamese words.
Created in the 13th century or earlier, the Nôm writing reached its zenith in the 18th century when many Vietnamese writers and poets composed their works in Nôm, most notably Nguyễn Du and Hồ Xuân Hương (dubbed "the Queen of Nôm poetry").
However it was only used for official purposes during the brief Hồ and Tây Sơn dynasties.
A Vietnamese Catholic, Nguyễn Trường Tộ, sent petitions to the Court which suggested a Chinese character-based syllabary which would be used for Vietnamese sounds; however, his petition failed.
The French colonial administration sought to eliminate the Chinese writing system, Confucianism, and other Chinese influences from Vietnam by getting rid of Nôm.
A romanization of Vietnamese was codified in the 17th century by the French Jesuit missionary Alexandre de Rhodes (1591-1660), based on works of earlier Portuguese missionaries Gaspar do Amaral and António Barbosa.
This Vietnamese alphabet (chữ quốc ngữ or "national script") was gradually expanded from its initial domain in Christian writing to become more popular among the general public.
However, the Romanized script did not come to predominate until the beginning of the 20th century, when education became widespread and a simpler writing system was found more expedient for teaching and communication with the general population.
Under French Indochina colonial rule, French superseded Chinese in administration.
Vietnamese written with the alphabet became required for all public documents in 1910 by issue of a decree by the French Résident Supérieur of the protectorate of Tonkin.
By the middle of the 20th century virtually all writing was done in chữ quốc ngữ, which became the official script on independence.
Chữ nho was still in use on early North Vietnamese and late French Indochinese banknotes issued after World War II, but fell out of official use shortly thereafter.
Only a few scholars and some extremely elderly people are able to read chữ Nôm today.
In China, members of the Jing minority still write in chữ Nôm.
Changes in the script were made by French scholars and administrators and by conferences held after independence during 1954-1974.
The script now reflects a so-called Middle Vietnamese dialect that has vowels and final consonants most similar to northern dialects and initial consonants most similar to southern dialects (Nguyễn 1996).
This Middle Vietnamese is presumably close to the Hanoi variety as spoken sometime after 1600 but before the present.
Computer support
The Unicode character set contains all Vietnamese characters and the Vietnamese currency symbol.
On systems that do not support Unicode, many 8-bit Vietnamese code pages are available such as Vietnamese Standard Code for Information Interchange (VSCII) or Windows-1258.
Where ASCII must be used, Vietnamese letters are often typed using the VIQR convention, though this is largely unnecessary with the increasing ubiquity of Unicode.
There are many software tools that help type true Vietnamese text on US keyboards, such as http:/ / MacVNKey on Macintosh.
History
It seems likely that in the distant past, Vietnamese shared more characteristics common to other languages in the Austroasiatic family, such as an inflectional morphology and a richer set of consonant clusters, which have subsequently disappeared from the language.
However, Vietnamese appears to have been heavily influenced by its location in the Mainland Southeast Asia linguistic area, with the result that it has acquired or converged toward characteristics such as isolating morphology and phonemically distinctive tones, through processes of tonogenesis.
These characteristics have become part of many of the genetically unrelated languages of Southeast Asia; for example, Tsat (a member of the Malayo-Polynesian group within Austronesian), and Vietnamese each developed tones as a phonemic feature.
The ancestor of the Vietnamese language is usually believed to have been originally based in the area of the Red River in what is now northern Vietnam.
However, Chamberlain argues that the Red River Delta region was originally Tai-speaking and became Vietnamese-speaking only between the seventh and ninth centuries AD, as a result of immigration from the south, i. e., modern central Vietnam, where the highly distinctive and conservative North-Central Vietnamese dialects are spoken today.
Therefore, the region of origin of Vietnamese (and the earlier Viet-Muong) was well south of the Red River.
Like the ethnonym Lao, the name Yue/Việt originally referred to Tai-Kadai-speaking groups.
In northern Vietnam, these later adopted Viet-Muong and further north Chinese varieties, where the designation Yue Chinese preserves the ethnonym.
This explains the fact that the same ethnonym Yue ~ Việt is associated with groups that speak Tai-Kadai, Austroasiatic and Chinese languages, which are typologically similar and share significant amounts of lexicon, but have different origins.
Distinctive tonal variations emerged during the subsequent expansion of the Vietnamese language and people into what is now central and southern Vietnam through conquest of the ancient nation of Champa and the Khmer people of the Mekong Delta in the vicinity of present-day Ho Chi Minh City, also known as Saigon.
Vietnamese was primarily influenced by Chinese, which came to predominate politically in the 2nd century BC.
After Vietnam achieved independence in the 10th century, the ruling class adopted Classical Chinese as the medium of government, scholarship and literature.
With the dominance of Chinese came radical importation of Chinese vocabulary and grammatical influence.
A portion of the Vietnamese lexicon in all realms consists of Sino-Vietnamese words (They comprise about a third of the Vietnamese lexicon, and may account for as much as 60% of the vocabulary used in formal texts.)
When France invaded Vietnam in the late 19th century, French gradually replaced Chinese as the official language in education and government.
Vietnamese adopted many French terms, such as đầm (dame, from madame), ga (train station, from gare), sơ mi (shirt, from chemise), and búp bê (doll, from poupée).
In addition, many Sino-Vietnamese terms were devised for Western ideas imported through the French.
Henri Maspero described six periods of the Vietnamese language:
#Pre-Vietnamese, also known as Proto-Viet-Muong or Proto-Vietnamuong, the ancestor of Vietnamese and the related Muong language.
#Proto-Vietnamese, the oldest reconstructable version of Vietnamese, dated to just before the entry of massive amounts of Sino-Vietnamese vocabulary into the language, c. 7th to 9th century AD?
At this state, the language had three tones.
#Archaic Vietnamese, the state of the language upon adoption of the Sino-Vietnamese vocabulary, c. 10th century AD.
#Ancient Vietnamese, the language represented by Chữ Nôm (c. 15th century) and the Chinese-Vietnamese glossary Huáyí Yìyǔ ( c. 15th century).
By this point, a tone split had happened in the language, leading to six tones but a loss of contrastive voicing among consonants.
#Middle Vietnamese, the language of the Dictionarium Annamiticum Lusitanum et Latinum of the Jesuit missionary Alexandre de Rhodes (c. 17th century).
#Modern Vietnamese, from the 19th century.
Proto-Viet-Muong
The following diagram shows the phonology of Proto-Viet-Muong (the nearest ancestor of Vietnamese and the closely related Muong language), along with the outcomes in the modern language:
According to Ferlus, * and * are not accepted by all researchers.
Ferlus 1992
Nói lái involves switching the tones in a pair of words and also the order of the two words or the first consonant and rime of each word; the resulting nói lái pair preserves the original sequence of tones.
Some examples:
The resulting transformed phrase often has a different meaning but sometimes may just be a nonsensical word pair.
Nói lái can be used to obscure the original meaning and thus soften the discussion of a socially sensitive issue, as with dấm đài and hoảng chưa (above) or, when implied (and not overtly spoken), to deliver a hidden subtextual message, as with bồi tây.
Naturally, nói lái can be used for a humorous effect.
Another word game somewhat reminiscent of pig latin is played by children.
Here a nonsense syllable (chosen by the child) is prefixed onto a target word's syllables, then their initial consonants and rimes are switched with the tone of the original word remaining on the new switched rime.
This language game is often used as a "secret" or "coded" language useful for obscuring messages from adult comprehension.
Examples
The Tale of Kieu is an epic narrative poem by the celebrated poet
Nguyễn Du, ({{vi-nom| today.
Bibliography
General
* Dương, Quảng-Hàm. (1941).
Việt-nam văn-học sử-yếu Outline history of Vietnamese literature.
Saigon: Bộ Quốc gia Giáo dục.
* Emeneau, M. B. (1947).
"Homonyms and puns in Annamese".
Language, 23 (3), 239-244. . .
* Emeneau, M. B. (1951).
Studies in Vietnamese (Annamese) grammar.
University of California publications in linguistics (Vol. 8).
Berkeley: University of California Press.
* Hashimoto, Mantaro.
(1978).
"Current developments in Sino-Vietnamese studies".
Journal of Chinese Linguistics, 6, 1-26.
* Nguyễn, Đình-Hoà.
(1995).
NTC's Vietnamese-English dictionary (updated ed.).
NTC language dictionaries.
Lincolnwood, Illinois: NTC Pub.
Press.
* Nguyễn, Đình-Hoà.
(1997).
Vietnamese:
Tiếng Việt không son phấn.
Amsterdam: John Benjamins Publishing Company.
* Rhodes, Alexandre de. (1991).
Từ điển Annam-Lusitan-Latinh original: Dictionarium Annamiticum Lusitanum et Latinum.
(L. Thanh, X. V. Hoàng, & Q. C. Đỗ, Trans.).
Hanoi:
Khoa học Xã hội.
(Original work published 1651).
* Thompson, Laurence C. (1991).
http:/ archives THOMPSONLaurenceC.htm
A Vietnamese reference grammar.
Seattle: University of Washington Press.
Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press.
Uỷ ban Khoa học Xã hội Việt Nam. (1983).
Ngữ-pháp tiếng Việt Vietnamese grammar.
Hanoi:
Khoa học Xã hội.
Sound system
*Brunelle, Marc.
(2009).
"Tone perception in Northern and Southern Vietnamese".
Journal of Phonetics, 37 (1), 79-96. .
*Brunelle, Marc.
(2009).
https:/ web http:/ JSEALS-1.pdf#page=55 "Northern and Southern Vietnamese Tone Coarticulation: A Comparative Case Study".
Journal of Southeast Asian Linguistics, 1, 49-62.
* Michaud, Alexis.
(2004).
http:/ hal-00130119
"Final consonants and glottalization: New perspectives from Hanoi Vietnamese".
Phonetica 61 (2-3), 119-146. .
* Nguyễn, Văn Lợi; & Edmondson, Jerold A. (1998).
http:/ archives NGUYNVnLoi.htm
"Tones and voice quality in modern northern Vietnamese: Instrumental case studies".
Mon-Khmer Studies, 28, 1-18
* Thompson, Laurence E. (1959).
"Saigon phonemics".
Language, 35 (3), 454-476. . .
Language variation
* Alves, Mark J. 2007.
http:/ sala pdf8/alves2002look.pdf "A Look At North-Central Vietnamese" In SEALS XII Papers from the 12th Annual Meeting of the Southeast Asian Linguistics Society 2002, edited by Ratree Wayland et al. Canberra, Australia, 1-7. Pacific Linguistics, Research School of Pacific and Asian Studies, The Australian National University
* Alves, Mark J.; & Nguyễn, Duy Hương.
(2007).
https:/ web http:/ catalogue/SEALSVIII_final.pdf "Notes on Thanh-Chương Vietnamese in Nghệ-An province".
In M. Alves, M. Sidwell, & D. Gil (Eds.), SEALS VIII:
Papers from the 8th annual meeting of the Southeast Asian Linguistics Society 1998 (pp. 1-9).
Canberra: Pacific Linguistics, The Australian National University, Research School of Pacific and Asian Studies
* Hoàng, Thị Châu.
(1989).
Tiếng Việt trên các miền đất nước: Phương ngữ học Vietnamese in different areas of the country: Dialectology.
Hà Nội: Khoa học xã hội.
* Honda, Koichi.
(2006).
http:/ sst sst2006-119.pd
"F0 and phonation types in Nghe Tinh Vietnamese tones".
In P. Warren & C. I. Watson (Eds.), Proceedings of the 11th Australasian International Conference on Speech Science and Technology (pp. 454-459).
Auckland, New Zealand: University of Auckland.
* Pham, Andrea Hoa. (2005).
https:/ web http:/ twpl twpl24/Pham_TWPL24.pdf "Vietnamese tonal system in Nghi Loc: A preliminary report".
In C. Frigeni, M. Hirayama, & S. Mackenzie (Eds.), Toronto working papers in linguistics: Special issue on similarity in phonology (Vol. 24, pp.
183-459).
Auckland, New Zealand: University of Auckland.
* Vũ, Thanh Phương.
(1982).
"Phonetic properties of Vietnamese tones across dialects".
In D. Bradley (Ed.), Papers in Southeast Asian linguistics: Tonation (Vol. 8, pp.
55-75).
Sydney: Pacific Linguistics, The Australian National University.
* Vương, Hữu Lễ. (1981).
"Vài nhận xét về đặc diểm của vần trong thổ âm Quảng Nam ở Hội An" Some notes on special qualities of the rhyme in local Quảng Nam speech in Hội An.
In Một Số Vấn Ðề Ngôn Ngữ Học Việt Nam Some linguistics issues in Vietnam (pp. 311-320).
Hà Nội: Nhà Xuất Bản Ðại Học và Trung Học Chuyên Nghiệp.
Pragmatics
* Luong, Hy Van. (1987).
"Plural markers and personal pronouns in Vietnamese person reference: An analysis of pragmatic ambiguity and negative models".
Anthropological Linguistics, 29 (1), 49-70.
* Sophana, Srichampa.
(2004).
http:/ archives SOPHANASrichampa.htm "Politeness strategies in Hanoi Vietnamese speech".
Mon-Khmer Studies, 34, 137-157
* Sophana, Srichampa.
(2005).
http:/ archives SOPHANASrichampa.htm
"Comparison of greetings in the Vietnamese dialects of Ha Noi and Ho Chi Minh City".
Mon-Khmer Studies, 35, 83-99
Historical and comparative
* Cooke, Joseph R. (1968).
Pronominal reference in Thai, Burmese, and Vietnamese.
University of California publications in linguistics (No. 52).
Berkeley: University of California Press.
* Gregerson, Kenneth J. (1969).
"A study of Middle Vietnamese phonology".
Bulletin de la Société des Etudes Indochinoises, 44, 135-193.
(Reprinted in 1981).
* Nguyễn, Đình-Hoà.
(1986).
"Alexandre de Rhodes' dictionary".
Papers in Linguistics, 19, 1-18. .
* Shorto, Harry L. edited by Sidwell, Paul, Cooper, Doug and Bauer, Christian (2006).
A Mon-Khmer comparative dictionary.
Canberra:
Australian National University.
Pacific Linguistics.
ISBN
* Thompson, Laurence E. (1967).
"The history of Vietnamese final palatals".
Language, 43 (1), 362-371. . .
Orthography
* Nguyễn, Đình-Hoà.
(1955).
Quốc-ngữ: The modern writing system in Vietnam.
Washington, DC: Author.
* Nguyễn, Đình-Hoà.
(1990).
"Graphemic borrowing from Chinese: The case of chữ nôm, Vietnam's demotic script".
Bulletin of the Institute of History and Philology, Academia Sinica, 61, 383-432.
* Nguyễn, Đình-Hoà. (1996).
Vietnamese.
In P. T. Daniels, & W. Bright (Eds.), The world's writing systems, (pp. 691-699).
New York: Oxford University Press. .
Pedagogical
* Nguyen, Bich Thuan.
(1997).
Contemporary Vietnamese: An intermediate text.
Southeast Asian language series.
Northern Illinois University, Center for Southeast Asian Studies.
* Healy, Dana. (2004).
Teach Yourself Vietnamese.
Teach Yourself.
Chicago:
McGraw-Hill.
ISBN
* Hoang, Thinh; Nguyen, Xuan Thu; Trinh, Quynh-Tram; (2000).
Vietnamese phrasebook, (3rd ed.).
Hawthorn, Vic.: Lonely Planet.
ISBN
* Moore, John. (1994).
Colloquial Vietnamese: A complete language course.
London: Routledge.
* Nguyễn, Đình-Hoà.
(1967).
Read Vietnamese: A graded course in written Vietnamese.
Rutland, Vermont: C.E. Tuttle.
* Lâm, Lý-duc; Emeneau, M. B.; von den Steinen, Diether.
(1944).
An Annamese reader.
Berkeley: University of California, Berkeley.
* Nguyễn, Đăng Liêm. (1970).
Vietnamese pronunciation.
PALI language texts: Southeast Asia.
Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press.
