In his book "Ideals of the Samurai" translator William Scott Wilson states: "The warriors in the https:/ web http:/ japanese heike.html Heike Monogatari served as models for the educated warriors of later generations, and the ideals depicted by them were not assumed to be beyond reach.
Rather, these ideals were vigorously pursued in the upper echelons of warrior society and recommended as the proper form of the Japanese man of arms.
With the Heike Monogatari, the image of the Japanese warrior in literature came to its full maturity."
Wilson then translates the writings of several warriors who mention the Heike Monogatari as an example for their men to follow.
Plenty of warrior writings document this ideal from the 13th century onward.
Most warriors aspired to or followed this ideal otherwise there would have been no cohesion in the samurai armies.
Culture
As aristocrats for centuries, samurai developed their own cultures that influenced Japanese culture as a whole.
The culture associated with the samurai such as the tea ceremony, monochrome ink painting, rock gardens and poetry was adopted by warrior patrons throughout the centuries 1200-1600.
These practices were adapted from the Chinese arts.
Zen monks introduced them to Japan and they were allowed to flourish due to the interest of powerful warrior elites.
Musō Soseki (1275-1351) was a Zen monk who was advisor to both Emperor Go-Daigo and General Ashikaga Takauji (1304-58).
Musō, as well as other monks, served as a political and cultural diplomat between Japan and China.
Musō was particularly well known for his garden design.
Another Ashikaga patron of the arts was Yoshimasa.
His cultural advisor, the Zen monk Zeami, introduced the tea ceremony to him.
Previously, tea had been used primarily for Buddhist monks to stay awake during meditation.
Education
In general, samurai, aristocrats, and priests had a very high literacy rate in kanji.
Recent studies have shown that literacy in kanji among other groups in society was somewhat higher than previously understood.
For example, court documents, birth and death records and marriage records from the Kamakura period, submitted by farmers, were prepared in Kanji.
Both the kanji literacy rate and skills in math improved toward the end of Kamakura period.
Literacy was generally high among the warriors and the common classes as well.
The feudal lord Asakura Norikage (1474-1555 AD) noted the great loyalty given to his father, due to his polite letters, not just to fellow samurai, but also to the farmers and townspeople:
There were to Lord Eirin's character many high points difficult to measure, but according to the elders the foremost of these was the way he governed the province by his civility.
It goes without saying that he acted this way toward those in the samurai class, but he was also polite in writing letters to the farmers and townspeople, and even in addressing these letters he was gracious beyond normal practice.
In this way, all were willing to sacrifice their lives for him and become his allies.
In a letter dated 29 January 1552, St Francis Xavier observed the ease of which the Japanese understood prayers due to the high level of literacy in Japan at that time:
There are two kinds of writing in Japan, one used by men and the other by women; and for the most part both men and women, especially of the nobility and the commercial class, have a literary education.
The bonzes, or bonzesses, in their monasteries teach letters to the girls and boys, though rich and noble persons entrust the education of their children to private tutors.
Most of them can read, and this is a great help to them for the easy understanding of our usual prayers and the chief points of our holy religion.
In a letter to Father Ignatius Loyola at Rome, Xavier further noted the education of the upper classes:
The Nobles send their sons to monasteries to be educated as soon as they are 8 years old, and they remain there until they are 19 or 20, learning reading, writing and religion; as soon as they come out, they marry and apply themselves to politics.
They are discreet, magnanimous and lovers of virtue and letters, honouring learned men very much.
In a letter dated 11 November 1549, Xavier described a multi-tiered educational system in Japan consisting of "universities", "colleges", "academies" and hundreds of monasteries that served as a principal center for learning by the populace:
But now we must give you an account of our stay at Cagoxima.
We put into that port because the wind was adverse to our sailing to Meaco, which is the largest city in Japan, and most famous as the residence of the King and the Princes.
It is said that after four months are passed the favourable season for a voyage to Meaco will return, and then with the good help of God we shall sail thither.
The distance from Cagoxima is three hundred leagues.
We hear wonderful stories about the size of Meaco: they say that it consists of more than ninety thousand dwellings.
There is a very famous University there, as well as five chief colleges of students, and more than two hundred monasteries of bonzes, and of others who are like coenobites, called Legioxi, as well as of women of the same kind, who are called Hamacutis.
Besides this of Meaco, there are in Japan five other principal academies, at Coya, at Negu, at Fisso, and at Homia.
These are situated round Meaco, with short distances between them, and each is frequented by about three thousand five hundred scholars.
Besides these there is the Academy at Bandou, much the largest and most famous in all Japan, and at a great distance from Meaco.
Bandou is a large territory, ruled by six minor princes, one of whom is more powerful than the others and is obeyed by them, being himself subject to the King of Japan, who is called the Great King of Meaco.
The things that are given out as to the greatness and celebrity of these universities and cities are so wonderful as to make us think of seeing them first with our own eyes and ascertaining the truth, and then when we have discovered and know how things really are, of writing an account of them to you.
They say that there are several lesser academies besides those which we have mentioned.
Names
A samurai was usually named by combining one kanji from his father or grandfather and one new kanji.
Samurai normally used only a small part of their total name.
For example, the full name of Oda Nobunaga would be "Oda Kazusanosuke Saburo Nobunaga" (), in which "Oda" is a clan or family name, "Kazusanosuke" is a title of vice-governor of Kazusa province, "Saburo" is a formal nickname (yobina), and "Nobunaga" is an adult name (nanori) given at genpuku, the coming of age ceremony.
A man was addressed by his family name and his title, or by his yobina if he did not have a title.
However, the nanori was a private name that could be used by only a very few, including the Emperor.
Samurai could choose their own nanori, and frequently changed their names to reflect their allegiances.
Samurai’s were given the privilege of carrying 2 swords and using ‘samurai surnames’ to identify themselves from the common people.
Marriage
Samurai had arranged marriages, which were arranged by a go-between of the same or higher rank.
While for those samurai in the upper ranks this was a necessity (as most had few opportunities to meet women), this was a formality for lower-ranked samurai.
Most samurai married women from a samurai family, but for lower-ranked samurai, marriages with commoners were permitted.
In these marriages a dowry was brought by the woman and was used to set up the couple's new household.
A samurai could take concubines but their backgrounds were checked by higher-ranked samurai.
In many cases, taking a concubine was akin to a marriage.
Kidnapping a concubine, although common in fiction, would have been shameful, if not criminal.
If the concubine was a commoner, a messenger was sent with betrothal money or a note for exemption of tax to ask for her parents' acceptance.
Even though the woman would not be a legal wife, a situation normally considered a demotion, many wealthy merchants believed that being the concubine of a samurai was superior to being the legal wife of a commoner.
When a merchant's daughter married a samurai, her family's money erased the samurai's debts, and the samurai's social status improved the standing of the merchant family.
If a samurai's commoner concubine gave birth to a son, the son could inherit his father's social status.
A samurai could divorce his wife for a variety of reasons with approval from a superior, but divorce was, while not entirely nonexistent, a rare event.
A wife's failure to produce a son was cause for divorce, but adoption of a male heir was considered an acceptable alternative to divorce.
A samurai could divorce for personal reasons, even if he simply did not like his wife, but this was generally avoided as it would embarrass the person who had arranged the marriage.
A woman could also arrange a divorce, although it would generally take the form of the samurai divorcing her.
After a divorce samurai had to return the betrothal money, which often prevented divorces.
Women
Maintaining the household was the main duty of women of the samurai class.
This was especially crucial during early feudal Japan, when warrior husbands were often traveling abroad or engaged in clan battles.
The wife, or okugatasama (meaning: one who remains in the home), was left to manage all household affairs, care for the children, and perhaps even defend the home forcibly.
For this reason, many women of the samurai class were trained in wielding a polearm called a naginata or a special knife called the kaiken in an art called tantojutsu (lit.
the skill of the knife), which they could use to protect their household, family, and honor if the need arose.
There were women who actively engaged in battles alongside male samurai in Japan, although most of these female warriors (Onna-bugeisha) were not formal samurai.
Traits valued in women of the samurai class were humility, obedience, self-control, strength, and loyalty.
Ideally, a samurai wife would be skilled at managing property, keeping records, dealing with financial matters, educating the children (and perhaps servants as well), and caring for elderly parents or in-laws that may be living under her roof.
Confucian law, which helped define personal relationships and the code of ethics of the warrior class required that a woman show subservience to her husband, filial piety to her parents, and care to the children.
Too much love and affection was also said to indulge and spoil the youngsters.
Thus, a woman was also to exercise discipline.
Though women of wealthier samurai families enjoyed perks of their elevated position in society, such as avoiding the physical labor that those of lower classes often engaged in, they were still viewed as far beneath men.
Women were prohibited from engaging in any political affairs and were usually not the heads of their household.
This does not mean that women in the samurai class were always powerless.
Powerful women both wisely and unwisely wielded power at various occasions.
After Ashikaga Yoshimasa, 8th shōgun of the Muromachi shogunate, lost interest in politics, his wife Hino Tomiko largely ruled in his place.
Nene, wife of Toyotomi Hideyoshi, was known to overrule her husband's decisions at times and Yodo-dono, his concubine, became the de facto master of Osaka castle and the Toyotomi clan after Hideyoshi's death.
Tachibana Ginchiyo was chosen to lead the Tachibana clan after her father's death.
Chiyo, wife of Yamauchi Kazutoyo, has long been considered the ideal samurai wife.
According to legend, she made her kimono out of a quilted patchwork of bits of old cloth and saved pennies to buy her husband a magnificent horse, on which he rode to many victories.
The fact that Chiyo (though she is better known as "Wife of Yamauchi Kazutoyo") is held in such high esteem for her economic sense is illuminating in the light of the fact that she never produced an heir and the Yamauchi clan was succeeded by Kazutoyo's younger brother.
The source of power for women may have been that samurai left their finances to their wives.
As the Tokugawa period progressed more value became placed on education, and the education of females beginning at a young age became important to families and society as a whole.
Marriage criteria began to weigh intelligence and education as desirable attributes in a wife, right along with physical attractiveness.
Though many of the texts written for women during the Tokugawa period only pertained to how a woman could become a successful wife and household manager, there were those that undertook the challenge of learning to read, and also tackled philosophical and literary classics.
Nearly all women of the samurai class were literate by the end of the Tokugawa period.
Foreign samurai
Several people born in foreign countries were granted the title of samurai.
After Bunroku and Keichō no eki, many people born in the Joseon dynasty were brought to Japan as prisoners or cooperators.
Some of them served daimyōs as retainers.
One of the most prominent figures among them was Kim Yeocheol, who was granted the Japanese name Wakita Naokata and promoted to Commissioner of Kanazawa city.
The English sailor and adventurer William Adams (1564-1620) was, along with Joosten, among the first Westerners to receive the dignity of samurai.
The shōgun Tokugawa Ieyasu presented him with two swords representing the authority of a samurai, and decreed that William Adams the sailor was dead and that Anjin Miura (), a samurai, was born.
Adams also received the title of hatamoto (bannerman), a high-prestige position as a direct retainer in the shōguns court.
He was provided with generous revenues: "For the services that I have done and do daily, being employed in the Emperor's service, the Emperor has given me a living".
He was granted a fief in Hemi () within the boundaries of present-day Yokosuka City, "with eighty or ninety husbandmen, that be my slaves or servants".
His estate was valued at 250 koku.
He finally wrote "God hath provided for me after my great misery", (Letters) by which he meant the disaster-ridden voyage that initially brought him to Japan.
Jan Joosten van Lodensteijn ( - ), a Dutch colleague of Adams' on their ill-fated voyage to Japan in the ship De Liefde, was also given similar privileges by Tokugawa Ieyasu.
Joosten likewise became a hatamoto samurai and was given a residence within Ieyasu's castle at Edo.
Today, this area at the east exit of Tokyo Station is known as Yaesu (八重洲).
Yaesu is a corruption of the Dutchman's Japanese name, Yayousu (耶楊子).
Also in common with Adams, Joostens was given a Red Seal Ship (朱印船) allowing him to trade between Japan and Indo-China.
On a return journey from Batavia, Joosten drowned after his ship ran aground.
Weapons
* Japanese swords (samurai sword) are the weapons that have come to be synonymous with the samurai.
Ancient Japanese swords from the Nara period (Chokutō) featured a straight blade, by the late 900s curved tachi appeared, followed by the uchigatana and ultimately the katana.
Smaller commonly known companion swords are the wakizashi and the tantō.
Wearing a long sword (katana) or (tachi) together with a smaller sword such as a wakizashi or tantō became the symbol of the samurai, this combination of swords is referred to as a daishō (literally "big and small").
During the Edo period only samurai were allowed to wear a daisho.
A longer blade known as the nodachi was also used in the fourteenth century, though primarily used by samurai on the ground.
* The yumi (longbow), reflected in the art of kyūjutsu (lit.
the skill of the bow) was a major weapon of the Japanese military.
Its usage declined with the introduction of the tanegashima (Japanese matchlock) during the Sengoku period, but the skill was still practiced at least for sport.
The yumi, an asymmetric composite bow made from bamboo, wood, rattan and leather, had an effective range of if accuracy was not an issue.
On foot, it was usually used behind a ().
* Tanegashima (Japanese matchlock) were introduced to Japan in the 1543 through Portuguese trade.
Tanegashima were produced on a large scale by Japanese gunsmiths, enabling warlords to raise and train armies from masses of peasants.
The new weapons were highly effective, their ease of use and deadly effectiveness led to the tanegashima becoming the weapon of choice over the yumi (bow).
By the end of the 16th century, there were more firearms in Japan than in many European nations.
Tanegashima-employed en masse, largely by ashigaru peasant foot troops-were responsible for a change in military tactics that eventually led to establishment of the Tokugawa shogunate (Edo period) and an end to civil war.
Production of tanegashima declined sharply as there was no need for massive amounts of firearms.
During the Edo period, tanegashima were stored away, and used mainly for hunting and target practice.
Foreign intervention in the 1800s renewed interest in firearms-but the tanegashima was outdated by then, and various samurai factions purchased more modern firearms from European sources.
* managed to fire an .
shot into the castle's keep.
Armor
As far back as the seventh century Japanese warriors wore a form of lamellar armor, this armor eventually evolved into the armor worn by the samurai.
The first types of Japanese armors identified as samurai armor were known as yoroi.
These early samurai armors were made from small individual scales known as kozane.
The kozane were made from either iron or leather and were bound together into small strips, the strips were coated with lacquer to protect the kozane from water.
A series of strips of kozane were then laced together with silk or leather lace and formed into a complete chest armor (dou or dō).
In the 1500s a new type of armor started to become popular due to the advent of firearms, new fighting tactics and the need for additional protection.
The kozane dou made from individual scales was replaced by plate armor.
This new armor, which used iron plated dou (dō), was referred to as Tosei-gusoku, or modern armor.
The newer armor added features and pieces of armor for the face, thigh, and back.
The back piece had multiple uses, such as for a flag bearing.
Various other components of armor protected the samurai's body.
The helmet kabuto was an important part of the samurai's armor.
It was paired with a shikoro and fukigaeshi for protection of the head and neck.
The garment worn under all of the armor and clothing was called the Fundoshi, also known as a loincloth.
Samurai armor changed and developed as the methods of samurai warfare changed over the centuries.
The known last use of samurai armor occurring in 1877 during the Satsuma Rebellion.
As the last samurai rebellion was crushed, Japan modernized its defenses and turned to a national conscription army that used uniforms.
Myth and reality
Most samurai were bound by a code of honor and were expected to set an example for those below them.
A notable part of their code is or hara kiri, which allowed a disgraced samurai to regain his honor by passing into death, where samurai were still beholden to social rules.
While there are many romanticized characterizations of samurai behavior such as the writing of in 1905, studies of Kobudō and traditional Budō indicate that the samurai were as practical on the battlefield as were any other warriors.
Despite the rampant romanticism of the 20th century, samurai could be disloyal and treacherous (e.g., Akechi Mitsuhide), cowardly, brave, or overly loyal (e.g., Kusunoki Masashige).
Samurai were usually loyal to their immediate superiors, who in turn allied themselves with higher lords.
These loyalties to the higher lords often shifted; for example, the high lords allied under Toyotomi Hideyoshi () were served by loyal samurai, but the feudal lords under them could shift their support to Tokugawa, taking their samurai with them.
There were, however, also notable instances where samurai would be disloyal to their lord (daimyō), when loyalty to the Emperor was seen to have supremacy.
In popular culture
Jidaigeki (literally historical drama) has always been a staple program on Japanese movies and television.
The programs typically feature a samurai.
Samurai films and westerns share a number of similarities and the two have influenced each other over the years.
One of Japan's most renowned directors, Akira Kurosawa, greatly influenced western film-making.
George Lucas's Star Wars series incorporated many stylistic traits pioneered by Kurosawa and Star Wars: A New Hope takes the core story of a rescued princess being transported to a secret base from Kurosawa's The Hidden Fortress.
Kurosawa was inspired by the works of director John Ford and in turn Kurosawa's works have been remade into westerns such as Seven Samurai into The Magnificent Seven and Yojimbo into A Fistful of Dollars.
There is also a 26 episode anime adaptation (Samurai 7) of Seven Samurai.
Along with film, literature containing samurai influences are seen as well.
As well as influence from American Westerns Kurosawa's also adapted two of Shakespeare's plays as sources for samurai movies; Throne of Blood was based on Macbeth and Ran was based on King Lear.
Most common are historical works where the protagonist is either a samurai or former samurai (or another rank or position) who possesses considerable martial skill.
Eiji Yoshikawa is one of the most famous Japanese historical novelists.
His retellings of popular works, including Taiko, Musashi and The Tale of the Heike, are popular among readers for their epic narratives and rich realism in depicting samurai and warrior culture.
The samurai have also appeared frequently in Japanese comics (manga) and animation (anime).
Examples are Samurai Champloo, Shigurui, Requiem from the Darkness, .
Samurai-like characters are not just restricted to historical settings and a number of works set in the modern age, and even the future, include characters who live, train and fight like samurai.
Some of these works have made their way to the west, where it has been increasing in popularity with America.
Just in the last two decades, samurai have become more popular in America.
"Hyperbolizing the samurai in such a way that they appear as a whole to be a loyal body of master warriors provides international interest in certain characters due to admirable traits."
(Moscardi, N. D.) Through various media, producers and writers have been capitalizing on the notion that Americans admire the samurai lifestyle.
The animated series, Afro Samurai, became well-liked in American popular culture due to its blend of hack-and-slash animation and gritty urban music.
Created by Takashi Okazaki, Afro Samurai was initially a dōjinshi, or manga series, which was then made into an animated series by Studio Gonzo.
In 2007 the animated series debuted on American cable television on the Spike TV channel.
The series was produced for American viewers which “embodies the trend... comparing hip-hop artists to samurai warriors, an image some rappers claim for themselves".
The storyline keeps in tone with the perception of a samurais finding vengeance against someone who has wronged him.
Starring the voice of well known American actor Samuel L. Jackson, "Afro is the second-strongest fighter in a futuristic, yet, still feudal Japan and seeks revenge upon the gunman who killed his father."
Due to its popularity, Afro Samurai was adopted into a full feature animated film and also became titles on gaming consoles such as the PlayStation 3 and Xbox.
Not only has the samurai culture been adopted into animation and video games, it can also be seen in comic books.
American comic books have adopted the character type for stories of their own like the mutant-villain Silver Samurai of Marvel Comics.
The design of this character preserves the samurai appearance; the villain is "Clad in traditional gleaming samurai armor and wielding an energy charged katana".
Not only does the Silver Samurai make over 350 comic book appearances, the character is playable in several video games, such as Marvel vs. Capcom 1 and 2.
In 2013, the samurai villain was depicted in James Mangold's film The Wolverine.
Ten years before the Wolverine debuted, another film helped pave the way to ensure the samurai were made known to American cinema:
A film released in 2003 titled The Last Samurai, starring Tom Cruise, is inspired by the samurai way of life.
In the film, Cruise's character finds himself deeply immersed in samurai culture.
The character in the film, "Nathan Algren, is a fictional contrivance to make nineteenth-century Japanese history less foreign to American viewers".
After being captured by a group of samurai rebels, he becomes empathetic towards the cause they fight for.
Taking place during the Meiji Period, Tom Cruise plays the role of US Army Captain Nathan Algren, who travels to Japan to train a rookie army in fighting off samurai rebel groups.
Becoming a product of his environment, Algren joins the samurai clan in an attempt to rescue a captured samurai leader.
"By the end of the film, he has clearly taken on many of the samurai traits, such as zen-like mastery of the sword, and a budding understanding of spirituality".
The television series Power Rangers Samurai (adapted from Samurai Sentai Shinkenger) is also inspired by the way of the Samurai.
Festivals
The celebrates the legacy of daimyō Takeda Shingen.
The festival is 3 days long.
It is held annually on the first or second weekend of April in Kōfu, Yamanashi Prefecture.
There are more than 100,000 visitors per festival.
Usually a famous Japanese celebrity plays the part of Takeda Shingen.
Ordinary people can participate too after applying.
It is one of the biggest historical reenactments in Japan.
In 2012 Guinness World Records certified it as the "largest gathering of samurai" in the world with 1061 participants.
Famous samurai
Bibliography
* Anderson, Patricia E. "Roles of Samurai Women: Social Norms and Inner Conflicts During Japan's Tokugawa Period, 1603-1868".
New Views on Gender 15 (2015): 30-37.
http:/ journals iusbgender viewFile 19840 online
* Ansart, Olivier.
"Lust, Commerce and Corruption: An Account of What I Have Seen and Heard by an Edo Samurai".
Asian Studies Review 39.3 (2015): 529-530.
* Benesch, Oleg.
Inventing the Way of the Samurai: Nationalism, Internationalism, and Bushido in Modern Japan (Oxford UP, 2014). ,
* Clements, Jonathan.
A Brief History of the Samurai (Running Press, 2010)
* Cummins, Antony, and Mieko Koizumi.
The Lost Samurai School (North Atlantic Books, 2016) 17th century Samurai textbook on comnbat; heavily illustrated.
* Hubbard, Ben.
The Samurai Warrior: The Golden Age of Japan's Elite Warriors 1560-1615 (Amber Books, 2015).
* Jaundrill, D. Colin.
Samurai to Soldier:
Remaking Military Service in Nineteenth-Century Japan (Cornell UP, 2016).
* Ogata, Ken.
"End of the Samurai: A Study of Deinstitutionalization Processes".
Academy of Management Proceedings Vol. 2015.
No. 1.
* Turnbull, Stephen.
The Samurai: A Military History (1996).
