RMS Titanic was a British passenger liner that sank in the North Atlantic Ocean in 1912 after striking an iceberg during her maiden voyage from Southampton to New York City.
Of the estimated 2,224 passengers and crew aboard, more than 1,500 died, making the sinking one of modern history's deadliest peacetime commercial marine disasters.
RMS Titanic was the largest ship afloat at the time she entered service and was the second of three s operated by the White Star Line.
She was built by the Harland and Wolff shipyard in Belfast.
Thomas Andrews, chief naval architect of the shipyard at the time, died in the disaster.
Titanic was under the command of Capt. Edward Smith, who also went down with the ship.
The ocean liner carried some of the wealthiest people in the world, as well as hundreds of emigrants from Great Britain and Ireland, Scandinavia and elsewhere throughout Europe who were seeking a new life in the United States.
The first-class accommodation was designed to be the pinnacle of comfort and luxury, with a gymnasium, swimming pool, libraries, high-class restaurants and opulent cabins.
A high-powered radiotelegraph transmitter was available for sending passenger "marconigrams" and for the ship's operational use.
Although Titanic had advanced safety features such as watertight compartments and remotely activated watertight doors, it only carried enough lifeboats for 1,178 people-about half the number on board, and one third of her total capacity-due to outdated maritime safety regulations.
The ship carried 16 lifeboat davits which could lower three lifeboats each, for a total of 48 boats.
However, Titanic carried only a total of 20 lifeboats, four of which were collapsible and proved hard to launch during the sinking.
After leaving Southampton on 10 April 1912, Titanic called at Cherbourg in France and Queenstown (now Cobh) in Ireland before heading west to New York.
On 14 April, four days into the crossing and about south of Newfoundland, she hit an iceberg at 11:40 p.m. ship's time.
The collision caused the hull plates to buckle inwards along her starboard (right) side and opened five of her sixteen watertight compartments to the sea; she could only survive four flooding.
Meanwhile, passengers and some crew members were evacuated in lifeboats, many of which were launched only partially loaded.
A disproportionate number of men were left aboard because of a "women and children first" protocol for loading lifeboats.
At 2:20 a.m., she broke apart and foundered with well over one thousand people still aboard.
Just under two hours after Titanic sank, the Cunard liner arrived and brought aboard an estimated 705 survivors.
The disaster was met with worldwide shock and outrage at the huge loss of life and the regulatory and operational failures that led to it.
Public inquiries in Britain and the United States led to major improvements in maritime safety.
One of their most important legacies was the establishment in 1914 of the International Convention for the Safety of Life at Sea (SOLAS), which still governs maritime safety.
Several new wireless regulations were passed around the world in an effort to learn from the many missteps in wireless communications-which could have saved many more passengers.
The wreck of Titanic was discovered in 1985 (more than 70 years after the disaster) during a US military mission, and it remains on the seabed.
The ship was split in two and is gradually disintegrating at a depth of .
Thousands of artefacts have been recovered and displayed at museums around the world.
Titanic has become one of the most famous ships in history, depicted in numerous works of popular culture, including books, folk songs, films, exhibits, and memorials.
Titanic is the second largest ocean liner wreck in the world, only beaten by her sister , the largest ever sunk; however, she is the largest sunk while in service as a liner as Britannic was in use as a hospital ship at the time of her sinking.
The final survivor of the sinking, Millvina Dean, aged two months at the time, died in 2009 at the age of 97.
Background
The name Titanic derives from the Titan of Greek mythology.
Built in Belfast, Ireland, in the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland (as it was then known), the RMS Titanic was the second of the three s-the first was the and the third was the .
Britannic was originally to be called Gigantic and was to be over long.
They were by far the largest vessels of the British shipping company White Star Line's fleet, which comprised 29 steamers and tenders in 1912.
The three ships had their genesis in a discussion in mid-1907 between the White Star Line's chairman, J. Bruce Ismay, and the American financier J. P. Morgan, who controlled the White Star Line's parent corporation, the International Mercantile Marine Co. (IMM).
The White Star Line faced an increasing challenge from its main rivals Cunard, which had recently launched the and the -the fastest passenger ships then in service-and the German lines Hamburg America and Norddeutscher Lloyd.
Ismay preferred to compete on size rather than speed and proposed to commission a new class of liners that would be larger than anything that had gone before as well as being the last word in comfort and luxury.
The company sought an upgrade in their fleet primarily in response to the Cunard giants but also to replace their oldest pair of passenger ships still in service, being the of 1889 and of 1890.
Teutonic was replaced by Olympic while Majestic was replaced by Titanic.
Majestic would be brought back into her old spot on White Star Line's New York service after Titanic loss.
The ships were constructed by the Belfast shipbuilders Harland and Wolff, who had a long-established relationship with the White Star Line dating back to 1867.
Harland and Wolff were given a great deal of latitude in designing ships for the White Star Line; the usual approach was for the latter to sketch out a general concept which the former would take away and turn into a ship design.
Cost considerations were relatively low on the agenda and Harland and Wolff was authorised to spend what it needed on the ships, plus a five percent profit margin.
In the case of the Olympic-class ships, a cost of £3 million (£250 million in 2015 money) for the first two ships was agreed plus "extras to contract" and the usual five percent fee.
Harland and Wolff put their leading designers to work designing the Olympic-class vessels.
The design was overseen by Lord Pirrie, a director of both Harland and Wolff and the White Star Line; naval architect Thomas Andrews, the managing director of Harland and Wolff's design department; Edward Wilding, Andrews' deputy and responsible for calculating the ship's design, stability and trim; and Alexander Carlisle, the shipyard's chief draughtsman and general manager.
Carlisle's responsibilities included the decorations, equipment and all general arrangements, including the implementation of an efficient lifeboat davit design.
On 29 July 1908, Harland and Wolff presented the drawings to J. Bruce Ismay and other White Star Line executives.
Ismay approved the design and signed three "letters of agreement" two days later, authorising the start of construction.
At this point the first ship-which was later to become Olympic-had no name, but was referred to simply as "Number 400", as it was Harland and Wolff's four hundredth hull.
Titanic was based on a revised version of the same design and was given the number 401.
Dimensions and layout
Titanic was long with a maximum breadth of .
Her total height, measured from the base of the keel to the top of the bridge, was .
She measured 46,328 gross register tons and with a draught of , she displaced 52,310 tons.
All three of the Olympic-class ships had ten decks , eight of which were for passenger use.
From top to bottom, the decks were:
* The Boat Deck, on which the lifeboats were housed.
It was from here during the early hours of 15 April 1912 that Titanics lifeboats were lowered into the North Atlantic.
The bridge and wheelhouse were at the forward end, in front of the captain's and officers' quarters.
The bridge stood above the deck, extending out to either side so that the ship could be controlled while docking.
The wheelhouse stood within the bridge.
The entrance to the First Class Grand Staircase and gymnasium were located midships along with the raised roof of the First Class lounge, while at the rear of the deck were the roof of the First Class smoke room and the relatively modest Second Class entrance.
The wood-covered deck was divided into four segregated promenades: for officers, First Class passengers, engineers, and Second Class passengers respectively.
Lifeboats lined the side of the deck except in the First Class area, where there was a gap so that the view would not be spoiled.
* A Deck, also called the Promenade Deck, extended along the entire length of the superstructure.
It was reserved exclusively for First Class passengers and contained First Class cabins, the First Class lounge, smoke room, reading and writing rooms and Palm Court.
* B Deck, the Bridge Deck, was the top weight-bearing deck and the uppermost level of the hull.
More First Class passenger accommodations were located here with six palatial staterooms (cabins) featuring their own private promenades.
On Titanic, the À La Carte Restaurant and the Café Parisien provided luxury dining facilities to First Class passengers.
Both were run by subcontracted chefs and their staff; all were lost in the disaster.
The Second Class smoking room and entrance hall were both located on this deck.
The raised forecastle of the ship was forward of the Bridge Deck, accommodating Number 1 hatch (the main hatch through to the cargo holds), numerous pieces of machinery and the anchor housings.
Aft of the Bridge Deck was the raised Poop Deck, long, used as a promenade by Third Class passengers.
It was where many of Titanics passengers and crew made their last stand as the ship sank.
The forecastle and Poop Deck were separated from the Bridge Deck by well decks.
* C Deck, the Shelter Deck, was the highest deck to run uninterrupted from stem to stern.
It included both well decks; the aft one served as part of the Third Class promenade.
Crew cabins were housed below the forecastle and Third Class public rooms were housed below the Poop Deck.
In between were the majority of First Class cabins and the Second Class library.
* D Deck, the Saloon Deck, was dominated by three large public rooms-the First Class Reception Room, the First Class Dining Saloon and the Second Class Dining Saloon.
An open space was provided for Third Class passengers.
First, Second and Third Class passengers had cabins on this deck, with berths for firemen located in the bow.
It was the highest level reached by the ship's watertight bulkheads (though only by eight of the fifteen bulkheads).
* E Deck, the Upper Deck, was predominantly used for passenger accommodation for all three classes plus berths for cooks, seamen, stewards and trimmers.
Along its length ran a long passageway nicknamed Scotland Road, in reference to a famous street in Liverpool.
Scotland Road was used by Third Class passengers and crew members.
* F Deck, the Middle Deck, was the last complete deck and mainly accommodated Second and Third Class passengers and several departments of the crew.
The Third Class dining saloon was located here, as were the swimming pool, Turkish bath and kennels.
* G Deck, the Lower Deck, was the lowest complete deck that carried passengers, and had the lowest portholes, just above the waterline.
The squash court was located here along with the traveling post office where letters and parcels were sorted ready for delivery when the ship docked.
Food was also stored here.
The deck was interrupted at several points by orlop decks over the boiler, engine and turbine rooms.
* The Orlop Decks and the Tank Top below that were on the lowest level of the ship, below the waterline.
The orlop decks were used as cargo spaces, while the Tank Top-the inner bottom of the ship's hull-provided the platform on which the ship's boilers, engines, turbines and electrical generators were housed.
This area of the ship was occupied by the engine and boiler rooms, areas which passengers would have been prohibited from seeing.
They were connected with higher levels of the ship by flights of stairs; twin spiral stairways near the bow provided access up to D Deck.
Features
Power
Titanic was equipped with three main engines-two reciprocating four-cylinder, triple-expansion steam engines and one centrally placed low-pressure Parsons turbine-each driving a propeller.
The two reciprocating engines had a combined output of .
The output of the steam turbine was .
The White Star Line had used the same combination of engines on an earlier liner, the , where it had been a great success.
It provided a good combination of performance and speed; reciprocating engines by themselves were not powerful enough to propel an Olympic-class liner at the desired speeds, while turbines were sufficiently powerful but caused uncomfortable vibrations, a problem that affected the all-turbine Cunard liners and .
By combining reciprocating engines with a turbine, fuel usage could be reduced and motive power increased, while using the same amount of steam.
The two reciprocating engines were each long and weighed 720 tons, with their bedplates contributing a further 195 tons.
They were powered by steam produced in 29 boilers, 24 of which were double-ended and five single-ended, which contained a total of 159 furnaces.
The boilers were in diameter and long, each weighing 91.5 tons and capable of holding 48.5 tons of water.
They were heated by burning coal, 6,611 tons of which could be carried in Titanics bunkers, with a further 1,092 tons in Hold 3.
The furnaces required over 600 tons of coal a day to be shovelled into them by hand, requiring the services of 176 firemen working around the clock.
100 tons of ash a day had to be disposed of by ejecting it into the sea.
The work was relentless, dirty and dangerous, and although firemen were paid relatively generously, there was a high suicide rate among those who worked in that capacity.
Exhaust steam leaving the reciprocating engines was fed into the turbine, which was situated aft.
From there it passed into a surface condenser, to increase the efficiency of the turbine and so that the steam could be condensed back into water and reused.
The engines were attached directly to long shafts which drove the propellers.
There were three, one for each engine; the outer (or wing) propellers were the largest, each carrying three blades of manganese-bronze alloy with a total diameter of .
The middle propeller was slightly smaller at in diameter, and could be stopped but not reversed.
Titanics electrical plant was capable of producing more power than an average city power station of the time.
Immediately aft of the turbine engine were four 400 kW steam-driven electric generators, used to provide electrical power to the ship, plus two 30 kW auxiliary generators for emergency use.
Their location in the stern of the ship meant they remained operational until the last few minutes before the ship sank.
Titanic lacked a searchlight in accordance with the ban on the use of searchlights in the merchant navy.
Technology
Compartments and funnels
The interiors of the Olympic-class ships were subdivided into 16 primary compartments divided by 15 bulkheads which extended above the waterline.
Eleven vertically closing watertight doors could seal off the compartments in the event of an emergency.
The ship's exposed decking was made of pine and teak, while interior ceilings were covered in painted granulated cork to combat condensation.
Standing above the decks were four funnels, each painted buff with black tops, (only three were functional-the last one was a dummy, installed for aesthetic purposes and also for kitchen ventilation) and two masts, each high, which supported derricks for working cargo.
Rudder and steering engines
Titanics rudder was so large-at high and long, weighing over 100 tons-that it required steering engines to move it.
Two steam-powered steering engines were installed, though only one was used at any one time, with the other one kept in reserve.
They were connected to the short tiller through stiff springs, to isolate the steering engines from any shocks in heavy seas or during fast changes of direction.
As a last resort, the tiller could be moved by ropes connected to two steam capstans.
The capstans were also used to raise and lower the ship's five anchors (one port, one starboard, one in the centreline and two kedging anchors).
Water, ventilation and heating
The ship was equipped with her own waterworks, capable of heating and pumping water to all parts of the vessel via a complex network of pipes and valves.
The main water supply was taken aboard while Titanic was in port, but in an emergency the ship could also distil fresh water from seawater, though this was not a straightforward process as the distillation plant quickly became clogged by salt deposits.
A network of insulated ducts conveyed warm air, driven by electric fans, around the ship, and First Class cabins were fitted with additional electric heaters.
Radio communications
Titanic radiotelegraph equipment (then known as wireless telegraphy) was leased to the White Star Line by the Marconi International Marine Communication Company, which also supplied two of its employees, Jack Phillips and Harold Bride, as operators.
The service maintained a 24-hour schedule, primarily sending and receiving passenger telegrams, but also handling navigation messages including weather reports and ice warnings.
The radio room was located on the Boat Deck, in the officers' quarters.
A soundproofed "Silent Room", next to the operating room, housed loud equipment, including the transmitter and a motor-generator used for producing alternating currents.
The operators' living quarters were adjacent to the working office.
The ship was equipped with a 'state of the art' 5 kilowatt rotary spark-gap transmitter, operating under the radio callsign MGY, and communication was conducted in Morse code.
This transmitter was one of the first Marconi installations to use a rotary spark-gap, which gave Titanic a distinctive musical tone that could be readily distinguished from other signals.
The transmitter was one of the most powerful in the world, and guaranteed to broadcast over a radius of .
An elevated T-antenna that spanned the length of the ship was used for transmitting and receiving.
The normal operating frequency was 500 kHz (600 m wavelength); however, the equipment could also operate on the "short" wavelength of 1,000 kHz (300 m wavelength) that was employed by smaller vessels with shorter antennas.
Passenger facilities
The passenger facilities aboard Titanic aimed to meet the highest standards of luxury.
According to Titanics general arrangement plans, the ship could accommodate 833 First Class Passengers, 614 in Second Class and 1,006 in Third Class, for a total passenger capacity of 2,453.
In addition, her capacity for crew members exceeded 900, as most documents of her original configuration have stated that her full carrying capacity for both passengers and crew was approximately 3,547.
Her interior design was a departure from that of other passenger liners, which had typically been decorated in the rather heavy style of a manor house or an English country house.
Titanic was laid out in a much lighter style similar to that of contemporary high-class hotels-the Ritz Hotel was a reference point-with First Class cabins finished in the Empire style.
A variety of other decorative styles, ranging from the Renaissance to Louis XV, were used to decorate cabins and public rooms in First and Second Class areas of the ship.
The aim was to convey an impression that the passengers were in a floating hotel rather than a ship; as one passenger recalled, on entering the ship's interior a passenger would "at once lose the feeling that we are on board ship, and seem instead to be entering the hall of some great house on shore".
Among the more novel features available to first-class passengers was a 7 ft. deep saltwater swimming pool, a gymnasium, a squash court, and a Turkish bath which comprised electric bath, steam room, cool room, massage room, and hot room.
First-class common rooms were impressive in scope and lavishly decorated.
They included a Lounge in the style of the Palace of Versailles, an enormous Reception Room, a men's Smoking Room, and a Reading and Writing Room.
There was an À la Carte Restaurant in the style of the Ritz Hotel which was run as a concession by the famous Italian restaurateur Gaspare Gatti.
A Café Parisien decorated in the style of a French sidewalk café, complete with ivy covered trellises and wicker furniture, was run as an annex to the restaurant.
For an extra cost, first-class passengers could enjoy the finest French haute cuisine in the most luxurious of surroundings.
Third Class (commonly referred to as Steerage) accommodations aboard Titanic were not as luxurious as First or Second Class, but even so were better than on many other ships of the time.
They reflected the improved standards which the White Star Line had adopted for trans-Atlantic immigrant and lower-class travel.
On most other North Atlantic passenger ships at the time, Third Class accommodations consisted of little more than open dormitories in the forward end of the vessels, in which hundreds of people were confined, often without adequate food or toilet facilities.
The White Star Line had long since broken that mould.
As seen aboard Titanic, all White Star Line passenger ships divided their Third Class accommodations into two sections, always at opposite ends of the vessel from one another.
The established arrangement was that single men were quartered in the forward areas, while single women, married couples and families were quartered aft.
In addition, while other ships provided only open berth sleeping arrangements, White Star Line vessels provided their Third Class passengers with private, small but comfortable cabins capable of accommodating two, four, six, eight and 10 passengers.
Third Class accommodations also included their own dining rooms, as well as public gathering areas including adequate open deck space, which aboard Titanic comprised the Poop Deck at the stern, the forward and aft well decks, and a large open space on D Deck which could be used as a social hall.
This was supplemented by the addition of a smoking room for men and a General Room on C Deck which women could use for reading and writing.
Although they were not as glamorous in design as spaces seen in upper class accommodations, they were still far above average for the period.
Leisure facilities were provided for all three classes to pass the time.
As well as making use of the indoor amenities such as the library, smoking rooms, and gymnasium, it was also customary for passengers to socialise on the open deck, promenading or relaxing in hired deck chairs or wooden benches.
A passenger list was published before the sailing to inform the public which members of the great and good were on board, and it was not uncommon for ambitious mothers to use the list to identify rich bachelors to whom they could introduce their marriageable daughters during the voyage.
One of Titanics most distinctive features was her First Class staircase, known as the Grand Staircase or Grand Stairway.
Built of solid English oak with a sweeping curve, the staircase descended through seven decks of the ship, between the Boat Deck to E deck, before terminating in a simplified single flight on F Deck.
It was capped with a dome of wrought iron and glass that admitted natural light to the stairwell.
Each landing off the staircase gave access to ornate entrance halls paneled in the William & Mary style and lit by ormolu and crystal light fixtures.
At the uppermost landing was a large carved wooden panel containing a clock, with figures of "Honour and Glory Crowning Time" flanking the clock face.
The Grand Staircase was destroyed during the sinking and is now just a void in the ship which modern explorers have used to access the lower decks.
During the filming of James Cameron's Titanic in 1997, his replica of the Grand Staircase was ripped from its foundations by the force of the inrushing water on the set.
It has been suggested that during the real event, the entire Grand Staircase was ejected upwards through the dome.
Mail and cargo
Although Titanic was primarily a passenger liner, she also carried a substantial amount of cargo.
Her designation as a Royal Mail Ship (RMS) indicated that she carried mail under contract with the Royal Mail .
For the storage of letters, parcels and specie (bullion, coins and other valuables), of space in her holds was allocated.
The Sea Post Office on G Deck was manned by five postal clerks; three Americans and two Britons, who worked 13 hours a day, seven days a week sorting up to 60,000 items daily.
The ship's passengers brought with them a huge amount of baggage; another was taken up by first- and second-class baggage.
In addition, there was a considerable quantity of regular cargo, ranging from furniture to foodstuffs, and a 1912 Renault Type CE Coupe de Ville motor car.
Despite later myths, the cargo on Titanics maiden voyage was fairly mundane; there was no gold, exotic minerals or diamonds, and one of the more famous items lost in the shipwreck, a jewelled copy of the Rubaiyat of Omar Khayyam, was valued at only £405 (£ today).
According to the claims for compensation filed with Commissioner Gilchrist, following the conclusion of the Senate Inquiry, the single most highly valued item of luggage or cargo was a large neoclassical oil painting entitled La Circassienne au Bain by French artist Merry-Joseph Blondel.
The painting's owner, first-class passenger Mauritz Håkan Björnström-Steffansson, filed a claim for $100,000 ($2.4 million equivalent in 2014) in compensation for the loss of the artwork.
Lifeboats
Like Olympic, Titanic carried a total of 20 lifeboats: 14 standard wooden Harland and Wolff lifeboats with a capacity of 65 people each and four Engelhardt "collapsible" (wooden bottom, collapsible canvas sides) lifeboats (identified as A to D) with a capacity of 47 people each.
In addition, she had two emergency cutters with a capacity of 40 people each.
Olympic carried at least two collapsible boats on either side of her number one funnel.
All of the lifeboats were stowed securely on the boat deck and, except for collapsible lifeboats A and B, connected to davits by ropes.
Those on the starboard side were odd-numbered 1-15 from bow to stern, while those on the port side were even-numbered 2-16 from bow to stern.
Both cutters were kept swung out, hanging from the davits, ready for immediate use, while collapsible lifeboats C and D were stowed on the boat deck (connected to davits) immediately inboard of boats 1 and 2 respectively.
A and B were stored on the roof of the officers' quarters, on either side of number 1 funnel.
There were no davits to lower them and their weight would make them difficult to launch by hand.
Each boat carried (among other things) food, water, blankets, and a spare life belt.
Lifeline ropes on the boats' sides enabled them to save additional people from the water if necessary.
Titanic had 16 sets of davits, each able to handle four lifeboats as Carlisle had planned.
This gave Titanic the ability to carry up to 64 wooden lifeboats which would have been enough for 4,000 people-considerably more than her actual capacity.
However, the White Star Line decided that only 16 wooden lifeboats and four collapsibles would be carried, which could accommodate 1,178 people, only one-third of Titanic total capacity.
At the time, the Board of Trade's regulations required British vessels over 10,000 tons to only carry 16 lifeboats with a capacity of 990 occupants.
Therefore, the White Star Line actually provided more lifeboat accommodation than was legally required.
At the time, lifeboats were intended to ferry survivors from a sinking ship to a rescuing ship-not keep afloat the whole population or power them to shore.
Had the responded to Titanic distress calls, the lifeboats may have been adequate to ferry the passengers to safety as planned.
Building and preparing the ship
Construction, launch and fitting-out
The sheer size of Titanic and her sister ships posed a major engineering challenge for Harland and Wolff; no shipbuilder had ever before attempted to construct vessels this size.
The ships were constructed on Queen's Island, now known as the Titanic Quarter, in Belfast Harbour.
Harland and Wolff had to demolish three existing slipways and build two new ones, the largest ever constructed up to that time, to accommodate both ships.
Their construction was facilitated by an enormous gantry built by Sir William Arrol & Co., a Scottish firm responsible for the building of the Forth Bridge and London's Tower Bridge.
The Arrol Gantry stood high, was wide and long, and weighed more than 6,000 tons.
It accommodated a number of mobile cranes.
A separate floating crane, capable of lifting 200 tons, was brought in from Germany.
The construction of Olympic and Titanic took place virtually in parallel, with Olympics keel laid down first on 16 December 1908 and Titanics on 31 March 1909.
Both ships took about 26 months to build and followed much the same construction process.
They were designed essentially as an enormous floating box girder, with the keel acting as a backbone and the frames of the hull forming the ribs.
At the base of the ships, a double bottom deep supported 300 frames, each between and apart and measuring up to about long.
They terminated at the bridge deck (B Deck) and were covered with steel plates which formed the outer skin of the ships.
The 2,000 hull plates were single pieces of rolled steel plate, mostly up to wide and long and weighing between 2.5 and 3 tons.
Their thickness varied from to .
The plates were laid in a clinkered (overlapping) fashion from the keel to the bilge.
Above that point they were laid in the "in and out" fashion, where strake plating was applied in bands (the "in strakes") with the gaps covered by the "out strakes", overlapping on the edges.
Commercial oxy-fuel and electric arc welding methods, ubiquitous in fabrication today, were still in their infancy; like most other iron and steel structures of the era, the hull was held together with over three million iron and steel rivets, which by themselves weighed over 1,200 tons.
They were fitted using hydraulic machines or were hammered in by hand.
In the 1990s some material scientists concluded that the steel plate used for the ship was subject to being especially brittle when cold, and that this brittleness exacerbated the impact damage and hastened the sinking.
It is believed that, by the standards of the time, the steel plate's quality was good, not faulty, but that it was inferior to what would be used for shipbuilding purposes in later decades, owing to advances in the metallurgy of steelmaking.
As for the rivets, considerable emphasis has also been placed on their quality and strength.
One of the last items to be fitted on Titanic before the ship's launch was her two side anchors and one centre anchor.
The anchors themselves were a challenge to make with the centre anchor being the largest ever forged by hand and weighing nearly 16 tons.
Twenty Clydesdale draught horses were needed to haul the centre anchor by wagon from the Noah Hingley & Sons Ltd forge shop in Netherton, near Dudley, United Kingdom to the Dudley railway station two miles away.
From there it was shipped by rail to Fleetwood in Lancashire before being loaded aboard a ship and sent to Belfast.
The work of constructing the ships was difficult and dangerous.
For the 15,000 men who worked at Harland and Wolff at the time, safety precautions were rudimentary at best; a lot of the work was carried out without equipment like hard hats or hand guards on machinery.
As a result, during Titanics construction, 246 injuries were recorded, 28 of them "severe", such as arms severed by machines or legs crushed under falling pieces of steel.
Six people died on the ship herself while she was being constructed and fitted out, and another two died in the shipyard workshops and sheds.
Just before the launch a worker was killed when a piece of wood fell on him.
Titanic was launched at 12:15 p.m. on 31 May 1911 in the presence of Lord Pirrie, J. Pierpont Morgan, J. Bruce Ismay and 100,000 onlookers.
Twenty-two tons of soap and tallow were spread on the slipway to lubricate the ship's passage into the River Lagan.
In keeping with the White Star Line's traditional policy, the ship was not formally named or christened with champagne.
The ship was towed to a fitting-out berth where, over the course of the next year, her engines, funnels and superstructure were installed and her interior was fitted out.
Although Titanic was virtually identical to the class's lead ship Olympic, a few changes were made to distinguish both ships.
The most noticeable exterior difference was that Titanic (and the third vessel in class, ) had a steel screen with sliding windows installed along the forward half of the A Deck promenade.
This was installed as a last minute change at the personal request of Bruce Ismay, and was intended to provide additional shelter to First Class passengers.
When the route was established, four ships were assigned to the service.
In addition to Teutonic and Majestic, the and the brand new sailed the route.
When the Olympic entered service in June 1911, she replaced Teutonic, which after completing her last run on the service in late April was transferred to the Dominion Line's Canadian service.
The following August, Adriatic was transferred to White Star Line's main Liverpool-New York service, and in November, Majestic was withdrawn from service impending the arrival of Titanic in the coming months, and was mothballed as a reserve ship.
Crew
Titanic had around 885 crew members on board for her maiden voyage.
Like other vessels of her time, she did not have a permanent crew, and the vast majority of crew members were casual workers who only came aboard the ship a few hours before she sailed from Southampton.
The process of signing up recruits had begun on 23 March and some had been sent to Belfast, where they served as a skeleton crew during Titanics sea trials and passage to England at the start of April.
Captain Edward John Smith, the most senior of the White Star Line's captains, was transferred from Olympic to take command of Titanic.
Henry Tingle Wilde also came across from Olympic to take the post of Chief Mate.
Titanics previously designated Chief Mate and First Officer, William McMaster Murdoch and Charles Lightoller, were bumped down to the ranks of First and Second Officer respectively.
The original Second Officer, David Blair, was dropped altogether.
The Third Officer was Herbert Pitman MBE, the only deck officer who was not a member of the Royal Naval Reserve.
Pitman was the second to last surviving officer.
Titanics crew were divided into three principal departments:
Deck, with 66 crew; Engine, with 325; and Victualling (pronounced vi-tal-ling), with 494.
The vast majority of the crew were thus not seamen, but were either engineers, firemen, or stokers, responsible for looking after the engines, or stewards and galley staff, responsible for the passengers.
Of these, over 97% were male; just 23 of the crew were female, mainly stewardesses.
The rest represented a great variety of professions-bakers, chefs, butchers, fishmongers, dishwashers, stewards, gymnasium instructors, laundrymen, waiters, bed-makers, cleaners, and even a printer, who produced a daily newspaper for passengers called the Atlantic Daily Bulletin with the latest news received by the ship's wireless operators.
Most of the crew signed on in Southampton on 6 April; in all, 699 of the crew came from there, and 40% were natives of the town.
A few specialist staff were self-employed or were subcontractors.
These included the five postal clerks, who worked for the Royal Mail and the United States Post Office Department, the staff of the First Class A La Carte Restaurant and the Café Parisien, the radio operators (who were employed by Marconi) and the eight musicians, who were employed by an agency and travelled as second-class passengers.
Crew pay varied greatly, from Captain Smith's £105 a month (equivalent to £ today) to the £3 10s (£ today) that stewardesses earned.
The lower-paid victualling staff could, however, supplement their wages substantially through tips from passengers.
Passengers
Titanics passengers numbered approximately 1,317 people: 324 in First Class, 284 in Second Class, and 709 in Third Class.
Of these, 869 (66%) were male and 447 (34%) female.
There were 107 children aboard, the largest number of whom were in Third Class.
The ship was considerably under capacity on her maiden voyage, as she could accommodate 2,453 passengers-833 First Class, 614 Second Class, and 1,006 Third Class.
Usually, a high prestige vessel like Titanic could expect to be fully booked on its maiden voyage.
However, a national coal strike in the UK had caused considerable disruption to shipping schedules in the spring of 1912, causing many crossings to be cancelled.
Many would-be passengers chose to postpone their travel plans until the strike was over.
The strike had finished a few days before Titanic sailed; however, that was too late to have much of an effect.
Titanic was able to sail on the scheduled date only because coal was transferred from other vessels which were tied up at Southampton, such as and , as well as coal Olympic had brought back from a previous voyage to New York, which had been stored at the White Star Dock.
Fares varied depending on class and season.
Third Class fares from London, Southampton, or Queenstown cost £7 5s (equivalent to £ today) while the cheapest First Class fares cost £23 (£ today).
The maiden voyage began at noon, as scheduled.
An accident was narrowly averted only a few minutes later, as Titanic passed the moored liners of the American Line and Oceanic of the White Star Line, the latter of which would have been her running mate on the service from Southampton.
Her huge displacement caused both of the smaller ships to be lifted by a bulge of water and then drop into a trough.
New Yorks mooring cables could not take the sudden strain and snapped, swinging her around stern-first towards Titanic.
A nearby tugboat, Vulcan, came to the rescue by taking New York under tow, and Captain Smith ordered Titanics engines to be put "full astern".
The two ships avoided a collision by a matter of about .
The incident delayed Titanics departure for about an hour, while the drifting New York was brought under control.
After making it safely through the complex tides and channels of Southampton Water and the Solent, Titanic disembarked the Southampton pilot at the Nab Lightship and headed out into the English Channel.
She headed for the French port of Cherbourg, a journey of .
The weather was windy, very fine but cold and overcast.
Because Cherbourg lacked docking facilities for a ship the size of Titanic, tenders had to be used to transfer passengers from shore to ship.
The White Star Line operated two at Cherbourg, the and the .
Both had been designed specifically as tenders for the Olympic-class liners and were launched shortly after Titanic.
Four hours after Titanic left Southampton, she arrived at Cherbourg and was met by the tenders.
There, 274 additional passengers were taken aboard - 142 First Class, 30 Second Class, and 102 Third Class.
Twenty-four passengers left aboard the tenders to be conveyed to shore, having booked only a cross-Channel passage.
The process was completed within only 90 minutes and at 8 p.m. Titanic weighed anchor and left for Queenstown with the weather continuing cold and windy.
At 11:30 a.m. on Thursday 11 April, Titanic arrived at Cork Harbour on the south coast of Ireland.
It was a partly cloudy but relatively warm day, with a brisk wind.
Again, the dock facilities were not suitable for a ship of Titanic size, and tenders were used to bring passengers aboard.
In all, 123 passengers boarded Titanic at Queenstown - three First Class, seven Second Class and 113 Third Class.
In addition to the 24 cross-Channel passengers who had disembarked at Cherbourg, another seven passengers had booked an overnight passage from Southampton to Queenstown.
Among the seven was Father Francis Browne, a Jesuit trainee who was a keen photographer and took many photographs aboard Titanic, including the last-ever known photograph of the ship.
A decidedly unofficial departure was that of a crew member, stoker John Coffey, a Queenstown native who sneaked off the ship by hiding under mail bags being transported to shore.
Titanic weighed anchor for the last time at 1:30 p.m. and departed on her westward journey across the Atlantic.
Atlantic crossing
Titanic was planned to arrive at New York Pier 59 on the morning of 17 April.
After leaving Queenstown, Titanic followed the Irish coast as far as Fastnet Rock, a distance of some .
From there she travelled along a Great Circle route across the North Atlantic to reach a spot in the ocean known as "the corner" south-east of Newfoundland, where westbound steamers carried out a change of course.
Titanic sailed only a few hours past the corner on a rhumb line leg of to Nantucket Shoals Light when she made her fatal contact with an iceberg.
The final leg of the journey would have been to Ambrose Light and finally to New York Harbor.
From 11 April to local apparent noon the next day, Titanic covered ; the following day, ; and by noon on the final day of her voyage, .
From then until the time of her sinking, she travelled another , averaging about .
The weather cleared as she left Ireland under cloudy skies with a headwind.
Temperatures remained fairly mild on Saturday 13 April, but the following day Titanic crossed a cold weather front with strong winds and waves of up to .
April, it became clear, calm and very cold.
The first three days of the voyage from Queenstown had passed without apparent incident.
A fire had begun in one of Titanic coal bunkers approximately 10 days prior to the ship's departure, and continued to burn for several days into its voyage, but passengers were unaware of this situation.
Fires occurred frequently on board steamships of that day due to spontaneous combustion of the coal.
The fires had to be extinguished with fire hoses, by moving the coal on top to another bunker and by removing the burning coal and feeding it into the furnace.
The fire was over on 14 April.
There has been some speculation and discussion as to whether this fire and attempts to extinguish it may have made the ship more vulnerable to its fate.
Titanic received a series of warnings from other ships of drifting ice in the area of the Grand Banks of Newfoundland.
One of the ships to warn Titanic was the Atlantic Line's .
Nevertheless, the ship continued to steam at full speed, which was standard practice at the time.
Although the ship was not trying to set a speed record, timekeeping was a priority, and under prevailing maritime practices, ships were often operated at close to full speed, with ice warnings seen as advisories and reliance placed upon lookouts and the watch on the bridge.
It was generally believed that ice posed little danger to large vessels.
Close calls with ice were not uncommon, and even head-on collisions had not been disastrous.
In 1907 , a German liner, had rammed an iceberg but still had been able to complete her voyage, and Captain Smith himself had declared in 1907 that he "could not imagine any condition which would cause a ship to founder.
Modern shipbuilding has gone beyond that."
Sinking
At 11:40 p.m. (ship's time) on 14 April, lookout Frederick Fleet spotted an iceberg immediately ahead of Titanic and alerted the bridge.
First Officer William Murdoch ordered the ship to be steered around the obstacle and the engines to be stopped, but it was too late; the starboard side of Titanic struck the iceberg, creating a series of holes below the waterline.
The hull was not punctured by the iceberg, but rather dented such that the hull's seams buckled and separated, allowing water to seep in.
Five of the ship's watertight compartments were breached.
It soon became clear that the ship was doomed, as she could not survive more than four compartments being flooded.
Titanic began sinking bow-first, with water spilling from compartment to compartment as her angle in the water became steeper.
Those aboard Titanic were ill-prepared for such an emergency.
In accordance with accepted practices of the time, where ships were seen as largely unsinkable and lifeboats were intended to transfer passengers to nearby rescue vessels, Titanic only had enough lifeboats to carry about half of those on board; if the ship had carried her full complement of about 3,339 passengers and crew, only about a third could have been accommodated in the lifeboats.
The crew had not been trained adequately in carrying out an evacuation.
The officers did not know how many they could safely put aboard the lifeboats and launched many of them barely half-full.
Third-class passengers were largely left to fend for themselves, causing many of them to become trapped below decks as the ship filled with water.
The "women and children first" protocol was generally followed when loading the lifeboats, and most of the male passengers and crew were left aboard.
Between 2:10 a.m. and 2:15 a.m., a little over two and a half hours after Titanic struck the iceberg, her rate of sinking suddenly increased as the boat deck dipped underwater, and the sea poured in through open hatches and grates.
As her unsupported stern rose out of the water, exposing the propellers, the ship broke in two main pieces between the second and third funnels, due to the immense forces on the keel.
With the bow underwater, and air trapped in the stern, the stern remained afloat and buoyant for a few minutes longer, rising to a nearly vertical angle with hundreds of people still clinging to it, before foundering at 2:20 a.m. For many years it was generally believed the ship sank in one piece; but when the wreck was located many years later, it was discovered that the ship had fully broken in two.
All remaining passengers and crew were immersed in lethally cold water with a temperature of .
Sudden immersion into freezing water typically causes death within minutes, either from cardiac arrest, uncontrollable breathing of water, or cold incapacitation (not, as commonly believed, from hypothermia), and almost all of those in the water died of cardiac arrest or other bodily reactions to freezing water, within 15-30 minutes.
Only 13 of them were helped into the lifeboats, though these had room for almost 500 more people.
Distress signals were sent by wireless, rockets, and lamp, but none of the ships that responded was near enough to reach Titanic before she sank.
A radio operator on board the Birma, for instance, estimated that it would be 6 a.m. before the liner could arrive at the scene.
Meanwhile, the , which was the last to have been in contact before the collision, saw Titanics flares but failed to assist.
Around 4 a.m., arrived on the scene in response to Titanics earlier distress calls.
About 710 people survived the disaster and were conveyed by Carpathia to New York, Titanics original destination, while at least 1,500 people lost their lives.
Carpathia's captain described the place as an ice field that had included 20 large bergs measuring up to high and numerous smaller bergs, as well as ice floes and debris from Titanic; passengers described being in the middle of a vast white plain of ice, studded with icebergs.
This area is now known as Iceberg Alley.
Aftermath of sinking
Arrival of Carpathia in New York
took three days to reach New York after leaving the scene of the disaster.
Her journey was slowed by pack ice, fog, thunderstorms and rough seas.
She was, however, able to pass news to the outside world by wireless about what had happened.
The initial reports were confusing, leading the American press to report erroneously on 15 April that Titanic was being towed to port by the .
Later that day, confirmation came through that Titanic had been lost and that most of her passengers and crew had died.
The news attracted crowds of people to the White Star Line's offices in London, New York, Montreal, Southampton, Liverpool and Belfast.
It hit hardest in Southampton, whose people suffered the greatest losses from the sinking.
Many charities were set up to help the victims and their families, many of whom lost their sole breadwinner, or, in the case of many Third Class survivors, everything they owned.
In New York City, for example, a joint committee of the American Red Cross and Charity Organization Society formed to disburse financial aid to survivors and dependents of those who died.
On 29 April, opera stars Enrico Caruso and Mary Garden and members of the Metropolitan Opera raised $12,000 ($300,000 in 2014) in benefits for victims of the disaster by giving special concerts in which versions of "Autumn" and "Nearer My God To Thee" were part of the programme.
This sharply limited the scope of damages survivors and family members were entitled to, prompting them to reduce their claims to some $2.5 million.
White Star only settled for $664,000 (appr.
$16.56 million in 2018), about 27% of the original total sought by survivors.
Investigations into the disaster
Even before the survivors arrived in New York, investigations were being planned to discover what had happened, and what could be done to prevent a recurrence.
Inquiries were held in both the United States and United Kingdom, the former more robustly critical of traditions and practices, and scathing of the failures involved, and the latter broadly more technical and expert-oriented.
The U.S. Senate's inquiry into the disaster was initiated on 19 April, a day after Carpathia arrived in New York.
The chairman, Senator William Alden Smith, wanted to gather accounts from passengers and crew while the events were still fresh in their minds.
Smith also needed to subpoena all surviving British passengers and crew while they were still on American soil, which prevented them from returning to the UK before the American inquiry was completed on 25 May.
noting that without hindsight, "what was a mistake in the case of the Titanic would without doubt be negligence in any similar case in the future".
The recommendations included strong suggestions for major changes in maritime regulations to implement new safety measures, such as ensuring that more lifeboats were provided, that lifeboat drills were properly carried out and that wireless equipment on passenger ships was manned around the clock.
An International Ice Patrol was set up to monitor the presence of icebergs in the North Atlantic, and maritime safety regulations were harmonised internationally through the International Convention for the Safety of Life at Sea; both measures are still in force today.
On 18 June 1912, Guglielmo Marconi gave evidence to the Court of Inquiry regarding the telegraphy.
Its final report recommended that all liners carry the system and that sufficient operators maintain a constant service.
Role of the SS Californian
One of the most controversial issues examined by the inquiries was the role played by , which had been only a few miles from Titanic but had not picked up her distress calls or responded to her signal rockets.
Californian had warned Titanic by radio of the pack ice (that was the reason Californian had stopped for the night) but was rebuked by Titanics senior wireless operator, Jack Phillips.
Testimony before the British inquiry revealed that at 10:10 p.m., Californian observed the lights of a ship to the south; it was later agreed between Captain Stanley Lord and Third Officer C.V. Groves (who had relieved Lord of duty at 11:10 p.m.) that this was a passenger liner.
At 11:50 p.m., the officer had watched that ship's lights flash out, as if she had shut down or turned sharply, and that the port light was now visible.
Morse light signals to the ship, upon Lord's order, were made between 11:30 p.m. and 1:00 a.m., but were not acknowledged.
If Titanic was as far from the Californian as Lord claimed, then he knew, or should have known, that Morse signals would not be visible.
A reasonable and prudent course of action would have been to awaken the wireless operator and to instruct him to attempt to contact Titanic by that method.
Had Lord done so, it is possible he could have reached Titanic in time to save additional lives.
The water temperature in the area where Titanic sank, which was well below normal, also contributed to the rapid death of many passengers during the sinking.
Water temperature readings taken around the time of the accident were reported to be .
Typical water temperatures were normally around during mid-April.
The coldness of the water was a critical factor, often causing death within minutes for many of those in the water.
Fewer than a third of those aboard Titanic survived the disaster.
Some survivors died shortly afterwards; injuries and the effects of exposure caused the deaths of several of those brought aboard Carpathia.
The figures show stark differences in the survival rates of the different classes aboard Titanic.
Although only 3% of first-class women were lost, 54% of those in third-class died.
Similarly, five of six first-class and all second-class children survived, but 52 of the 79 in third-class perished.
The differences by gender were even bigger: nearly all female crew members, first- and second-class passengers were saved.
Men from the First Class died at a higher rate than women from the Third Class.
In total, 50% of the children survived, 20% of the men and 75% of the women.
The last living survivor, Millvina Dean from England, who at only nine weeks old was the youngest passenger on board, died aged 97 on 31 May 2009.
Two special survivors were the stewardess Violet Jessop and the stoker Arthur John Priest, who survived the sinkings of both Titanic and HMHS Britannic and were aboard RMS Olympic when she was rammed in 1911.
Retrieval and burial of the dead
Once the massive loss of life became known, White Star Line chartered the cable ship CS Mackay-Bennett from Halifax, Nova Scotia, Canada, to retrieve bodies.
Three other Canadian ships followed in the search: the cable ship Minia, lighthouse supply ship Montmagny and sealing vessel Algerine.
Each ship left with embalming supplies, undertakers, and clergy.
Of the 333 victims that were eventually recovered, 328 were retrieved by the Canadian ships and five more by passing North Atlantic steamships.
The first ship to reach the site of the sinking, the CS Mackay-Bennett, found so many bodies that the embalming supplies aboard were quickly exhausted.
Health regulations required that only embalmed bodies could be returned to port.
Only 333 bodies of Titanic victims were recovered, one in five of the over 1,500 victims.
Some bodies sank with the ship while currents quickly dispersed bodies and wreckage across hundreds of miles making them difficult to recover.
By June, one of the last search ships reported that life jackets supporting bodies were coming apart and releasing bodies to sink.
Wreck
Titanic was long thought to have sunk in one piece and, over the years, many schemes were put forward for raising the wreck.
None came to fruition.
The fundamental problem was the sheer difficulty of finding and reaching a wreck that lies over below the surface, in a location where the water pressure is over .
A number of expeditions were mounted to find Titanic
but it was not until 1 September 1985 that a Franco-American expedition led by Robert Ballard succeeded.
The team discovered that Titanic had in fact split apart, probably near or at the surface, before sinking to the seabed.
The separated bow and stern sections lie about a third of a mile (0.6 km) apart in Titanic Canyon off the coast of Newfoundland.
They are located from the inaccurate coordinates given by Titanics radio operators on the night of her sinking, and approximately from Halifax and from New York.
Both sections struck the sea bed at considerable speed, causing the bow to crumple and the stern to collapse entirely.
The bow is by far the more intact section and still contains some surprisingly intact interiors.
In contrast, the stern is completely wrecked; its decks have pancaked down on top of each other and much of the hull plating was torn off and lies scattered across the sea floor.
The much greater level of damage to the stern is probably due to structural damage incurred during the sinking.
Thus weakened, the remainder of the stern was flattened by the impact with the sea bed.
The two sections are surrounded by a debris field measuring approximately .
It contains hundreds of thousands of items, such as pieces of the ship, furniture, dinnerware and personal items, which fell from the ship as she sank or were ejected when the bow and stern impacted on the sea floor.
The debris field was also the last resting place of a number of Titanics victims.
Most of the bodies and clothes were consumed by sea creatures and bacteria, leaving pairs of shoes and boots-which have proved to be inedible-as the only sign that bodies once lay there.
Since its initial discovery, the wreck of Titanic has been revisited on numerous occasions by explorers, scientists, filmmakers, tourists and salvagers, who have recovered thousands of items from the debris field for conservation and public display.
The ship's condition has deteriorated significantly over the years, particularly from accidental damage by submersibles but mostly because of an accelerating rate of growth of iron-eating bacteria on the hull.
In 2006, it was estimated that within 50 years the hull and structure of Titanic would eventually collapse entirely, leaving only the more durable interior fittings of the ship intermingled with a pile of rust on the sea floor.
Many artefacts from Titanic have been recovered from the sea bed by RMS Titanic Inc., which exhibits them in touring exhibitions around the world and in a permanent exhibition at the Luxor Las Vegas hotel and casino in Las Vegas, Nevada.
A number of other museums exhibit artefacts either donated by survivors or retrieved from the floating bodies of victims of the disaster.
On 16 April 2012, the day after the 100th anniversary of the sinking, photos were released showing possible human remains resting on the ocean floor.
The photos, taken by Robert Ballard during an expedition led by NOAA in 2004, show a boot and a coat close to Titanic stern which experts called "compelling evidence" that it is the spot where somebody came to rest, and that human remains could be buried in the sediment beneath them.
The wreck of the Titanic falls under the scope of the 2001 UNESCO Convention on the Protection of the Underwater Cultural Heritage.
This means that all states party to the convention will prohibit the pillaging, commercial exploitation, sale and dispersion of the wreck and its artefacts.
Because of the location of the wreck in international waters and the lack of any exclusive jurisdiction over the wreckage area, the convention provides a state co-operation system, by which states inform each other of any potential activity concerning ancient shipwreck sites, like the Titanic, and co-operate to prevent unscientific or unethical interventions.
Submersible dives in 2019 have found further deterioration of the wreck, including loss of the captain's bathtub.
Legacy
Safety
After the disaster, recommendations were made by both the British and American Boards of Inquiry stating that ships should carry enough lifeboats for all aboard, mandated lifeboat drills would be implemented, lifeboat inspections would be conducted, etc.
Many of these recommendations were incorporated into the International Convention for the Safety of Life at Sea passed in 1914.
The Convention has been updated by periodic amendments, with a completely new version adopted in 1974.
Signatories to the Convention followed up with national legislation to implement the new standards.
For example, in Britain, new "Rules for Life Saving Appliances" were passed by the Board of Trade on 8 May 1914 and then applied at a meeting of British steamship companies in Liverpool in June 1914.
Further, the United States government passed the Radio Act of 1912.
This Act, along with the International Convention for the Safety of Life at Sea, stated that radio communications on passenger ships would be operated 24 hours a day, along with a secondary power supply, so as not to miss distress calls.
Also, the Radio Act of 1912 required ships to maintain contact with vessels in their vicinity as well as coastal onshore radio stations.
In addition, it was agreed in the International Convention for the Safety of Life at Sea that the firing of red rockets from a ship must be interpreted as a sign of need for help.
Once the Radio Act of 1912 was passed, it was agreed that rockets at sea would be interpreted as distress signals only, thus removing any possible misinterpretation from other ships.
In 1912, the Board of Trade chartered the barque to act as a weather ship in the Grand Banks of Newfoundland, keeping a look-out for icebergs.
A Marconi wireless was installed to enable her to communicate with stations on the coast of Labrador and Newfoundland.
Cultural
Titanic has gone down in history as the ship that was called unsinkable.
For more than 100 years, she has been the inspiration of fiction and non-fiction.
She is commemorated by monuments for the dead and by museums exhibiting artefacts from the wreck.
Just after the sinking, memorial postcards sold in huge numbers together with memorabilia ranging from tin candy boxes to plates, whiskey jiggers, and even black mourning teddy bears.
Several survivors wrote books about their experiences, but it was not until 1955 that the first historically accurate book - A Night to Remember - was published.
The first film about the disaster, Saved from the Titanic, was released only 29 days after the ship sank and had an actual survivor as its star-the silent film actress Dorothy Gibson.
The British film A Night to Remember (1958) is still widely regarded as the most historically accurate movie portrayal of the sinking.
The most financially successful by far has been James Cameron's Titanic (1997), which became the highest-grossing film in history up to that time, as well as the winner of 11 Oscars at the 70th Academy Awards, including Best Picture and Best Director for Cameron.
The Titanic disaster was commemorated through a variety of memorials and monuments to the victims, erected in several English-speaking countries and in particular in cities that had suffered notable losses.
These included Southampton, Liverpool and Belfast in the United Kingdom; New York and Washington, D.C. in the United States; and Cobh (formerly Queenstown) in Ireland.
A number of museums around the world have displays on Titanic; the most prominent is in Belfast, the ship's birthplace (see below).
RMS Titanic Inc., which is authorised to salvage the wreck site, has a permanent Titanic exhibition at the Luxor Las Vegas hotel and casino in Nevada which features a 22-ton slab of the ship's hull.
It also runs an exhibition which travels around the world.
In Nova Scotia, Halifax's Maritime Museum of the Atlantic displays items that were recovered from the sea a few days after the disaster.
They include pieces of woodwork such as panelling from the ship's First Class Lounge and an original deckchair, as well as objects removed from the victims.
In 2012 the centenary was marked by plays, radio programmes, parades, exhibitions and special trips to the site of the sinking together with commemorative stamps and coins.
In a frequently commented-on literary coincidence, Morgan Robertson authored a novel called Futility in 1898 about a fictional British passenger liner with the plot bearing a number of similarities to the Titanic disaster.
In the novel the ship is the SS Titan, a four-stacked liner, the largest in the world and considered unsinkable.
And like the Titanic, she sinks after hitting an iceberg and does not have enough lifeboats.
In Northern Ireland
Only recently has the significance of Titanic most notably been given by Northern Ireland where it was built by Harland and Wolff in the capital city, Belfast.
While the rest of the world embraced the glory and tragedy of Titanic, in its birth city, Titanic remained a taboo subject throughout the 20th century.
The sinking brought tremendous grief and was a blow to the city's pride.
But its shipyard was also a place many Catholics regarded as hostile.
In the latter half of the century, during a 30-year sectarian conflict, Titanic was a reminder of the lack of civil rights that in part contributed towards the Troubles.
While the fate of Titanic remained a well-known story within local households throughout the 20th century, commercial investment around RMS Titanic legacy was modest because of these issues.
After the Troubles and Good Friday Agreement, the number of overseas tourists visiting Northern Ireland dramatically increased to 30 million (100% rise by 2008).
It was subsequently identified in the Northern Ireland Tourism Board's Strategic Framework for Action 2004-2007 that the significance of and interest in Titanic globally was not being fully exploited as a tourist attraction.
Thus, Titanic Belfast® was spearheaded, along with some smaller projects, such as a Titanic memorial.
In 2012 on the ship's centenary, Titanic Belfast visitor attraction was opened on the site of the shipyard where Titanic was built.
It was Northern Ireland's second most visited tourist attraction with almost 700,000 visitors in 2016.
Despite over 1,600 ships being built by Harland and Wolff in Belfast Harbour, Queen's Island became renamed after its most famous ship, Titanic Quarter in 1995.
Once a sensitive story, Titanic is now considered one of Northern Ireland's most iconic and uniting symbols.
In late August 2018, several groups were vying for the right to purchase the 5,500 Titanic relics that were an asset of the bankrupt Premier Exhibitions.
Eventually, Titanic Belfast, Titanic Foundation Limited and the National Museums Northern Ireland joined with the National Maritime Museum as a consortium that was raising money to purchase the 5,500 artefacts.
The group intended to keep all of the items together as a single exhibit.
Oceanographer Robert Ballard said he favored this bid since it would ensure that the memorabilia would be permanently displayed in Belfast (where Titanic was built) and in Greenwich.
On 17 October 2018, The New York Times reported that a consortium of three hedge funds-Apollo Global Management, Alta Fundamental Advisers, and PacBridge Capital Partners-had paid US$19.5 million for the collection.
Appendix
Diagram of RMS Titanic showing the arrangement of the bulkheads in red.
Compartments in the engineering area at the bottom of the ship are noted in blue.
Names of decks are listed to the right .
Areas of damage made by the iceberg are shown in green.
The scale's smallest unit is and its total length is .
A cutaway diagram of Titanics midship section.
S: Sun deck.
A: Upper promenade deck.
B: Promenade deck, glass-enclosed.
C: Saloon deck.
E: Main deck.
F: Middle deck.
G: Lower deck: cargo, coal bunkers, boilers, engines.
(a) Welin davits with lifeboats, (b) Bilge, (c) Double bottom
Comparison of Titanic in size to modern means of transport and a person
* 10 April, noon: Maiden voyage starts.
Leaves Southampton dock, narrowly escaping collision with American liner New York.
* 10 April, 19:00: Stops at Cherbourg for passengers.
* 11 April, 12:30: Stops at Queenstown for passengers and mail.
* 14 April, 23:40:
Collision with iceberg (Latitude 41° 46′ N, Longitude 50° 14′ W).
* 15 April, 02:05: Last boat, Collapsible D, lowered.
Replicas
There have been several proposals and studies for a project to build a replica ship based on the Titanic.
A project by South African businessman Sarel Gaus was abandoned in 2006, and a project by Australian businessman Clive Palmer was announced in 2012, known as the Titanic II.
A Chinese shipbuilding company known as Wuchang Shipbuilding Industry Group Co., Ltd commenced construction in January 2014 to build a replica ship of the Titanic for use in a resort.
The vessel will house many features of the original, such as a ballroom, dining hall, theatre, first-class cabins, economy cabins and swimming pool.
Tourists will be able to reside inside the Titanic during their time at the resort.
It will be permanently docked at the resort and feature an audiovisual simulation of the sinking, which has caused some criticism.
The RMS Olympic was the sister ship of the Titanic.
The interior decoration of the dining salon and the grand staircase were in identical style and created by the same craftsmen.
Large parts of the interior of the Olympic were later sold and are now in the White Swan Hotel, Alnwick, which gives an impression of how the interior of the Titanic looked.
* RMS Titanic alternative theories, alternative explanations for the fate of the Titanic (rather than it hitting an iceberg)
* Eastland disaster, a ship capsizing in 1915 after being fitted with extra lifeboats
Notes
Bibliography
Books
Journals and news articles
Investigations
