Bir Tawil or Bi'r Tawīl ( or , meaning "tall water well") is a area along the border between Egypt and Sudan, which is uninhabited and claimed by neither country.
When spoken of in association with the neighbouring Hala'ib Triangle, it is sometimes referred to as the Bir Tawil Triangle, despite the area's quadrilateral shape; the two "triangles" border at a quadripoint.
Its terra nullius status results from a discrepancy between the straight political boundary between Egypt and Sudan established in 1899, and the irregular administrative boundary established in 1902.
Egypt asserts the political boundary, and Sudan asserts the administrative boundary, with the result that the Hala'ib Triangle is claimed by both and Bir Tawil by neither.
In 2014, author Alastair Bonnett described Bir Tawil as the only place on Earth that was habitable but was not claimed by any recognised government.
History
On 19 January 1899, an agreement between the UK and Egypt relating to the administration of the Sudan defined "Soudan" as the "territories south of the 22nd parallel of latitude".
It contained a provision that would give Egypt control of the red sea port of Suakin, but an amendment on 10 July 1899 gave Suakin to Sudan instead.
Geography
Bir Tawil is in size.
The length of its northern and southern borders are and respectively; the length of its eastern and western borders are and respectively.
In the north of the area is the mountain Jabal Tawil (), with a height of .
In the east is Jebel Hagar ez Zarqa, with a height of .
In the south is the Wadi Tawil (), also called Khawr Abū Bard.
There are a few streams in Bir Tawil, which originate in Lake Nasser.
Climate
Bir Tawil's climate is, according to the Köppen climate classification, a BWh hot, arid desert.
During the summer months, approximately three-quarters of the year, temperatures can exceed , while its hottest three months (June-August) can see it as high as .
During the brief winters, however (December and January being its mildest months), Bir Tawil can experience milder temperatures with as its usual temperature peak.
Because the territory is far from the ocean (being at least away from the Red Sea), the diurnal temperature range throughout the region is large, varying from , year-round.
Claims
Due to its status as de jure unclaimed territory, a number of individuals and organizations have attempted to claim Bir Tawil as a micronation.
However, none has been taken seriously by the international community, and due to the remoteness and hostile climate of the region, the vast majority of these claims have been by declarations posted online from other locations.
None of these claims, or any others, have been recognized, officially or otherwise, by any government or international organization.
