The snowshoe hare (Lepus americanus), also called the varying hare, or snowshoe rabbit, is a species of hare found in North America.
It has the name "snowshoe" because of the large size of its hind feet.
The animal's feet prevent it from sinking into the snow when it hops and walks.
Its feet also have fur on the soles to protect it from freezing temperatures.
For camouflage, its fur turns white during the winter and rusty brown during the summer.
Its flanks are white year-round.
The snowshoe hare is also distinguishable by the black tufts of fur on the edge of its ears.
Its ears are shorter than those of most other hares.
In summer, it feeds on plants such as grass, ferns, and leaves; in winter, it eats twigs, the bark from trees, and buds from flowers and plants and, similar to the Arctic hare, has been known to occasionally eat dead animals.
It can sometimes be seen feeding in small groups.
This animal is mainly active at night and does not hibernate.
The snowshoe hare may have up to four litters in a year, which average three to eight young.
Males compete for females, and females may breed with several males.
A major predator of the snowshoe hare is the Canadian lynx.
Historical records of animals caught by fur hunters over hundreds of years show the lynx and hare numbers rising and falling in a cycle, which has made the hare known to biology students worldwide as a case study of the relationship between numbers of predators and their prey.
Taxonomy and distribution
Snowshoe hares occur from Newfoundland to Alaska; south in the Sierra Nevada to central California; in the Rocky Mountains to southern Utah and northern New Mexico; and in the Appalachian Mountains to North Carolina and Tennessee.
*Lepus americanus americanus (Erxleben) - Ontario, Manitoba, Saskatchewan, Alberta, Montana, and North Dakota
*L. a. cascadensis (Nelson) - British Columbia and Washington
*L. a. columbiensis (Rhoads) - British Columbia, Alberta, and Washington
*L. a. dalli (Merriam) - Mackenzie District, British Columbia, Alaska, Yukon
*L. a. klamathensis (Merriam) - Oregon and California
*L. a. phaeonotus (J. A. Allen) - Ontario, Manitoba, Saskatchewan, Michigan, Wisconsin, and Minnesota
*L. a. pineus (Dalquest) - British Columbia, Idaho, and Washington
*L. a. struthopus (Bangs) - Newfoundland, Nova Scotia, New Brunswick, Prince Edward Island, Quebec, and Maine
*L. a. tahoensis (Orr) - California, western Nevada
*L. a. virginianus (Harlan) - Ontario, Quebec, Maine, New Hampshire, Vermont, Massachusetts, New York, Pennsylvania, Ohio, West Virginia, Maryland, Virginia, North Carolina, and Tennessee
*L. a. washingtonii (Baird) - British Columbia, Washington, and Oregon
Description
The snowshoe hare's fur is rusty brown in the spring and summer, and white in the winter.
It also always has a gray underbelly, and black on the tips and edges of its ears and tail.
It has very large hind feet, and dense fur on their soles.
The snowshoe hare's ears are not as long as some other species of hares' ears.
In the winter, it turns a bright white to blend in with the snow.
Habitats
Snowshoe hares are primarily found in boreal forests and upper montane forests; within these forests, they favor habitats with a dense shrub layer.
In the Pacific Northwest, snowshoe hares occupy diverse habitats, including mature conifers (mostly Douglas-fir Pseudotsuga menziesii and variants), immature conifers, alder (Alnus spp.)
salal (Gaultheria shallon), and cedar (Thuja spp.)
swamps.
In the Southwest, the southernmost populations of snowshoe hares occur in
the Sangre de Cristo Mountains, New Mexico, in subalpine scrub: narrow bands of shrubby and prostrate conifers at and just below timberline that are usually composed of Engelmann spruce (Picea engelmannii), bristlecone pine (Pinus aristata), limber pine (P. flexilis), and/or common juniper (Juniperus communis).
In Minnesota, snowshoe hares use jack pine (P. banksiana) uplands, edges, tamarack (Larix laricina) bogs, black spruce (Picea mariana) bogs, and sedge (Carex spp.), alder, and scrub fens.
In New England, snowshoe hares favor second-growth aspen (Populus spp.)-birch (Betula spp.) near conifers, but other forest types occupied by snowshoe hares include aspens, paper birch (B. papyrifera), northern hardwoods, red maple (A. rubrum), balsam fir (Abies balsamea), red
spruce (Picea rubens)-balsam fir, eastern hemlock (Tsuga canadensis), northern red oak (Quercus rubra), oak (Quercus spp.)-pine (Pinus spp.), eastern white pine (P. strobus)-northern red oak-red maple, and eastern white pine.
Snowshoe hares also use shrub swamps dominated by buttonbush (Cephalanthus occidentalis), alders, and silky dogwood (Cornus ammomum).
Further details on plant communities used by snowshoe hares in different regions are in Bittner and Rongstad.
Female snowshoe hares can become pregnant anytime after the 35th day of gestation.
The second litter can therefore be conceived before the first litter is born (snowshoe hares have twin uteri).
Population cycles
Northern populations of snowshoe hares undergo cycles that range from seven to 17 years between population peaks.
The average time between peaks is approximately 10 years.
The period of abundance usually lasts for two to five years, followed by a population decline to lower numbers or local scarcity.
Areas of great abundance tend to be scattered.
The hare's fluctuating numbers are modelled by the Lotka-Volterra equations.
Preferred habitat
Major variables in habitat quality include average visual obstruction and browse biomass.
Snowshoe hares prefer young forests with abundant understories.
The presence of cover is the primary determinant of habitat quality, and is more significant than food availability or species composition.
Species composition does, however, influence population density; dense softwood understories support greater snowshoe hare density than hardwoods because of cover quality.
In Maine, female snowshoe hares were observed to be more common on sites with less cover but more nutritious forage; males tended to be found on sites with heavier cover.
Winter browse availability depends on height of understory brush and winter snow depth; saplings with narrow stem diameters are required for winter browse in heavy snow.
In northern Utah, they occupied all the later stages of succession on quaking aspen and spruce-fir, but were not observed in meadows.
In Alberta, snowshoe hares use upland shrub-sapling stages of regenerating aspens (either postfire or postharvest).
In British Columbia overstocked juvenile lodgepole pine (Pinus contorta) stands formed optimal snowshoe hare habitat.
In western Washington, most unburned, burned, or scarified clearcuts will normally be fully occupied by snowshoe hares within four to five years, as vegetation becomes dense.
In western Oregon, snowshoe hares were abundant only in early successional stages, including stable brushfields.
In west-central Oregon, an old-growth Douglas-fir forest was clearcut and monitored through 10 years of succession.
A few snowshoe hares were noted in adjacent virgin forest plots; they represented widely scattered, sparse populations.
One snowshoe hare was observed on the disturbed plot 2.5 years after it had been clearcut and burned; at this stage, ground cover was similar to that of the uncut forest.
By 9 years after disturbance, snowshoe hare density had increased markedly.
In western Washington, snowshoe hares routinely used steep slopes where cover was adequate; most studies, however, suggest they tend to prefer gentle slopes.
Moonlight increases snowshoe hare vulnerability to predation, particularly in winter.
They tend to avoid open areas during bright phases of the moon and during bright periods of a single night.
Their activity usually shifts from coniferous understories in winter to hardwood understories in summer.
Vegetative structure plays an important role in the size of snowshoe hare home ranges.
Snowshoe hares wander up to 5 miles (8 km) when food is scarce.
In Montana home ranges are smaller in brushy woods than in open woods.
In Colorado and Utah, the average home range of both sexes was 20 acres (8.1 ha).
On the Island of Montreal in Quebec, the average daily range for both sexes was 4 acres (1.6 ha) in old-field mixed woods.
In Montana, the home range averaged 25 acres (10 ha) for males and 19 acres (7.6 ha) for females.
In Oregon the average snowshoe hare home range was 14.6 acres (5.9 ha).
Cover requirements
Snowshoe hares require dense, brushy, usually coniferous cover; thermal and escape cover are especially important for young hares.
Food habits
Snowshoe hares eat a variety of plant materials.
Forage type varies with season.
Succulent green vegetation is consumed when available from spring to fall; after the first frost, buds, twigs, evergreen needles, and bark form the bulk of snowshoe hare diets until spring greenup.
Winter
Snowshoe hares prefer branches, twigs, and small stems up to 0.25 inch (6.3 mm) diameter; larger stems are sometimes used in winter.
The snowshoe hare winter diet is dominated by bog birch (Betula glandulosa), which is preferred but not always available.
Greyleaf willow (Salix glauca) is eaten most often when bog birch is not available.
Buffaloberry (Shepherdia canadensis) is the fourth most common diet item.
White spruce (Picea glauca) is eaten, but not preferred.
In Alaska, spruce, willows, and alders comprise 75% of snowshoe hare diets; spruce needles make up nearly 40% of the diet.
Further details on regional food preferences are summarized in Snowshoe hare and allies:
Spring, summer and autumn
In Alaska, snowshoe hares consume new leaves of blueberries (Vaccinium spp.), new shoots of field horsetails (Equisetum arvense), and fireweed (Epilobium angustifolium) in spring.
Grasses are not a major item due to low availability associated with sites that have adequate cover.
In summer, leaves of willows, black spruce, birches, and bog Labrador tea (Ledum groenlandicum) are also consumed.
Black spruce is the most heavily used and the most common species in the area.
Pen trials suggest black spruce is not actually preferred.
Roses (Rosa spp.) were preferred, but a minor dietary item, as they were not common in the study area.
In northwest Oregon, summer foods include grasses, clovers (Trifolium spp.), other forbs, and some woody plants, including Sitka spruce, Douglas-fir, and young leaves and twigs of salal.
In Ontario, summer diets consist of clovers, grasses, and forbs.
Predators
The snowshoe hare is a major prey item for a number of predators.
Major predators include Canada lynx (Lynx canadensis), bobcats (L. rufus), fishers , American martens (M. americana), long-tailed weasels (Mustela frenata), minks (M. vison), foxes (Vulpes and Urocyon spp.), coyote (Canis latrans), domestic dogs (C. familiaris), domestic cats (Felis catus), wolves (C. lupus), mountain lions (Puma concolor), great horned owls (Bubo virginianus), barred owls (Strix varia), spotted owls (S. occidentalis), other owls, red-tailed hawks (Buteo jamaicensis), northern goshawks (Accipiter gentilis), other hawks (Buteonidae), golden eagles (Aquila chryseatos), and crows and ravens.
Other predators include black bears (Ursus americanus).
Vulnerability to climate change
The habitat for some snowshoe hares has changed dramatically, leaving some habitats without snow for longer periods than previously.
Some hares have adapted and stay brown all winter.
Others, however, continue to turn white in winter.
These hares are at an increased risk of being hunted and killed because they are no longer camouflaged.
Many people in the scientific community believe that snowshoe hare populations are at risk of crashing unless interbreeding speeds up the process of evolution to year-round brown.
Other species who rely on the hare as part of their diet are also at risk.
