The polar bear (s.
Because of expected habitat loss caused by climate change, the polar bear is classified as a vulnerable species.
For decades, large-scale hunting raised international concern for the future of the species, but populations rebounded after controls and quotas began to take effect.
For thousands of years, the polar bear has been a key figure in the material, spiritual, and cultural life of circumpolar peoples, and polar bears remain important in their cultures.
Historically, the polar bear has also been known as the white bear.
It is sometimes referred to as the 'nanook', based on the Inuit term nanuq.
due to the animal's native habitat.
The Inuit refer to the animal as nanook (transliterated as nanuq in the Inupiat language).
The Yupik also refer to the bear as nanuuk in Siberian Yupik.
The bear is umka in the Chukchi language.
In Russian, it is usually called бе́лый медве́дь (bélyj medvédj, the white bear), though an older word still in use is ошку́й (Oshkúj, which comes from the Komi oski, "bear").
In Quebec, the polar bear is referred to as ours blanc ("white bear") or ours polaire ("polar bear").
In the Norwegian-administered Svalbard archipelago, the polar bear is referred to as Isbjørn ("ice bear").
The polar bear was previously considered to be in its own genus, Thalarctos.
However, evidence of hybrids between polar bears and brown bears, and of the recent evolutionary divergence of the two species, does not support the establishment of this separate genus, and the accepted scientific name is now therefore Ursus maritimus, as Phipps originally proposed.
The subfamily Ursinae originated approximately 4.2 million years ago.
The oldest known polar bear fossil is a 130,000 to 110,000-year-old jaw bone, found on Prince Charles Foreland in 2004.
Fossils show that between 10,000 and 20,000 years ago, the polar bear's molar teeth changed significantly from those of the brown bear.
Polar bears are thought to have diverged from a population of brown bears that became isolated during a period of glaciation in the Pleistocene meaning that the polar bear might not be considered a species under some species concepts.
The mtDNA of extinct Irish brown bears is particularly close to polar bears.
A comparison of the nuclear genome of polar bears with that of brown bears revealed a different pattern, the two forming genetically distinct clades that diverged approximately 603,000 years ago, although the latest research is based on analysis of the complete genomes of polar and brown bears, and establishes the divergence of polar and brown bears at 400,000 years ago.
However, the two species have mated intermittently for all that time, most likely coming into contact with each other during warming periods, when polar bears were driven onto land and brown bears migrated northward.
Most brown bears have about 2 percent genetic material from polar bears, but one population, the ABC Islands bears has between 5 percent and 10 percent polar bear genes, indicating more frequent and recent mating.
Polar bears can breed with brown bears to produce fertile grizzly-polar bear hybrids; rather than indicating that they have only recently diverged, the new evidence suggests more frequent mating has continued over a longer period of time, and thus the two bears remain genetically similar.
When the polar bear was originally documented, two subspecies were identified: the American polar bear (Ursus maritimus maritimus) by Constantine J. Phipps in 1774, and the Siberian polar bear (Ursus maritimus marinus) by Peter Simon Pallas in 1776.
This distinction has since been invalidated.
There are 19 generally recognized, discrete subpopulations, though polar bears are thought to exist only in low densities in the area of the Arctic Basin.
The subpopulations display seasonal fidelity to particular areas, but DNA studies show that they are not reproductively isolated.
The 13 North American subpopulations range from the Beaufort Sea south to Hudson Bay and east to Baffin Bay in western Greenland and account for about 54% of the global population.
The range includes the territory of five nations: Denmark (Greenland), Norway (Svalbard), Russia, the United States (Alaska) and Canada.
These five nations are the signatories of the International Agreement on the Conservation of Polar Bears, which mandates cooperation on research and conservation efforts throughout the polar bear's range.
Bears sometimes swim to Iceland from Greenland-about 600 sightings since the country's settlement in the 9th century AD, and five in the 21st century -and are always killed because of their danger, and the cost and difficulty of repatriation.
Modern methods of tracking polar bear populations have been implemented only since the mid-1980s, and are expensive to perform consistently over a large area.
The most accurate counts require flying a helicopter in the Arctic climate to find polar bears, shooting a tranquilizer dart at the bear to sedate it, and then tagging the bear.
In Nunavut, some Inuit have reported increases in bear sightings around human settlements in recent years, leading to a belief that populations are increasing.
Scientists have responded by noting that hungry bears may be congregating around human settlements, leading to the illusion that populations are higher than they actually are.
The Polar Bear Specialist Group of the IUCN Species Survival Commission takes the position that "estimates of subpopulation size or sustainable harvest levels should not be made solely on the basis of traditional ecological knowledge without supporting scientific studies."
Of the 19 recognized polar bear subpopulations, one is in decline, two are increasing, seven are stable, and nine have insufficient data, as of 2017.
Habitat
The polar bear is a marine mammal because it spends many months of the year at sea.
However, it is the only living marine mammal with powerful, large limbs and feet that allow them to cover miles on foot and run on land.
Its preferred habitat is the annual sea ice covering the waters over the continental shelf and the Arctic inter-island archipelagos.
These areas, known as the "Arctic ring of life", have high biological productivity in comparison to the deep waters of the high Arctic.
Freshwater is limited in these environments because it is either locked up in snow or saline.
Polar bears are able to produce water through the metabolism of fats found in seal blubber, and are therefore found primarily along the perimeter of the polar ice pack, rather than in the Polar Basin close to the North Pole where the density of seals is low.
Annual ice contains areas of water that appear and disappear throughout the year as the weather changes.
Seals migrate in response to these changes, and polar bears must follow their prey.
In Hudson Bay, James Bay, and some other areas, the ice melts completely each summer (an event often referred to as "ice-floe breakup"), forcing polar bears to go onto land and wait through the months until the next freeze-up.
In the Chukchi and Beaufort seas, polar bears retreat each summer to the ice further north that remains frozen year-round.
Physical characteristics
The only other bear similar in size to the polar bear is the Kodiak bear, which is a subspecies of brown bear.
Adult male polar bears weigh and measure in total length.
Around the Beaufort Sea, however, mature males reportedly average .
Adult females are roughly half the size of males and normally weigh , measuring in length.
Elsewhere, a slightly larger estimated average weight of was claimed for adult females.
When pregnant, however, females can weigh as much as .
The largest polar bear on record, reportedly weighing , was a male shot at Kotzebue Sound in northwestern Alaska in 1960.
This specimen, when mounted, stood tall on its hindlegs.
The shoulder height of an adult polar bear is .
While all bears are short-tailed, the polar bear's tail is relatively the shortest amongst living bears, ranging from in length.
Compared with its closest relative, the brown bear, the polar bear has a more elongated body build and a longer skull and nose.
The pads of the paws are covered with small, soft papillae (dermal bumps), which provide traction on the ice.
The polar bear's claws are short and stocky compared to those of the brown bear, perhaps to serve the former's need to grip heavy prey and ice.
Unlike the brown bear, polar bears in captivity are rarely overweight or particularly large, possibly as a reaction to the warm conditions of most zoos.
The 42 teeth of a polar bear reflect its highly carnivorous diet.
The cheek teeth are smaller and more jagged than in the brown bear, and the canines are larger and sharper.
The dental formula is The guard hair is over most of the body.
Polar bears gradually moult from May to August, but, unlike other Arctic mammals, they do not shed their coat for a darker shade to provide camouflage in summer conditions.
The hollow guard hairs of a polar bear coat were once thought to act as fiber-optic tubes to conduct light to its black skin, where it could be absorbed; however, this hypothesis was disproved by a study in 1998.
The white coat usually yellows with age.
When kept in captivity in warm, humid conditions, the fur may turn a pale shade of green due to algae growing inside the guard hairs.
Males have significantly longer hairs on their forelegs, which increase in length until the bear reaches 14 years of age.
The male's ornamental foreleg hair is thought to attract females, serving a similar function to the lion's mane.
The polar bear has an extremely well developed sense of smell, being able to detect seals nearly away and buried under of snow.
Its hearing is about as acute as that of a human, and its vision is also good at long distances.
The polar bear is an excellent swimmer and often will swim for days.
One bear swam continuously for 9 days in the frigid Bering Sea for to reach ice far from land.
She then travelled another .
During the swim, the bear lost 22% of her body mass and her yearling cub died.
With its body fat providing buoyancy, the bear swims in a dog paddle fashion using its large forepaws for propulsion.
Polar bears can swim .
When walking, the polar bear tends to have a lumbering gait and maintains an average speed of around .
Life history and behaviour
Unlike brown bears, polar bears are not territorial.
Although stereotyped as being voraciously aggressive, they are normally cautious in confrontations, and often choose to escape rather than fight.
Satiated polar bears rarely attack humans unless severely provoked.
However, due to their lack of prior human interaction, hungry polar bears are extremely unpredictable, fearless towards people and are known to kill and sometimes eat humans.
Many attacks by brown bears are the result of surprising the animal, which is not the case with the polar bear.
Polar bears are stealth hunters, and the victim is often unaware of the bear's presence until the attack is underway.
Whereas brown bears often maul a person and then leave, polar bear attacks are more likely to be predatory and are almost always fatal.
However, due to the very small human population around the Arctic, such attacks are rare.
Michio Hoshino, a Japanese wildlife photographer, was once pursued briefly by a hungry male polar bear in northern Alaska.
According to Hoshino, the bear started running but Hoshino made it to his truck.
The bear was able to reach the truck and tore one of the doors off the truck before Hoshino was able to drive off.
In general, adult polar bears live solitary lives.
Yet, they have often been seen playing together for hours at a time and even sleeping in an embrace, Polar bears are usually quiet but do communicate with various sounds and vocalizations.
Females communicate with their young with moans and chuffs, and the distress calls of both cubs and subadults consists of bleats.
When nervous, bears produce huffs, chuffs and snorts while hisses, growls and roars are signs of aggression.
Chemical communication can also be important: bears leave behind their scent in their tracks which allow individuals to keep track of one another in the vast Arctic wilderness.
In 1992, a photographer near Churchill took a now widely circulated set of photographs of a polar bear playing with a Canadian Eskimo Dog (Canis lupus familiaris) a tenth of its size.
The pair wrestled harmlessly together each afternoon for 10 days in a row for no apparent reason, although the bear may have been trying to demonstrate its friendliness in the hope of sharing the kennel's food.
This kind of social interaction is uncommon; it is far more typical for polar bears to behave aggressively towards dogs.
Hunting and diet
The polar bear is the most carnivorous member of the bear family, and throughout most of its range, its diet primarily consists of ringed (Pusa hispida) and bearded seals (Erignathus barbatus).
The Arctic is home to millions of seals, which become prey when they surface in holes in the ice in order to breathe, or when they haul out on the ice to rest.
Polar bears hunt primarily at the interface between ice, water, and air; they only rarely catch seals on land or in open water.
the bear uses its excellent sense of smell to locate a seal breathing hole, and crouches nearby in silence for a seal to appear.
The bear may lie in wait for several hours.
When the seal exhales, the bear smells its breath, reaches into the hole with a forepaw, and drags it out onto the ice.
The polar bear kills the seal by biting its head to crush its skull.
The polar bear also hunts by stalking seals resting on the ice: upon spotting a seal, it walks to within , and then crouches.
If the seal does not notice, the bear creeps to within of the seal and then suddenly rushes forth to attack.
whereas younger bears consume the protein-rich red meat.
For subadult bears, which are independent of their mother but have not yet gained enough experience and body size to successfully hunt seals, scavenging the carcasses from other bears' kills is an important source of nutrition.
Subadults may also be forced to accept a half-eaten carcass if they kill a seal but cannot defend it from larger polar bears.
After feeding, polar bears wash themselves with water or snow.
Although polar bears are extraordinarily powerful, its primary prey species, the ringed seal, is much smaller than itself, and many of the seals hunted are pups rather than adults.
Ringed seals are born weighing and grown to an estimated average weight of only .
They also in places prey heavily upon the harp seal (Pagophilus groenlandicus) or the harbour seal.
The bearded seal, on the other hand, can be nearly the same size as the bear itself, averaging .
Large males also occasionally attempt to hunt and kill even larger prey items.
It can kill an adult walrus (Odobenus rosmarus), Polar bears have also been seen to prey on beluga whales (Delphinapterus leucas)
Most terrestrial animals in the Arctic can outrun the polar bear on land as polar bears overheat quickly, and most marine animals the bear encounters can outswim it.
In some areas, the polar bear's diet is supplemented by walrus calves and by the carcasses of dead adult walruses or whales, whose blubber is readily devoured even when rotten.
Being both curious animals and scavengers, The dump in Churchill, Manitoba was closed in 2006 to protect bears, and waste is now recycled or transported to Thompson, Manitoba.
Dietary flexibility
Although seal predation is the primary and an indispensable way of life for most polar bears, when alternatives are present they are quite flexible.
Polar bears consume a wide variety of other wild foods, including muskox (Ovibos moschatus), reindeer (Rangifer tarandus), birds, eggs, rodents, crabs, other crustaceans and other polar bears.
They may also eat plants, including berries, roots, and kelp; however, none of these have been a significant part of their diet,
When stalking land animals, such as muskox, reindeer, Adult muskox, which can weigh or more, are a more formidable quarry.
Although ungulates are not typical prey, the killing of one during the summer months can greatly increase the odds of survival during that lean period.
Like the brown bear, most ungulate prey of polar bears is likely to be young, sickly or injured specimens rather than healthy adults.
In their southern range, especially near Hudson Bay and James Bay, Canadian polar bears endure all summer without sea ice to hunt from.
One scientist found that 71% of the Hudson Bay bears had fed on seaweed (marine algae) and that about half were feeding on birds
Reproduction and lifecycle
Courtship and mating take place on the sea ice in April and May, when polar bears congregate in the best seal hunting areas.
Partners stay together and mate repeatedly for an entire week; the mating ritual induces ovulation in the female.
After mating, the fertilized egg remains in a suspended state until August or September.
During these four months, the pregnant female eats prodigious amounts of food, gaining at least and often more than doubling her body weight.
Her body temperature does not decrease during this period as it would for a typical mammal in hibernation.
Between November and February, cubs are born blind, covered with a light down fur, and weighing less than , On average, each litter has two cubs.
The family remains in the den until mid-February to mid-April, with the mother maintaining her fast while nursing her cubs on a fat-rich milk.
By the time the mother breaks open the entrance to the den, her cubs weigh about .
For about 12 to 15 days, the family spends time outside the den while remaining in its vicinity, the mother grazing on vegetation while the cubs become used to walking and playing.
Then they begin the long walk from the denning area to the sea ice, where the mother can once again catch seals.
Depending on the timing of ice-floe breakup in the fall, she may have fasted for up to eight months.
Female polar bears are noted for both their affection towards their offspring, and their valor in protecting them.
Multiple cases of adoption of wild cubs have been confirmed by genetic testing.
Adult bears of either gender occasionally kill and eat polar bear cubs.
As of 2006, in Alaska, 42% of cubs were reaching 12 months of age, down from 65% in 1991.
A study in Hudson Bay indicated that both the reproductive success and the maternal weight of females peaked in their mid-teens.
Maternal success appeared to decline after this point, possibly because of an age-related impairment in the ability to store the fat necessary to rear cubs.
Polar bears appear to be less affected by infectious diseases and parasites than most terrestrial mammals.
although infections are usually not fatal.
Only one case of a polar bear with rabies has been documented, even though polar bears frequently interact with Arctic foxes, which often carry rabies.
The oldest wild bears on record died at age 32, whereas the oldest captive was a female who died in 1991, age 43.
The causes of death in wild adult polar bears are poorly understood, as carcasses are rarely found in the species's frigid habitat.
In the wild, old polar bears eventually become too weak to catch food, and gradually starve to death.
Polar bears injured in fights or accidents may either die from their injuries, or become unable to hunt effectively, leading to starvation.
Ecological role
The polar bear is the apex predator within its range, and is a keystone species for the Arctic.
Several animal species, particularly Arctic foxes (Vulpes lagopus) and glaucous gulls (Larus hyperboreus), routinely scavenge polar bear kills.
and dead polar bear cubs have been found in brown bear dens.
Wolves are rarely encountered by polar bears, though there are two records of Arctic wolf (Canis lupus arctos) packs killing polar bear cubs.
Adult polar bears are occasionally vulnerable to predation by orcas (Orcinus orca) while swimming, but they are rarely reported as taken and bears are likely to avoid entering the water if possible if they detect an orca pod in the area.
The melting sea ice in the Arctic may be causing an increase of orcas in the Arctic sea, which may increase the risk of predation on polar bears but also may benefit the bears by providing more whale carcasses that they can scavenge.
The remains of polar bears have found in the stomachs of large Greenland sharks (Somniosus microcephalus), although it certainly cannot be ruled out that the bears were merely scavenged by this slow-moving, unusual shark.
A rather unlikely killer of a grown polar bear has reportedly included a wolverine (Gulo gulo), anecedotely reported to have suffocated a bear in a zoo with a bite to the throat during a conflict.
This report may well be dubious, however.
Polar bears are sometimes the host of arctic mites such as Alaskozetes antarcticus.
The polar bear may swim underwater for up to three minutes to approach seals on shore or on ice floes.
Hunting
Indigenous people
Polar bears have long provided important raw materials for Arctic peoples, including the Inuit, Yupik, Chukchi, Nenets, Russian Pomors and others.
Hunters commonly used teams of dogs to distract the bear, allowing the hunter to spear the bear or shoot it with arrows at closer range.
Hunters make sure to either toss the liver into the sea or bury it in order to spare their dogs from potential poisoning.
Traditional subsistence hunting was on a small enough scale to not significantly affect polar bear populations, mostly because of the sparseness of the human population in polar bear habitat.
However, since polar bear fur has always played a marginal commercial role, data on the historical harvest is fragmentary.
It is known, for example, that already in the winter of 1784/1785 Russian Pomors on Spitsbergen harvested 150 polar bears in Magdalenefjorden.
In the early 20th century, Norwegian hunters were harvesting 300 bears per year at the same location.
Estimates of total historical harvest suggest that from the beginning of the 18th century, roughly 400 to 500 animals were being harvested annually in northern Eurasia, reaching a peak of 1,300 to 1,500 animals in the early 20th century, and falling off as the numbers began dwindling.
Norwegians used "self-killing guns", comprising a loaded rifle in a baited box that was placed at the level of a bear's head, and which fired when the string attached to the bait was pulled.
The numbers taken grew rapidly in the 1960s, peaking around 1968 with a global total of 1,250 bears that year.
Contemporary regulations
Concerns over the future survival of the species led to the development of national regulations on polar bear hunting, beginning in the mid-1950s.
The Soviet Union banned all hunting in 1956.
Canada began imposing hunting quotas in 1968.
Norway passed a series of increasingly strict regulations from 1965 to 1973, and has completely banned hunting since then.
The United States began regulating hunting in 1971 and adopted the Marine Mammal Protection Act in 1972.
In 1973, the International Agreement on the Conservation of Polar Bears was signed by all five nations whose territory is inhabited by polar bears: Canada, Denmark, Norway, the Soviet Union, and the United States.
Member countries agreed to place restrictions on recreational and commercial hunting, ban hunting from aircraft and icebreakers, and conduct further research.
The treaty allows hunting "by local people using traditional methods".
Norway is the only country of the five in which all harvest of polar bears is banned.
The agreement was a rare case of international cooperation during the Cold War.
Biologist Ian Stirling commented, "For many years, the conservation of polar bears was the only subject in the entire Arctic that nations from both sides of the Iron Curtain could agree upon sufficiently to sign an agreement.
Such was the intensity of human fascination with this magnificent predator, the only marine bear."
Agreements have been made between countries to co-manage their shared polar bear subpopulations.
After several years of negotiations, Russia and the United States signed an agreement in October 2000 to jointly set quotas for indigenous subsistence hunting in Alaska and Chukotka.
The treaty was ratified in October 2007.
In September 2015, the polar bear range states agreed upon a "circumpolar action plan" describing their conservation strategy for polar bears.
Although the United States government has proposed that polar bears be transferred to Appendix I of CITES, which would ban all international trade in polar bear parts, polar bears currently remain listed under Appendix II.
This decision was approved of by members of the IUCN and TRAFFIC, who determined that such an uplisting was unlikely to confer a conservation benefit.
Canada
Polar bears were designated "Not at Risk" in April 1986 and uplisted to "Special Concern" in April 1991.
This status was re-evaluated and confirmed in April 1999, November 2002, and April 2008.
Polar bears continue to be listed as a species of special concern in Canada because of their sensitivity to overharvest and because of an expected range contraction caused by loss of Arctic sea ice.
More than 600 bears are killed per year by humans across Canada, but the practice was not common until the 1980s.
The territory of Nunavut accounts for the location 80% of annual kills in Canada.
In 2005, the government of Nunavut increased the quota from 400 to 518 bears, In two areas where harvest levels have been increased based on increased sightings, science-based studies have indicated declining populations, and a third area is considered data-deficient.
While most of that quota is hunted by the indigenous Inuit people, a growing share is sold to recreational hunters.
Nunavut polar bear biologist, Mitchell Taylor, who was formerly responsible for polar bear conservation in the territory, has insisted that bear numbers are being sustained under current hunting limits.
In 2010, the 2005 increase was partially reversed.
Government of Nunavut officials announced that the polar bear quota for the Baffin Bay region would be gradually reduced from 105 per year to 65 by the year 2013.
The Government of the Northwest Territories maintain their own quota of 72 to 103 bears within the Inuvialuit communities of which some are set aside for sports hunters.
Environment Canada also banned the export from Canada of fur, claws, skulls and other products from polar bears harvested in Baffin Bay as of 1 January 2010.
Greenland
In Greenland, hunting restrictions were first introduced in 1994 and expanded by executive order in 2005.
Other provisions included year-round protection of cubs and mothers, restrictions on weapons used and various administrative requirements to catalogue kills.
Russia
The Soviet Union banned the harvest of polar bears in 1956; however, poaching continued and is estimated to pose a serious threat to the polar bear population.
Polar bears are currently listed as "Rare", of "Uncertain Status", or "Rehabilitated and rehabilitating" in the Red Data Book of Russia, depending on population.
In 2010, the Ministry of Natural Resources and Environment published a strategy for polar bear conservation in Russia.
United States
The Marine Mammal Protection Act of 1972 afforded polar bears some protection in the United States.
It banned hunting (except by indigenous subsistence hunters), banned importing of polar bear parts (except polar bear pelts taken legally in Canada), and banned the harassment of polar bears.
On 15 May 2008, the United States Department of the Interior listed the polar bear as a threatened species under the Endangered Species Act, citing the melting of Arctic sea ice as the primary threat to the polar bear.
It banned all importing of polar bear trophies.
Importing products made from polar bears had been prohibited from 1972 to 1994 under the Marine Mammal Protection Act, and restricted between 1994 and 2008.
Under those restrictions, permits from the United States Fish and Wildlife Service were required to import sport-hunted polar bear trophies taken in hunting expeditions in Canada.
The permit process required that the bear be taken from an area with quotas based on sound management principles.
Since 1994, hundreds of sport-hunted polar bear trophies have been imported into the U.S. In 2015, the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service published a draft conservation management plan for polar bears to improve their status under the Endangered Species Act and the Marine Mammal Protection Act.
Conservation status, threats, and controversies
Polar bear population sizes and trends are difficult to estimate accurately because they occupy remote home ranges and exist at low population densities.
Polar bear fieldwork can also be hazardous to researchers.
As of 2015, the International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN) reports that the global population of polar bears is 22,000 to 31,000, and the current population trend is unknown.
Nevertheless, polar bears are listed as "Vulnerable" under criterion A3c, which indicates an expected population decrease of ≥30% over the next three generations (~34.5 years) due to "decline in area of occupancy, extent of occurrence and/or quality of habitat".
Risks to the polar bear include climate change, pollution in the form of toxic contaminants, conflicts with shipping, oil and gas exploration and development, and human-bear interactions including harvesting and possible stresses from recreational polar-bear watching.
Climate change
The International Union for Conservation of Nature, Arctic Climate Impact Assessment, United States Geological Survey and many leading polar bear biologists have expressed grave concerns about the impact of climate change, including the belief that the current warming trend imperils the survival of the polar bear.
The key danger posed by climate change is malnutrition or starvation due to habitat loss.
Polar bears hunt seals from a platform of sea ice.
Rising temperatures cause the sea ice to melt earlier in the year, driving the bears to shore before they have built sufficient fat reserves to survive the period of scarce food in the late summer and early fall.
Reduction in sea-ice cover also forces bears to swim longer distances, which further depletes their energy stores and occasionally leads to drowning.
although the population was listed as "stable" as of 2017.
In Alaska, the effects of sea ice shrinkage have contributed to higher mortality rates in polar bear cubs, and have led to changes in the denning locations of pregnant females.
The proportion of maternity dens on sea ice has changed from 62% between the years 1985 through 1994, to 37% over the years 1998 through 2004.
Thus, now the Alaskan population more resembles the world population in that it is more likely to den on land.
In recent years, polar bears in the Arctic have undertaken longer than usual swims to find prey, possibly resulting in four recorded drownings in the unusually large ice pack regression of 2005.
A new development is that polar bears have begun ranging to new territory.
While not unheard of but still uncommon, polar bears have been sighted increasingly in larger numbers ashore, staying on the mainland for longer periods of time during the summer months, particularly in North Canada, traveling farther inland.
This may cause an increased reliance on terrestrial diets, such as goose eggs, waterfowl and caribou, as well as increased human-bear conflict.
Halocarbons are known to be toxic to other animals, because they mimic hormone chemistry, and biomarkers such as immunoglobulin G and retinol suggest similar effects on polar bears.
PCBs have received the most study, and they have been associated with birth defects and immune system deficiency.
Many chemicals, such as PCBs and DDT, have been internationally banned due to the recognition of their harm on the environment.
Their concentrations in polar bear tissues continued to rise for decades after being banned as these chemicals spread through the food chain.
Since then, the trend seems to have discontinued, with tissue concentrations of PCBs declining between studies performed from 1989 to 1993 and studies performed from 1996 to 2002.
During the same time periods, DDT was notably lower in the Western Hudson Bay population only.
Oil and gas development
Oil and gas development in polar bear habitat can affect the bears in a variety of ways.
An oil spill in the Arctic would most likely concentrate in the areas where polar bears and their prey are also concentrated, such as sea ice leads.
Maternity dens, used by pregnant females and by females with infants, can also be disturbed by nearby oil exploration and development.
Disturbance of these sensitive sites may trigger the mother to abandon her den prematurely, or abandon her litter altogether.
The bears could disappear from Europe, Asia, and Alaska, and be depleted from the Canadian Arctic Archipelago and areas off the northern Greenland coast.
By 2080, they could disappear from Greenland entirely and from the northern Canadian coast, leaving only dwindling numbers in the interior Arctic Archipelago.
Polar bears diverged from brown bears 400,000-600,000 years ago and have survived past periods of climate fluctuation.
It has been claimed that polar bears will be able to adapt to terrestrial food sources as the sea ice they use to hunt seals disappears.
However, most polar bear biologists think that polar bears will be unable to completely offset the loss of calorie-rich seal blubber with terrestrial foods, and that they will be outcompeted by brown bears in this terrestrial niche, ultimately leading to a population decline.
Controversy over species protection
Warnings about the future of the polar bear are often contrasted with the fact that worldwide population estimates have increased over the past 50 years and are relatively stable today.
Some estimates of the global population are around 5,000 to 10,000 in the early 1970s; other estimates were 20,000 to 40,000 during the 1980s.
Current estimates put the global population at between 20,000 and 25,000 Second, controls of harvesting were introduced that allowed this previously overhunted species to recover.
Third, the recent effects of climate change have affected sea ice abundance in different areas to varying degrees.
Many Inuit believe the polar bear population is increasing, and restrictions on commercial sport-hunting are likely to lead to a loss of income to their communities.
In culture
Indigenous folklore
For the indigenous peoples of the Arctic, polar bears have long played an important cultural and material role.
and 1,500-year-old cave paintings of polar bears have been found in the Chukchi Peninsula.
Indeed, it has been suggested that Arctic peoples' skills in seal hunting and igloo construction has been in part acquired from the polar bears themselves.
Among the Chukchi and Yupik of eastern Siberia, there was a longstanding shamanistic ritual of "thanksgiving" to the hunted polar bear.
After killing the animal, its head and skin were removed and cleaned and brought into the home, and a feast was held in the hunting camp in its honor.
To appease the spirit of the bear, traditional song and drum music was played, and the skull was ceremonially fed and offered a pipe.
Only once the spirit was appeased was the skull be separated from the skin, taken beyond the bounds of the homestead, and placed in the ground, facing north.
Vehicle licence plates in the Northwest Territories and Nunavut in Canada are in the shape of a polar bear.
The polar bear is the mascot of Bowdoin College, Maine, the University of Alaska Fairbanks, and the 1988 Winter Olympics held in Calgary.
The Eisbären Berlin hockey team uses a roaring polar bear as their logo, and the Charlotte, North Carolina hockey team the Charlotte Checkers uses a polar bear named Chubby Checker as their mascot.
Coca-Cola has used images of the polar bear in its advertising, and Polar Beverages, Nelvana, Bundaberg Rum, Klondike bars, and Fox's Glacier Mints all feature polar bears in their logos.
Fiction
Polar bears are popular in fiction, particularly in books for children or teenagers.
For example, The Polar Bear Son is adapted from a traditional Inuit tale.
The animated television series Noah's Island features a polar bear named Noah as the protagonist.
Polar bears feature prominently in East (North Child in the UK) by Edith Pattou, The Bear by Raymond Briggs (adapted into an animated short in 1998), and Chris d'Lacey's The Fire Within series.
The panserbjørne of Philip Pullman's fantasy trilogy His Dark Materials are sapient, dignified polar bears who exhibit anthropomorphic qualities, and feature prominently in the 2007 film adaptation of The Golden Compass.
The television series Lost features polar bears living on the tropical island setting.
Bibliography
Further reading
