The Colosseum or Coliseum ( ), also known as the Flavian Amphitheatre (; or Colosseo ), is an oval amphitheatre in the centre of the city of Rome, Italy.
Built of travertine limestone, tuff (volcanic rock), and brick-faced concrete, it was the largest amphitheatre ever built at the time and held 50,000 spectators.
The Colosseum is situated just east of the Roman Forum.
Construction began under the emperor Vespasian in AD 72 and was completed in AD 80 under his successor and heir, Titus.
Further modifications were made during the reign of Domitian (81-96).
These three emperors are known as the Flavian dynasty, and the amphitheatre was named in Latin for its association with their family name (Flavius).
The Colosseum could hold an estimated 50,000 to 80,000 spectators during phases of its various renovations over the centuries, having an average audience of some 65,000; it was used for gladiatorial contests and public spectacles such as mock sea battles (for only a short time as the hypogeum was soon filled in with mechanisms to support the other activities), animal hunts, executions, re-enactments of famous battles, and dramas based on Classical mythology.
The building ceased to be used for entertainment in the early medieval era.
It was later reused for such purposes as housing, workshops, quarters for a religious order, a fortress, a quarry, and a Christian shrine.
Although substantially ruined because of earthquakes, thieves, and stone-robbers, the Colosseum is still an iconic symbol of Imperial Rome and is listed as one of the New7Wonders of the World.
It is one of Rome's most popular tourist attractions and also has links to the Roman Catholic Church, as each Good Friday the Pope leads a torchlit "Way of the Cross" procession that starts in the area around the Colosseum.
In 2018, it was the most popular tourist attraction in the world, with 7.4 million visitors.
The Colosseum is also depicted on the Italian version of the five-cent euro coin.
Name
The Colosseum's original Latin name was Amphitheatrum Flavium, often anglicized as Flavian Amphitheatre.
The building was constructed by emperors of the Flavian dynasty, following the reign of Nero.
This name is still used in modern English, but generally the structure is better known as the Colosseum.
In antiquity, Romans may have referred to the Colosseum by the unofficial name Amphitheatrum Caesareum (with Caesareum an adjective pertaining to the title Caesar), but this name may have been strictly poetic as it was not exclusive to the Colosseum; Vespasian and Titus, builders of the Colosseum, also constructed an amphitheater of the same name in Puteoli (modern Pozzuoli).
The name Colosseum is believed to be derived from a colossal statue of Nero that once stood nearby.
This is often mistranslated to refer to the Colosseum rather than the Colossus (as in, for instance, Byron's poem Childe Harold's Pilgrimage).
However, at the time that the Pseudo-Bede wrote, the masculine noun coliseus was applied to the statue rather than to what was still known as the Flavian amphitheatre.
The Colossus did eventually fall, possibly being pulled down to reuse its bronze.
By the year 1000 the name "Colosseum" had been coined to refer to the amphitheatre from the nearby Colossus Solis.
The statue itself was largely forgotten and only its base survives, situated between the Colosseum and the nearby Temple of Venus and Roma.
By the 2nd century BC the area was densely inhabited.
It was devastated by the Great Fire of Rome in 64 AD, following which Nero seized much of the area to add to his personal domain.
He built the grandiose Domus Aurea on the site, in front of which he created an artificial lake surrounded by pavilions, gardens and porticoes.
The existing Aqua Claudia aqueduct was extended to supply water to the area and the gigantic bronze Colossus of Nero was set up nearby at the entrance to the Domus Aurea.
Although the Colossus was preserved, much of the Domus Aurea was torn down.
The lake was filled in and the land reused as the location for the new Flavian Amphitheatre.
Gladiatorial schools and other support buildings were constructed nearby within the former grounds of the Domus Aurea.
Vespasian's decision to build the Colosseum on the site of Nero's lake can be seen as a populist gesture of returning to the people an area of the city which Nero had appropriated for his own use.
In contrast to many other amphitheatres, which were located on the outskirts of a city, the Colosseum was constructed in the city centre, in effect, placing it both symbolically and precisely at the heart of Rome.
Construction was funded by the opulent spoils taken from the Jewish Temple after the Great Jewish Revolt in 70 CE led to the Siege of Jerusalem.
According to a reconstructed inscription found on the site, "the emperor Vespasian ordered this new amphitheatre to be erected from his general's share of the booty."
It is often assumed that Jewish prisoners of war were brought back to Rome and contributed to the massive workforce needed for the construction of the amphitheatre, but there is no ancient evidence for that; it would, nonetheless, be commensurate with Roman practice to add humiliation to the defeat population.
Along with this free source of unskilled labor, teams of professional Roman builders, engineers, artists, painters and decorators undertook the more specialized tasks necessary for building the Colosseum.
The Colosseum was constructed with several different materials: wood, limestone, tuff, tiles, cement, and mortar.
Construction of the Colosseum began under the rule of Vespasian Dio Cassius recounts that over 9,000 wild animals were killed during the inaugural games of the amphitheatre.
Commemorative coinage was issued celebrating the inauguration.
The building was remodelled further under Vespasian's younger son, the newly designated Emperor Domitian, who constructed the hypogeum, a series of tunnels used to house animals and slaves.
He also added a gallery to the top of the Colosseum to increase its seating capacity.
In 217, the Colosseum was badly damaged by a major fire (caused by lightning, according to Dio Cassius) which destroyed the wooden upper levels of the amphitheatre's interior.
It was not fully repaired until about 240 and underwent further repairs in 250 or 252 and again in 320.
Gladiatorial fights are last mentioned around 435.
An inscription records the restoration of various parts of the Colosseum under Theodosius II and Valentinian III (reigned 425-455), possibly to repair damage caused by a major earthquake in 443; more work followed in 484 and 508.
The arena continued to be used for contests well into the 6th century.
Animal hunts continued until at least 523, when Anicius Maximus celebrated his consulship with some venationes, criticised by King Theodoric the Great for their high cost.
and continued to inhabit it until as late as the early 19th century.
The interior of the amphitheater was extensively stripped of stone, which was reused elsewhere, or (in the case of the marble façade) was burned to make quicklime.
In 1671 Cardinal Altieri authorized its use for bullfights; a public outcry caused the idea to be hastily abandoned.
In 1749, Pope Benedict XIV endorsed the view that the Colosseum was a sacred site where early Christians had been martyred.
He forbade the use of the Colosseum as a quarry and consecrated the building to the Passion of Christ and installed Stations of the Cross, declaring it sanctified by the blood of the Christian martyrs who perished there (see Significance in Christianity).
However, there is no historical evidence to support Benedict's claim, nor is there even any evidence that anyone before the 16th century suggested this might be the case; the Catholic Encyclopedia concludes that there are no historical grounds for the supposition, other than the reasonably plausible conjecture that some of the many martyrs may well have been.
Later popes initiated various stabilization and restoration projects, removing the extensive vegetation which had overgrown the structure and threatened to damage it further.
The façade was reinforced with triangular brick wedges in 1807 and 1827, and the interior was repaired in 1831, 1846 and in the 1930s.
The arena substructure was partly excavated in 1810-1814 and 1874 and was fully exposed under Benito Mussolini in the 1930s.
or if a jurisdiction abolishes the death penalty.
Most recently, the Colosseum was illuminated in gold in November 2012 following the abolishment of capital punishment in the American state of Connecticut in April 2012.
Because of the ruined state of the interior, it is impractical to use the Colosseum to host large events; only a few hundred spectators can be accommodated in temporary seating.
However, much larger concerts have been held just outside, using the Colosseum as a backdrop.
Performers who have played at the Colosseum in recent years have included Ray Charles (May 2002), Paul McCartney (May 2003), Elton John (September 2005), and Billy Joel (July 2006).
Physical description
Exterior
Unlike earlier Greek theatres that were built into hillsides, the Colosseum is an entirely free-standing structure.
It derives its basic exterior and interior architecture from that of two Roman theatres back to back.
It is elliptical in plan and is 189 meters wide, with a base area of .
The height of the outer wall is 48 meters .
The central arena is an oval 87 m (287 ft) long and 55 m (180 ft) wide, surrounded by a wall 5 m (15 ft) high, above which rose tiers of seating.
The outer wall is estimated to have required over of travertine stone which were set without mortar; they were held together by 300 tons of iron clamps.
Each of the arches in the second- and third-floor arcades framed statues, probably honoring divinities and other figures from Classical mythology.
Two hundred and forty mast corbels were positioned around the top of the attic.
They originally supported a retractable awning, known as the velarium, that kept the sun and rain off spectators.
This consisted of a canvas-covered, net-like structure made of ropes, with a hole in the center.
The Colosseum's huge crowd capacity made it essential that the venue could be filled or evacuated quickly.
Its architects adopted solutions very similar to those used in modern stadiums to deal with the same problem.
The amphitheatre was ringed by eighty entrances at ground level, 76 of which were used by ordinary spectators.
Arena and hypogeum
The arena itself was 83 meters by 48 meters (272 ft by 157 ft / 280 by 163 Roman feet).
There is now a museum dedicated to Eros located in the upper floor of the outer wall of the building.
Part of the arena floor has been re-floored.
Beneath the Colosseum, a network of subterranean passageways once used to transport wild animals and gladiators to the arena opened to the public in summer 2010.
The Colosseum is also the site of Roman Catholic ceremonies in the 20th and 21st centuries.
For instance, Pope Benedict XVI led the Stations of the Cross called the Scriptural Way of the Cross (which calls for more meditation) at the Colosseum on Good Fridays.
Due to the controversial nature of using a public-private partnership to fund the restoration, work was delayed and began in 2013.
The restoration is the first full cleaning and repair in the Colosseum's history.
The first stage is to clean and restore the Colosseum's arcaded façade and replace the metal enclosures that block the ground-level arches.
Taking three years, the final product of this work was unveiled 1 July 2016, when the Italian minister of culture, Dario Franceschini, also announced that the funds have been committed to replace the floors by the end of 2018.
These will provide a stage that Franceschini says will be used for "cultural events of the highest level."
The project also plans to create a services center and to restore the galleries and underground spaces inside the Colosseum.
New to tours of the restored marvel beginning 1 November 2017, the top two levels have been opened for guided visits.
The fourth level held the marketplace, and the top fifth tier is where the poorest citizens, the plebians, gathered and watched the show, bringing picnics for the day-long event.
File:Colosseum 0731 2013.jpg|Colosseum 2013
File:Colosseum 0732 2013.jpg|Colosseum 2013
File:Exterior of the Colosseum.jpg|Colosseum 2012
File:Colosseum 0740 2013.jpg|Colosseum 2013
File:Colosseum 0748 2013.jpg|Colosseum 2013
File:Colosseum 0771 2013.jpg|Colosseum 2013
File:Colosseum 0762 2013.jpg|Colosseum 2013
File:Weed Whacking the Colosseum (2883935844).jpg
File:Interior of the Colloseum, Rome.png|Colosseum 2014
File:Colosseum Exterior July 2018.jpg|Colosseum 2018
Significance in Christianity
The Colosseum is generally regarded by Christians as a site of the martyrdom of large numbers of believers during the persecution of Christians in the Roman Empire, as evidenced by Church history and tradition.
On the other hand, other scholars believe that the majority of martyrdoms may have occurred at other venues within the city of Rome, rather than at the Colosseum, citing a lack of still-intact physical evidence or historical records.
These scholars assert that "some Christians were executed as common criminals in the Colosseum-their crime being refusal to reverence the Roman gods", but most Christian martyrs of the early Church were executed for their faith at the Circus Maximus.
According to Irenæus (died about 202), Ignatius of Antioch was fed to the lions in Rome around 107 A.D and although Irenaeus says nothing about this happening at the Colosseum, tradition ascribes it to that place.
In the Middle Ages, the Colosseum was not regarded as a monument, and was used as what some modern sources label a "quarry," which is to say that stones from the Colosseum were taken for the building of other sacred sites.
This fact is used to support the idea that, at a time when sites associated with martyrs were highly venerated the Colosseum was not being treated as a sacred site.
It was not included in the itineraries compiled for the use of pilgrims nor in works such as the 12th century Mirabilia Urbis Romae ("Marvels of the City of Rome"), which claims the Circus Flaminius - but not the Colosseum - as the site of martyrdoms.
Part of the structure was inhabited by a Christian religious order, but it is not known whether this was for any particular religious reason.
Pope Pius V (1566-1572) is said to have recommended that pilgrims gather sand from the arena of the Colosseum to serve as a relic, on the grounds that it was impregnated with the blood of martyrs, although some of his contemporaries did not share his conviction.
A century later Fioravante Martinelli listed the Colosseum at the head of a list of places sacred to the martyrs in his 1653 book Roma ex ethnica sacra.
Martinelli's book evidently had an effect on public opinion; in response to Cardinal Altieri's proposal some years later to turn the Colosseum into a bullring, Carlo Tomassi published a pamphlet in protest against what he regarded as an act of desecration.
The ensuing controversy persuaded Pope Clement X to close the Colosseum's external arcades and declare it a sanctuary.
At the insistence of St. Leonard of Port Maurice, Pope Benedict XIV (1740-1758) forbade the quarrying of the Colosseum and erected Stations of the Cross around the arena, which remained until February 1874.
Benedict Joseph Labre spent the later years of his life within the walls of the Colosseum, living on alms, before he died in 1783.
Other Christian crosses stand in several points around the arena and every Good Friday the Pope leads a Via Crucis procession to the amphitheater.
Flora
The Colosseum has a wide and well-documented history of flora ever since Domenico Panaroli made the first catalogue of its plants in 1643.
Since then, 684 species have been identified there.
The peak was in 1855 (420 species).
Attempts were made in 1871 to eradicate the vegetation, because of concerns over the damage that was being caused to the masonry, but much of it has returned.
Works modeled on, or inspired by, the Colosseum
* The Kongresshalle, or "Congress Hall", (1935, unfinished) at the Nazi Party Rally grounds, Nuremberg, Germany
The Summer Olympic Games medal from 1928 to 2000, designed by Giuseppe Cassioli, features a depiction of the Colosseum.
At the 2004 Summer Olympics in Athens the Colosseum was replaced by a depiction of the Panathinaiko Stadium
* The exterior of the Vancouver Public Library in British Columbia resembles the current state of the Colosseum.
It was designed by Moshe Safdie.
The Los Angeles Memorial Coliseum entrance was inspired by the Colosseum.
The Palazzo della Civilta Italiana was very closely modelled on the Colosseum.
It was built for Mussolini for the Universal Exhibition of 1942 but the exhibition never happened due to the outbreak of World War II.
The architects were Giovanni Guerrini, Ernesto Bruno La Padula, and Mario Romano.
Popular culture references
The iconic status of the Colosseum has led it to be featured in numerous films, such as Roman Holiday, Demetrius and the Gladiators, 20 Million Miles to Earth, Way of the Dragon, Gladiator (in which it was re-created via CGI), .
It was also featured in the 1998 The Rise of Rome expansion for the video game Age of Empires, and in the 2010 video game Assassin's Creed: Brotherhood.
References
Notes
Bibliography
