is a massively multiplayer online action game created by Brazilian A Steam version was announced on 3 May 2015 (though never released as of May 2019), while the mobile version of for iOS and Android was released on 24 July 2015 by Miniclip. has inspired similar web games called ".io games", including games with a similar objective but different characters, and games that incorporate elements of other genres like shooter games.
Gameplay
The objective of is to grow a cell on a Petri dish by swallowing both randomly generated pellets (agar), which slightly increases a cell's mass, and smaller cells, without being swallowed by larger cells.
The browser version currently holds five game modes: FFA (Free-For-All), Battle Royale, Teams, Experimental and Party.
The mobile version of the game includes FFA (Free-For-All), Rush Mode and Battle Royale mode.
The goal of the game is to obtain the largest cell; players must restart when all their cells are eaten.
Players can change their cell's appearance with predefined words, phrases, symbols or skins.
The more mass a cell has, the slower it will move.
Cells gradually lose a small amount of mass over time.
Viruses are green, spiky circles that split large cells.
Viruses are normally randomly generated, but can also be generated when receiving enough mass, to the point of splitting into two, hence creating a new virus.
Players can split their cell into two, and one of the two evenly divided cells will be flung in the direction of the cursor.
This can be used as a ranged attack to shoot a cell in order to swallow other smaller cells or to escape an attack and move quickly around the map.
Split cells eventually merge back into one cell.
Aside from feeding viruses, players can release a small fraction of their mass to feed other cells, an action commonly recognized as an intention to team with another player.
However, a small portion of the ejected mass is lost.
Players can also spawn from ejected mass.
Written in JavaScript and C++, the game was developed in a few days.
The game originally did not have a name, and users had to connect to Valadares's IP address in order to play.
The name was suggested by an anonymous user on 4chan, as other domain names such as were already taken.
One week later, entered Steam Greenlight with Valadares announcing a future free-to-play version of the game for download.
He planned to include features in the Steam version not available in the browser version, including additional gamemodes, custom styling, and an account system.
It was approved for listing on Steam due to community interest.
However, the Greenlight program was shut down in 2017, and the announced game has yet to be released.
On 24 July 2015, Miniclip published a mobile version of for iOS and Android.
Sergio Varanda, head of mobile at Miniclip, explained that the main goal of the mobile version was to "recreate the gaming experience" on mobile, citing the challenges with recreating the game on touchscreen controls.
Reception
was released to a positive critical reception.
Particular praise was given to the simplicity, competition, and mechanics of the game.
Engadget described the game as "a good abstraction of the fierce survival-of-the-fittest competition that you sometimes see on the microscopic level."
Toucharcade praised its simplicity, strategic element, and "personality."
Criticism was mainly targeted towards its repetitiveness and the controls of the mobile version.
Tom Christiansen of Gamezebo was mixed on the game, saying that there was "nothing to hold my attention" and that it was "highly repetitive, overall."
Pocket Gamer, reviewing the mobile version, described its controls as "floaty."
Because it was frequently propagated through social media and broadcast on Twitch.tv was a quick success.
The website (for the browser version) was ranked by Alexa as one of the 1,000 most visited websites and the mobile versions were downloaded more than ten million times during their first week.
During 2015, was Google's most searched video game.
It was Google's second-most searched game in the United States in 2016.
A 2015 press release by Miniclip stated that was listed as the fifth top game on YouTube’s list of top games.
During the campaigns of the June 2015 Turkish elections, was used in Turkey as a medium of political advocacy; many players were naming their cells after Turkish political parties and references, with alliances formed between players with similar political views, battling against other players with opposing views.
Some political parties have used in campaign posters as a symbol of support.
Its gameplay was compared to the presidential campaigning.
Notes
