Edson Arantes do Nascimento, KBE (; born 23 October 1940), known as Pelé (), is a Brazilian retired professional footballer who played as a forward.
He is widely regarded as one of the greatest players of all time.
In 1999, he was voted World Player of the Century by the International Federation of Football History & Statistics (IFFHS), and was one of the two joint winners of the FIFA Player of the Century award.
That same year, Pelé was elected Athlete of the Century by the International Olympic Committee.
According to the IFFHS, Pelé is the most successful domestic league goal-scorer in football history scoring 650 goals in 694 League matches, and in total 1281 goals in 1363 games, which included unofficial friendlies and is a Guinness World Record.
During his playing days, Pelé was for a period the best-paid athlete in the world.
Pelé began playing for Santos at age 15 and the Brazil national team at 16.
During his international career, he won three FIFA World Cups: 1958, 1962 and 1970, being the only player ever to do so.
Pelé is the all-time leading goalscorer for Brazil with 77 goals in 92 games.
At club level he is the record goalscorer for Santos, and led them to the 1962 and 1963 Copa Libertadores.
Known for connecting the phrase "The Beautiful Game" with football, Pelé's "electrifying play and penchant for spectacular goals" made him a star around the world, and his teams toured internationally in order to take full advantage of his popularity.
Since retiring in 1977, Pelé has been a worldwide ambassador for football and has made many acting and commercial ventures.
In 2010, he was named the Honorary President of the New York Cosmos.
Averaging almost a goal per game throughout his career, Pelé was adept at striking the ball with either foot in addition to anticipating his opponents' movements on the field.
While predominantly a striker, he could also drop deep and take on a playmaking role, providing assists with his vision and passing ability, and he would also use his dribbling skills to go past opponents.
In Brazil, he is hailed as a national hero for his accomplishments in football and for his outspoken support of policies that improve the social conditions of the poor.
Throughout his career and in his retirement, Pelé received several individual and team awards for his performance in the field, his record-breaking achievements, and legacy in the sport.
Early years
Pelé was born Edson Arantes do Nascimento on 23 October 1940, in Três Corações, Minas Gerais, Brazil, the son of Fluminense footballer Dondinho (born João Ramos do Nascimento) and Celeste Arantes.
He was the elder of two siblings.
He was named after the American inventor Thomas Edison.
His parents decided to remove the "i" and call him "Edson", but there was a mistake on the birth certificate, leading many documents to show his name as "Edison", not "Edson", as he is called.
He was originally nicknamed "Dico" by his family.
He received the nickname "Pelé" during his school days, when it is claimed he was given it because of his pronunciation of the name of his favorite player, local Vasco da Gama goalkeeper Bilé, which he misspoke but the more he complained the more it stuck.
In his autobiography, Pelé stated he had no idea what the name means, nor did his old friends.
Apart from the assertion that the name is derived from that of Bilé, and that it is Hebrew for "miracle" (פֶּ֫לֶא), the word has no known meaning in Portuguese.
Pelé grew up in poverty in Bauru in the state of São Paulo.
He earned extra money by working in tea shops as a servant.
Taught to play by his father, he could not afford a proper football and usually played with either a sock stuffed with newspaper and tied with a string or a grapefruit.
He played for several amateur teams in his youth, including Sete de Setembro, Canto do Rio, São Paulinho, and Amériquinha.
Pelé led Bauru Athletic Club juniors (coached by Waldemar de Brito) to two São Paulo state youth championships.
In his mid-teens, he played for an indoor football team called Radium.
Indoor football had just become popular in Bauru when Pelé began playing it.
He was part of the first Futebol de Salão (indoor football) competition in the region.
Pelé and his team won the first championship and several others.
Club career
Santos
In 1956, de Brito took Pelé to Santos, an industrial and port city located near São Paulo, to try out for professional club Santos FC, telling the directors at Santos that the 15-year-old would be "the greatest football player in the world."
Pelé impressed Santos coach Lula during his trial at the Estádio Vila Belmiro, and he signed a professional contract with the club in June 1956.
Pelé was highly promoted in the local media as a future superstar.
He made his senior team debut on 7 September 1956 at the age of 15 against Corinthians Santo Andre and had an impressive performance in a 7-1 victory, scoring the first goal in his prolific career during the match.
When the 1957 season started, Pelé was given a starting place in the first team and, at the age of 16, became the top scorer in the league.
Ten months after signing professionally, the teenager was called up to the Brazil national team.
After the 1958 and the 1962 World Cup, wealthy European clubs, such as Real Madrid, Juventus and Manchester United, tried to sign him in vain; in 1958 Inter Milan even managed to get him a regular contract, but Angelo Moratti was forced to tear the contract up at the request of Santos' chairman following a revolt by Santos' Brazilian fans.
However, in 1961 the government of Brazil under President Jânio Quadros declared Pelé an "official national treasure" to prevent him from being transferred out of the country.
Pelé won his first major title with Santos in 1958 as the team won the Campeonato Paulista; Pelé would finish the tournament as top scorer with 58 goals, a record that stands today.
A year later, he would help the team earn their first victory in the Torneio Rio-São Paulo with a 3-0 over Vasco da Gama.
However, Santos was unable to retain the Paulista title.
In 1960, Pelé scored 33 goals to help his team regain the Campeonato Paulista trophy but lost out on the Rio-São Paulo tournament after finishing in 8th place.
In the 1960 season, Pelé scored 47 goals and helped Santos regain the Campeonato Paulista.
The club went on to win the Taça Brasil that same year, beating Bahia in the finals; Pelé finished as top scorer of the tournament with 9 goals.
The victory allowed Santos to participate in the Copa Libertadores, the most prestigious club tournament in the Western hemisphere.
QTEMPLATE box|width
28%|align
right|quote
"I arrived hoping to stop a great man, but I went away convinced I had been undone by someone who was not born on the same planet as the rest of us."|source
-Benfica goalkeeper Costa Pereira following the loss to Santos in 1962.
Santos's most successful Copa Libertadores season started in 1962; the team was seeded in Group One alongside Cerro Porteño and Deportivo Municipal Bolivia, winning every match of their group but one (a 1-1 away tie versus Cerro).
Santos defeated Universidad Católica in the semi-finals and met defending champions Peñarol in the finals.
Pelé scored twice in the playoff match to secure the first title for a Brazilian club.
Pelé finished as the second top scorer of the competition with four goals.
That same year, Santos would successfully defend the Campeonato Brasileiro (with 37 goals from Pelé) and the Taça Brasil (Pelé scoring four goals in the final series against Botafogo).
Santos would also win the 1962 Intercontinental Cup against Benfica.
Wearing his number 10 shirt, Pelé produced one of the best performances of his career, scoring a hat-trick in Lisbon as Santos won 5-2.
As the defending champions, Santos qualified automatically to the semi-final stage of the 1963 Copa Libertadores.
The ballet blanco, the nickname given to Santos for Pelé, managed to retain the title after victories over Botafogo and Boca Juniors.
Pelé helped Santos overcome a Botafogo team that contained Brazilian legends such as Garrincha and Jairzinho with a last-minute goal in the first leg of the semi-finals which made it 1-1.
In the second leg, Pelé scored a hat-trick in the Estádio do Maracanã as Santos won, 0-4, in the second leg.
Santos started the final series by winning, 3-2, in the first leg and defeating Boca Juniors 1-2, in La Bombonera.
It was a rare feat in official competitions, with another goal from Pelé.
Santos became the first (and to date the only) Brazilian team to lift the Copa Libertadores in Argentine soil.
Pelé finished the tournament with 5 goals.
Santos lost the Campeonato Paulista after finishing in third place but went on to win the Rio-São Paulo tournament after a 0-3 win over Flamengo in the final, with Pelé scoring one goal.
Pelé would also help Santos retain the Intercontinental Cup and the Taça Brasil against Milan and Bahia respectively.
Unlike 1962, Peñarol came out on top and eliminated Santos 2-1.
This proved to be the start of a decline as Santos failed to retain the Torneio Rio-São Paulo.
In 1966, Pelé and Santos also failed to retain the Taça Brasil as Pelé's goals were not enough to prevent a 9-4 defeat by Cruzeiro (led by Tostão) in the final series.
The club did, however, win the Campeonato Paulista in 1967, 1968 and 1969.
On 19 November 1969, Pelé scored his 1000th goal in all competitions, in what was a highly anticipated moment in Brazil.
The goal, popularly dubbed O Milésimo (The Thousandth), occurred in a match against Vasco da Gama, when Pelé scored from a penalty kick, at the Maracanã Stadium.
Pelé states that his most memorable goal was scored at Rua Javari stadium on a Campeonato Paulista match against São Paulo rival Clube Atlético Juventus on 2 August 1959.
As there is no video footage of this match, Pelé asked that a computer animation be made of this specific goal.
In March 1961, Pelé scored the gol de placa (goal worthy of a plaque), against Fluminense at the Maracanã.
A plaque was commissioned with a dedication to "the most beautiful goal in the history of the Maracanã".
In 1967, the two factions involved in the Nigerian Civil War agreed to a 48-hour ceasefire so they could watch Pelé play an exhibition game in Lagos.
During his time at Santos, Pelé played alongside many gifted players, including Zito, Pepe, and Coutinho; the latter partnered him in numerous one-two plays, attacks, and goals.
New York Cosmos
After the 1974 season (his 19th with Santos), Pelé retired from Brazilian club football although he continued to occasionally play for Santos in official competitive matches.
Two years later, he came out of semi-retirement to sign with the New York Cosmos of the North American Soccer League (NASL) for the 1975 season.
Though well past his prime at this point, Pelé was credited with significantly increasing public awareness and interest of the sport in the United States.
During his first public appearance in Boston, he was injured by a crowd of fans who had surrounded him and was evacuated on a stretcher.
Pelé made his debut for the Cosmos on 15 June 1975 against the Dallas Tornado at Downing Stadium, scoring one goal in a 2-2 draw.
In 1975, one week before the Lebanese Civil War, Pelé played a friendly game for the Lebanese club Nejmeh against a team of Lebanese Premier League stars, scoring two goals which were not included in his official tally.
On the day of the game, 40,000 spectators were at the stadium from early morning to watch the match.
He led the Cosmos to the 1977 NASL championship, in his third and final season with the club.
On 1 October 1977, Pelé closed out his career in an exhibition match between the Cosmos and Santos.
Santos arrived in New York after previously defeating the Seattle Sounders in New Jersey, 2-0.
The match was played in front of a sold out crowd at Giants Stadium and was televised in the United States on ABC's Wide World of Sports as well as throughout the world.
Pelé's father and wife both attended the match, as well as Muhammad Ali and Bobby Moore.
International career
Pelé's first international match was a 2-1 defeat against Argentina on 7 July 1957 at the Maracanã.
In that match, he scored his first goal for Brazil aged 16 years and nine months, and he remains the youngest goalscorer for his country.
1958 World Cup
Pelé arrived in Sweden sidelined by a knee injury but on his return from the treatment room, his colleagues stood together and insisted upon his selection.
His first match was against the USSR in the third match of the first round of the 1958 FIFA World Cup, where he gave the assist to Vavá's second goal.
He was the youngest player of that tournament, and at the time the youngest ever to play in the World Cup.
On 29 June 1958, Pelé became the youngest player to play in a World Cup final match at 17 years and 249 days.
He scored two goals in that final as Brazil beat Sweden 5-2 in Stockholm, the capital.
His first goal where he flicked the ball over a defender before volleying into the corner of the net, was selected as one of the best goals in the history of the World Cup.
Following Pelé's second goal, Swedish player Sigvard Parling would later comment; "When Pelé scored the fifth goal in that Final, I have to be honest and say I felt like applauding".
He then recovered, and was compelled by the victory to weep as he was being congratulated by his teammates.
He finished the tournament with six goals in four matches played, tied for second place, behind record-breaker Just Fontaine, and was named best young player of the tournament.
The press proclaimed Pelé the greatest revelation of the 1958 World Cup, and he was also retroactively given the Silver Ball as the second best player of the tournament, behind Didi.
He scored in five of Brazil's six games, including two goals against Chile and a hat-trick against Paraguay.
In the first match of the 1962 World Cup in Chile, against Mexico, Pelé assisted the first goal and then scored the second one, after a run past four defenders, to go up 2-0.
He injured himself in the next game while attempting a long-range shot against Czechoslovakia.
This would keep him out of the rest of the tournament, and forced coach Aymoré Moreira to make his only lineup change of the tournament.
The substitute was Amarildo, who performed well for the rest of the tournament.
However, it was Garrincha who would take the leading role and carry Brazil to their second World Cup title, after beating Czechoslovakia at the final in Santiago.
1966 World Cup
Pelé was the most famous footballer in the world during the 1966 World Cup in England, and Brazil fielded some world champions like Garrincha, Gilmar and Djalma Santos with the addition of other stars like Jairzinho, Tostão and Gérson, leading to high expectations for them.
Brazil was eliminated in the first round, playing only three matches.
Pelé scored the first goal from a free kick against Bulgaria, becoming the first player to score in three successive FIFA World Cups, but due to his injury, a result of persistent fouling by the Bulgarians, he missed the second game against Hungary.
After this game he vowed he would never again play in the World Cup, a decision he would later change.
The 1970 World Cup in Mexico was expected to be Pelé's last.
Brazil's squad for the tournament featured major changes in relation to the 1966 squad.
Players like Garrincha, Nilton Santos, Valdir Pereira, Djalma Santos and Gilmar had already retired.
However, Brazil's 1970 World Cup squad, which included players like Pelé, Rivelino, Jairzinho, Gérson, Carlos Alberto Torres, Tostão and Clodoaldo, is often considered to be the greatest football team in history.
The front five of Jairzinho, Pelé, Gerson, Tostão and Rivelino together created an attacking momentum, with Pelé having a central role in Brazil's way to the final.
All of Brazil's matches in the tournament (except the final) were played in Guadalajara, and in the first match against Czechoslovakia, Pelé gave Brazil a 2-1 lead, by controlling Gerson's long pass with his chest and then scoring.
In this match Pelé attempted to lob goalkeeper Ivo Viktor from the half-way line, only narrowly missing the Czechoslovak goal.
Brazil went on to win the match, 4-1.
In the first half of the match against England, Pelé nearly scored with a header that was saved by the England goalkeeper Gordon Banks.
In the second half, he controlled a cross from Tostão before flicking the ball to Jairzinho who scored the only goal.
Against Romania, Pelé scored two goals, with Brazil winning by a final score of 3-2.
In the quarterfinals against Peru, Brazil won 4-2, with Pelé assisting Tostão for Brazil's third goal.
In their semi-final match, Brazil faced Uruguay for the first time since the 1950 World Cup final round match.
Jairzinho put Brazil ahead 2-1, and Pelé assisted Rivelino for the 3-1.
During that match, Pelé made one of his most famous plays.
Brazil played Italy in the final at the Azteca Stadium in Mexico City.
Pelé scored the opening goal with a header after outjumping Italian defender Tarcisio Burgnich.
Brazil's 100th World Cup goal, Pelé‘s leap of joy into the arms of teammate Jairzinho in celebrating the goal is regarded as one of the most iconic moments in World Cup history.
He then made assists on Brazil's third goal, scored by Jairzinho, and the fourth finished by Carlos Alberto.
The last goal of the game is often considered the greatest team goal of all time because it involved all but two of the team's outfield players.
The play culminated after Pelé made a blind pass that went into Carlos Alberto's running trajectory.
He came running from behind and struck the ball to score.
Brazil won the match 4-1, keeping the Jules Rimet Trophy indefinitely, and Pelé received the Golden Ball as player of the tournament.
Burgnich, who marked Pelé during the final, was quoted saying "I told myself before the game, he's made of skin and bones just like everyone else - but I was wrong".
Style of play
Pelé has also been known for connecting the phrase "The Beautiful Game" with football.
A prolific goalscorer, he was known for his ability to anticipate opponents in the area and finish off chances with an accurate and powerful shot with either foot.
Pelé was also a hard-working team-player, and a complete forward, with exceptional vision and intelligence, who was recognised for his precise passing, and ability to link-up with teammates and provide them with assists.
In his early career, he played in a variety of attacking positions.
Although he usually operated inside the penalty area as a main striker or centre forward, his wide range of skills also allowed him to play in a more withdrawn role, as an inside forward or second striker, or out wide.
In his later career, he took on more of a deeper playmaking role behind the strikers, often functioning as an attacking midfielder.
Pelé's unique playing style combined speed, creativity, and technical skill with physical power, stamina, and athleticism.
His excellent technique, balance, flair, agility, and dribbling skills enabled him to beat opponents with the ball, and frequently saw him use sudden changes of direction and elaborate feints in order to get past players, such as his trademark move, the drible da vaca.
Another one of his signature moves was the paradinha, or little stop.
Despite his relatively small stature, 5 feet 8 inches (1.73 m), he excelled in the air, due to his heading accuracy, timing, and elevation.
Renowned for his bending shots, he was also an accurate free-kick taker, and penalty taker, although he often refrained from taking penalties, stating that he believed it to be a cowardly way to score.
Pelé was also known to be a fair and highly influential player, who stood out for his charismatic leadership and sportsmanship on the pitch.
His warm embrace of Bobby Moore following the Brazil vs England game at the 1970 World Cup is viewed as the embodiment of sportsmanship, with The New York Times stating the image "captured the respect that two great players had for each other.
As they exchanged jerseys, touches and looks, the sportsmanship between them is all in the image.
No gloating, no fist-pumping from Pelé.
No despair, no defeatism from Bobby Moore."
Pelé also earned a reputation for often being a decisive player for his teams, due to his tendency to score crucial goals in important matches.
Reception and legacy
QTEMPLATE box|width
28%|align
right|quote
"Pelé was one of the few who contradicted my theory: instead of 15 minutes of fame, he will have 15 centuries."|source
-Andy Warhol.
Among his contemporaries, Dutch star Johan Cruyff stated; "Pelé was the only footballer who surpassed the boundaries of logic."
Former Manchester United striker and member of England's 1966 FIFA World Cup-winning team Sir Bobby Charlton stated; "I sometimes feel as though football was invented for this magical player."
French three time Balon D'or winner Michel Platini said; "There's Pelé the man, and then Pelé the player.
And to play like Pelé is to play like God."
Joint FIFA Player of the Century, Argentina's 1986 FIFA World Cup-winning captain Diego Maradona stated; "It's too bad we never got along, but he was an awesome player".
Real Madrid honorary president and former player, Alfredo Di Stéfano, opined: "The best player ever?
Pelé.
Lionel Messi and Cristiano Ronaldo are both great players with specific qualities, but Pelé was better".
Presenting Pelé the Laureus Lifetime Achievement Award, former South African president Nelson Mandela said; "To watch him play was to watch the delight of a child combined with the extraordinary grace of a man in full."
US politician and political scientist Henry Kissinger stated, "Performance at a high level in any sport is to exceed the ordinary human scale.
But Pelé's performance transcended that of the ordinary star by as much as the star exceeds ordinary performance."
After a reporter asked if his fame compared to that of Jesus, Pelé quipped, "There are parts of the world where Jesus Christ is not so well known."
In 1999, the International Federation of Football History & Statistics (IFFHS) voted Pelé the World Player of the Century.
That same year, the International Olympic Committee elected him the Athlete of the Century.
According to the IFFHS, Pelé is the most successful league goal-scorer in the world, scoring 1281 goals in 1363 games, which included unofficial friendlies and tour games.
In 1999, Time magazine named Pelé one of the 100 Most Important People of the 20th Century.
During his playing days, Pelé was for a period the highest-paid athlete in the world.
Pelé's "electrifying play and penchant for spectacular goals" made him a star around the world.
To take full advantage of his popularity, his teams toured internationally.
Approximately $22 million was invested in the construction of the museum, housed in a 19th century mansion.
Personal life
Relationships and children
Pelé has married three times, and has had several affairs, producing several children.
On 21 February 1966, Pelé married Rosemeri dos Reis Cholbi.
They had two daughters and one son: Kelly Cristina (born 13 January 1967), who married Dr. Arthur DeLuca, Jennifer (b. 1978), and their son Edson ("Edinho", b. 27 August 1970).
The couple divorced in 1982.
In May 2014, Edinho was jailed for 33 years for laundering money from drug trafficking.
On appeal the sentence was reduced to 12 years and 10 months.
From 1981 to 1986, Pelé was romantically linked with TV presenter Xuxa, which was influential in launching her career.
She was 17 when they started dating.
In April 1994, Pelé married psychologist and gospel singer Assíria Lemos Seixas, who gave birth on 28 September 1996 to twins Joshua and Celeste through fertility treatments.
The couple divorced in 2008.
Pelé had at least two more children from former affairs.
Sandra Machado, who was born from an affair Pelé had in 1964 with a housemaid, Anizia Machado, fought for years to be acknowledged by Pelé, who refused to submit to DNA tests.
Although she was recognized by courts as his biological daughter based on DNA evidence in 1993, Pelé never acknowledged his eldest daughter even after her death in 2006, nor her two children, Octavio and Gabriel.
They married in July 2016.
Politics
In 1970, Pelé was investigated by the Brazilian military dictatorship for suspected leftist sympathies.
Declassified documents showed Pelé was investigated after being handed a manifesto calling for the release of political prisoners.
Pelé himself did not get further involved within political struggles in the country.
In 1976, Pelé was on a Pepsi-sponsored trip in Lagos, Nigeria, when that year's attempted military coup took place.
Pelé was trapped in a hotel together with Arthur Ashe and other tennis pros, who were participating in the interrupted 1976 Lagos WCT tournament.
Pelé and his crew eventually left the hotel to stay at the residence of Brazil's ambassador as they couldn't leave the country for a couple of days.
Later the airport was opened and Pelé left the country disguised as a pilot.
In June 2013, he was criticized in public opinion for his conservative views.
During the 2013 protests in Brazil, Pelé asked for people to "forget the demonstrations" and support the Brazil national team.
Health
In 1977, Brazilian media reported that Pelé had his right kidney removed.
In November 2012, Pelé underwent a successful hip operation.
In December 2017, Pelé appeared in a wheelchair at the 2018 World Cup draw in Moscow where he was pictured with Russian President Vladimir Putin and Diego Maradona.
After a hospitalization because of a urinary tract infection, Pelé underwent surgery to remove kidney stones.
After football
In 1994, Pelé was appointed a UNESCO Goodwill Ambassador.
In 1995, Brazilian President Fernando Henrique Cardoso appointed Pelé to the position of Extraordinary Minister for Sport.
During this time he proposed legislation to reduce corruption in Brazilian football, which became known as the "Pelé law."
Pelé left his position in 2001 after he was accused of involvement in a corruption scandal that stole $700,000 from UNICEF.
It was claimed that money given to Pelé's company for a benefit match was not returned after it was cancelled, although nothing was proven, and it was denied by UNICEF.
In 1997, he received an honorary knighthood from Queen Elizabeth II at a ceremony in Buckingham Palace.
Pelé also helped inaugurate the 2006 FIFA World Cup finals, alongside supermodel Claudia Schiffer.
He appeared in the 1981 film Escape to Victory, about a World War II-era football match between Allied prisoners of war and a German team.
Pelé starred alongside other footballers of the 1960s and 1970s, with actors Michael Caine, and Sylvester Stallone.
in 1969, Pelé starred in a telenovela called Os Estranhos, about first contact with aliens.
It was created to drum up interest in the Apollo missions.
In 2001, had a cameo role in the satire film, Mike Bassett: England Manager.
In November 2007, Pelé was in Sheffield, England to mark the 150th anniversary of the world's oldest football club, Sheffield F.C. Pelé scouted for Premier League club Fulham in 2002.
He made the draw for the qualification groups for the 2006 FIFA World Cup finals.
On 1 August 2010, Pelé was introduced as the Honorary President of a revived New York Cosmos, aiming to field a team in Major League Soccer.
In August 2011, ESPN reported that Santos were considering bringing him out of retirement for a cameo role in the 2011 FIFA Club World Cup, although this turned out to be false.
The most notable area of Pelé's life since football is his ambassadorial work.
In 1992, he was appointed a UN ambassador for ecology and the environment.
He was also awarded Brazil's Gold Medal for outstanding services to the sport in 1995.
In 2012, Pelé was awarded an honorary degree from the University of Edinburgh for "significant contribution to humanitarian and environmental causes, as well as his sporting achievements".
In 2009, Pelé assisted the Rio de Janeiro bid for the 2016 Summer Olympics.
In July 2009 he spearheaded the Rio 2016 presentation to the Association of National Olympic Committees of Africa General Assembly in Abuja, Nigeria.
On 12 August 2012, Pelé was an attendee at the 2012 Olympic hunger summit hosted by UK Prime Minister David Cameron at 10 Downing Street, London, part of a series of international efforts which have sought to respond to the return of hunger as a high-profile global issue.
Later on the same day, Pelé appeared at the closing ceremony of the 2012 Summer Olympics in London, following the handover section to the next host city for the 2016 Summer Olympics, Rio de Janeiro.
In March 2016, Pelé filed a lawsuit against Samsung Electronics in the United States District Court for the Northern District of Illinois seeking US$30 million in damages claiming violations under the Lanham Act for false endorsement and a state law claim for violation of his right of publicity.
The suit alleged, that at one point Samsung and Pelé came close to entering into a licensing agreement for Pelé to appear in a Samsung advertising campaign.
Samsung abruptly pulled out of the negotiations.
The October 2015 Samsung ad in question, included a partial face shot of a man who allegedly "very closely resembles" Pelé and also a superimposed high-definition television screen next to the image of the man featuring a "modified bicycle or scissors-kick", often used by Pelé.
New York Cosmos
* North American Soccer League, Atlantic Conference Championship: 1977
Individual
In December 2000, Pelé and Maradona shared the prize of FIFA Player of the Century by FIFA.
The award was originally intended to be based upon votes in a web poll, but after it became apparent that it favoured Diego Maradona, many observers complained that the Internet nature of the poll would have meant a skewed demographic of younger fans who would have seen Maradona play, but not Pelé.
FIFA then appointed a "Family of Football" committee of FIFA members to decide the winner of the award together with the votes of the readers of the FIFA magazine.
The committee chose Pelé.
Since Maradona was winning the Internet poll, however, it was decided he and Pelé should share the award.
Campeonato Brasileiro Série A Top Scorer (3): 1961, 1963, 1964
** Campeonato Paulista Top Scorer (11): 1957, 1958, 1959, 1960, 1961, 1962, 1963, 1964, 1965, 1969, 1973
** South American player of the century, by the IFFHS: 1999
** France Football's Ballon d'Or (7): 1958, 1959, 1960, 1961, 1963, 1964, 1970 - Le nouveau palmarès (the new winners)
** Winner of France Football's World Cup Top-100 1930-1990
*** BBC Sports Personality of the Year Lifetime Achievement Award: 2005
** Greatest football player to have ever played the game, by Golden Foot: 2012
** Athlete of the Century, by Reuters News Agency: 1999
** Athlete of the Century, elected by International Olympic Committee: 1999
** Football Player of the Century, elected by France Football's Ballon d'Or Winners: 1999
** Inducted into the American National Soccer Hall of Fame: 1992
** TIME:
One of the 100 Most Important People of the 20th century: 1999
** Included in the North American Soccer League (NASL) All-Star team (3): 1975, 1976, 1977
** Number 10 retired by the New York Cosmos as a recognition to his contribution to the club: 1977
** Elected Citizen of the World, by the United Nations: 1977
* Knight Commander of the Order of the British Empire (honorary knighthood): 1997
Elected Commander of the Order of Rio Branco after scoring the thousandth goal: 1969
Personal records
* Brazil national football team: All-time leading goalscorer: 77 goals (95 goals including unofficial friendlies)
* All-time South American leading international goalscorer: 77 goals
* Santos: All-time leading goalscorer: 643 goals in 656 competitive games
* Intercontinental Cup: All-time leading goalscorer: 7 goals
* Guinness World Records: Most career goals (football): 1283 goals in 1363 games
* Guinness World Records: Most FIFA World Cup winners' medals: three
* Guinness World Records: Youngest winner of a FIFA World Cup: 17 years and 249 days in 1958 FIFA World Cup
* Youngest goalscorer in a FIFA World Cup: 17 years and 239 days (Brazil v Wales 1958)
* Youngest player to score a hat-trick in a FIFA World Cup: 17 years and 244 days (Brazil v France 1958)
* Youngest goalscorer in a FIFA World Cup Final: 17 years and 249 days (Brazil v Sweden 1958)
Most assists provided in a single FIFA World Cup tournament: 7, (1970)
* Top scorer in a FIFA World Cup Final (joint with Vavá, Geoff Hurst and Zinedine Zidane): 3 goals
* Youngest goalscorer of the Paulista Championship: 1957 - Santos (he was 17 years old during the competition)
* Youngest FIFA World Cup winner: in 1958 - Brazil (17 years)
* Youngest two-time FIFA World Cup winner: in 1962 - Brazil (21 years)
* Record Top scorer in a calendar year: in 1959 - 127 goals
Career statistics
Club
Pelé's goalscoring record is often reported by FIFA as being 1281 goals in 1363 games.
He was listed in the Guinness World Records for most career goals scored in football.
The tables below record every goal Pelé scored in major club competitions for Santos and the New York Cosmos.
* * Indicates that the number was deduced from the list of and this list of Pelé games.
International
Pelé is the top scorer of the Brazil national football team with 77 goals in 92 official appearances.
Pelé shares with Uwe Seeler, Miroslav Klose and Cristiano Ronaldo the achievement of being the only players to have scored in four separate World Cup tournaments.
Non-full International appearances (playing for club teams)
FIFA World Cup goals
Source: The following table is a compendium of sources that include data from Santos and FIFA official websites among others.
Filmography
*List of men's footballers with 50 or more international goals
Notes
Bibliography
