Conservapedia is an English-language wiki encyclopedia project written from an American conservative and fundamentalist Christian point of view.
The website was started in 2006 by American homeschool teacher and attorney Andrew Schlafly, son of the late conservative activist Phyllis Schlafly, to counter what he perceived as a liberal bias present in Wikipedia. - along with criticisms of atheism, homosexuality, the Democratic Party, evolution, and Wikipedia's alleged liberal bias.
Furthermore, it views the theory of relativity as promoting moral relativism, claims there is a proven link between abortion and breast cancer, praises a number of Republican politicians, supports celebrities and artistic works that it believes represent moral standards in line with Christian family values, and accepts fundamentalist Christian doctrines such as Young Earth creationism.
Conservapedia's "Conservative Bible Project" is a crowd-sourced retranslation of the English-language Bible which Conservapedia claims will be "free of corruption by liberal untruths".
and has been criticized by liberal and conservative critics alike for bias and inaccuracies.
Background
Conservapedia was created in November 2006 by Andrew Schlafly, a Harvard- and Princeton-educated attorney and a homeschool teacher.
The "Eagle Forum University" online education program, which is associated with Phyllis Schlafly's Eagle Forum organization, uses material for various online courses, including U.S. history, stored on Conservapedia.
Editing of Conservapedia articles related to a particular course topic is also a certain assignment for Eagle Forum University students.
Regular features on the front page of Conservapedia include links to news articles and blogs that the site's editors consider relevant to conservatism.
Editors of Conservapedia also maintain a page titled "Examples of Bias in Wikipedia" that compiles alleged instances of bias or errors on Wikipedia pages.
It was, at one point, the most-viewed page on the site.
Many editorial practices of Conservapedia differ from those of Wikipedia.
Articles and other content on the site frequently include criticism of Wikipedia as well as criticism of its alleged liberal ideology, despite Wikipedia's efforts to make articles neutral and the requirements that edits must be free of bias.
differ from Wikipedia's editorial policies.
Wikipedia's policies include following a neutral point of view and avoiding original research.
In response to Wikipedia's core policy of neutrality, Schlafly has stated: "It's impossible for an encyclopedia to be neutral.
I mean let's take a point of view, let's disclose that point of view to the reader",
Licensing of content
Conservapedia allows users to "use any of the content on this site with or without attribution."
The copyright policy also states, "This license is revocable only in very rare instances of self-defense, such as protecting continued use by Conservapedia editors or other licensees."
It also does not permit "unauthorized mirroring."
Wikipedia co-founder Jimmy Wales has raised concerns about the fact that the project is not licensed under the GNU Free Documentation License (GFDL) or a similar copyleft license, stating that "people who contribute to Conservapedia are giving them full control of the content, which may lead to unpleasant results."
and other Conservapedia editors considered Wikipedia's policy allowing British English spelling to be anti-American bias.
The "Conservapedia Commandments" require edits to be "family-friendly, clean, concise, and without gossip or foul language" and that users make most edits on the site quality edits to articles.
Accounts that engage in what it considers "unproductive activity, such as 90% talk and only 10% quality edits" may be blocked.
The commandments also cite the United States Code at 18 USC § 1470 as justification for legal action against edits that contain obscenities or are vandalism or spam.
Conservapedia policies encourage its users to choose usernames "based on their real name or initials", and users that have usernames deemed "frivolous" by the admins are blocked; one of the site's criticisms of Wikipedia is "silly administrator names", which is claimed to reflect Wikipedia's "substantial anti-intellectual element".
Because of Schlafly's claim that Wikipedia's allowance of both Common Era and Anno Domini notation is anti-Christian bias, In an analysis in early 2007, science writer Carl Zimmer found evidence that much of what appeared to be inaccurate or inadequate information about science and scientific theory could be traced back to an over-reliance on citations from the works of home-schooling textbook author Jay L. Wile.
Evolution
Conservapedia's article on evolution presents evolution as a naturalistic theory that lacks support and that conflicts with evidence in the fossil record that creationists perceive to support creationism.
The entry also suggests that sometimes the Bible has been more scientifically correct than the scientific community.
Schlafly has defended the statement as presenting an alternative to evolution.
An entry on the "Pacific Northwest Arboreal Octopus" has received particular attention, although Schlafly has asserted that this page was intended as a parody of environmentalism.
Abortion
Conservapedia asserts that there is a proven link between abortion and breast cancer, while the scientific consensus is that the best studies indicate no such association.
Relativity
Conservapedia has also received criticism for its articles regarding the theory of relativity, particularly on their entry titled "Counterexamples to relativity", an article that lists examples purportedly demonstrating that the theory is incorrect.
Attention was drawn to the article by a Talking Points Memo posting, in which they reported on Conservapedia's entry and stated that Andy Schlafly, Conservapedia's founder, "has found one more liberal plot: the theory of relativity".
New Scientist, a science magazine, criticized Conservapedia's views on relativity and responded to several of Conservapedia's arguments against it.
Against Conservapedia's statements, New Scientist stated that, while one is unlikely to find a single physicist who would claim that the theory of general relativity is the whole answer to how the universe works, the theory of relativity has passed every test it has been put through.
Similarly, New Scientist stated at the end of their article that:
Another claim is that "Albert Einstein's work had nothing to do with the development of the atomic bomb", and that Einstein was only a minor contributor to the theory of relativity.
Liberalism
Many Conservapedia articles criticise values that its editors associate with "liberal ideology".
The article "Liberal" once began with text originating from Schlafly personally: "A liberal (also leftist) is someone who rejects logical and biblical standards, often for self-centered reasons.
There are no coherent liberal standards; often a liberal is merely someone who craves attention, and who uses many words to say nothing."
Leonard Pitts quoted it in a critical comment saying "You may judge Conservapedia's own bias by reading its definition of liberal".
The opening text has since been changed and now features claims that all politically liberal Americans favor increased government intervention, oppose religion, support same-sex marriage and a welfare state, and believe in conspiracy theories.
Partisan politics
Schlafly said in an interview with National Public Radio that Wikipedia's article on the history of the Democratic Party is an "attempt to legitimize the modern Democratic Party by going back to Thomas Jefferson" and that this statement is "specious and worth criticizing".
The Conservapedia entries on former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton and President Barack Obama are critical of their respective subjects.
uses racial quotas and stated: "The statement about affirmative action is accurate and will remain in the entry".
In addition, Hugh Muir of the British newspaper The Guardian mockingly referred to Conservapedia's assertion that Obama has links to radical Islam as "dynamite" and an excellent resource for "US rightwingers".
In contrast, the articles about conservative politicians, such as former U.S. Republican president Ronald Reagan and former British Conservative Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher, have been observed as praising their respective subjects.
Mark Sabbatini of the Juneau Empire considered the Conservapedia entry on Sarah Palin, the Republican vice-presidential candidate for the 2008 U.S. presidential election, a "kinder, gentler" and "far shorter and less controversial" reference for one wishing to learn about Palin in contrast with the corresponding Wikipedia entry, which Sabbatini found to be plagued by disputes over inclusion of potentially controversial details about her life.
Atheism
In July 2008, American Prospect associate editor Ezra Klein derided the Conservapedia article on atheism in his weekly column: "As Daniel DeGroot notes, you've got to wonder which 'unreasonable' explanations they rejected when formulating that entry".
The website sometimes adopts a strongly critical stance against figures that it perceives as political, religious, or ideological opponents.
For instance, in May 2009, Vanity Fair and The Spectator reported that Conservapedia's article on atheist Richard Dawkins featured a picture of Adolf Hitler at the top.
The picture has since been moved to a lower position in the article.
Reception
The Conservapedia project has come under significant criticism for numerous factual inaccuracies
Tom Flanagan, a conservative professor of political science at the University of Calgary, has argued that Conservapedia is more about religion, specifically Christianity, than political or social conservatism and that it "is far more guilty of the crime they're attributing to Wikipedia" than Wikipedia itself.
Its scope as an encyclopedia, according to its founders, "offers a historical record from a Christian and conservative perspective".
APC magazine perceives this to be representative of Conservapedia's own problem with bias.
The project has also been criticized for promoting a false dichotomy between conservatism and liberalism and for promoting relativism with the implicit idea that there "often are two equally valid interpretations of the facts".
Author Damian Thompson asserts that the purpose of Conservapedia is to "dress up nonsense as science".
Bryan Ochalla, writing for the LGBT magazine The Advocate, referred to the project as "Wikipedia for the bigoted".
On the satirical news program The Daily Show, comedian Lewis Black lampooned its article on homosexuality.
Writing in The Australian, columnist Emma Jane described Conservapedia as "a disturbing parallel universe where the ice age is a theoretical period, intelligent design is empirically testable, and relativity and geology are junk sciences."
Opinions criticizing the site rapidly spread throughout the blogosphere around early 2007.
Stephanie Simon of the Los Angeles Times quoted two Conservapedia editors who commented favorably about Conservapedia.
Wired magazine, in an article entitled "Ten Impressive, Weird And Amazing Facts About Wikipedia", highlighted several of Conservapedia's articles, including those on "Atheism and obesity" and "Hollywood values", amongst others.
It also highlighted Conservapedia's "Examples of bias in Wikipedia" article, which encourages readers to contact Jimmy Wales and tell him to "sort it out."
Conservapedia's use of Wikipedia's format to create a conservative Christian alternative encyclopedia has been mirrored by other sites, such as GodTube, QubeTV and MyChurch, which adopted the format of the more prominent YouTube and MySpace, respectively.
Wikipedia's co-creator Jimmy Wales said about Conservapedia that "free culture knows no bounds" and "the reuse of our work to build variants is directly in line with our mission".
Wales denied Schlafly's claims of liberal bias in Wikipedia.
RationalWiki's self-stated purpose is to analyze and refute "pseudoscience", the "anti-science movement", and "crank ideas", as well as to conduct "explorations of authoritarianism and fundamentalism" and explore "how these subjects are handled in the media."
According to an article published in the Los Angeles Times in 2007, RationalWiki members "monitor Conservapedia.
And-by their own admission-engage in acts of cyber-vandalism."
Schlafly contacted Lenski to request the data.
Lenski explained that the relevant data was in the paper and that Schlafly fundamentally misunderstood it.
Schlafly wrote again and requested the raw data.
Lenski replied again that the relevant data was already in the paper, that the "raw data" were living bacterial samples, which he would willingly share with qualified researchers at properly equipped biology labs, and that he felt insulted by letters and comments on Conservapedia which he saw as later called Lenski's reply "one of the greatest and most comprehensive put-downs in scientific argument".
The exchange, recorded on a Conservapedia page entitled "Lenski dialog", was widely reported on news-aggregating sites and web logs.
Carl Zimmer wrote that it was readily apparent that "Schlafly had not bothered to read Lenski's paper closely", and PZ Myers criticized Schlafly for demanding data despite having neither a plan to use it nor the expertise to analyze it.
During and after the Lenski dialogue on Conservapedia, several users on the site were blocked for "insubordination" for expressing disagreement with Schlafly's stance on the issue.
The dialogue between Lenski and Conservapedia is noted in Richard Dawkins' The Greatest Show on Earth: The Evidence for Evolution in a chapter concerning Lenski's research.
Conservative Bible Project
Conservapedia hosts the "Conservative Bible Project", a project aiming to rewrite the English translation of the Bible in order to remove or alter terms described as "liberal bias".
The project intends to remove sections of the Bible which are judged by Conservapedia's founder to be later liberal additions.
These include the story of the adulteress in the Gospel of John in which Jesus declares "Let him who is without sin cast the first stone".
Rod Dreher, a conservative editor and columnist, described the project as "insane hubris" and "crazy"; he further described the project as "It's like what you'd get if you crossed the Jesus Seminar with the College Republican chapter at a rural institution of Bible learnin.
Ed Morrissey, another conservative Christian writer, wrote that bending the word of God to one's own ideology makes God subservient to an ideology, rather than the other way around.
Creation Ministries International wrote "Forcing the Bible to conform to a certain political agenda, no matter if one happens to agree with that agenda, is a perversion of the Word of God and should therefore be opposed by Christians as much as 'politically correct' Bibles."
On October 7, 2009, Stephen Colbert called for his viewers to incorporate him into the Conservapedia Bible as a Biblical figure and viewers responded by editing the Conservapedia Bible to include his name.
The edits were, as a matter of course, treated as vandalism and removed.
This was followed by an interview between Colbert and Schlafly on December 8, 2009.
