Hamsters are rodents (order Rodentia) belonging to the subfamily Cricetinae, which contains 18 species classified in seven (Phodopus roborovskii).
Hamsters are more crepuscular than nocturnal and, in the wild, remain underground during the day to avoid being caught by predators.
They feed primarily on seeds, fruits, and vegetation, and will occasionally eat burrowing insects.
Physically, they are stout-bodied with distinguishing features that include elongated cheek pouches extending to their shoulders, which they use to carry food back to their burrows, as well as a short tail and fur-covered feet.
History
Although the Syrian hamster or golden hamster (Mesocricetus auratus) was first described scientifically by George Robert Waterhouse in 1839, researchers were not able to successfully breed and domesticate hamsters until 1939.
The entire laboratory and pet populations of Syrian hamsters appear to be descendants of a single brother-sister pairing.
These littermates were captured and imported in 1930 from Aleppo in Syria by Israel Aharoni, a zoologist of the University of Jerusalem.
In Jerusalem, the hamsters bred very successfully.
Years later, animals of this original breeding colony were exported to the USA, where Syrian hamsters became a common pet and laboratory animal.
Comparative studies of domestic and wild Syrian hamsters have shown reduced genetic variability in the domestic strain.
However, the differences in behavioral, chronobiological, morphometrical, hematological, and biochemical parameters are relatively small and fall into the expected range of interstrain variations in other laboratory animals.
Etymology
The name "hamster" is a loanword from the German, which itself derives from earlier Middle High German hamastra.
It is possibly related to Old Church Slavonic khomestoru, which is either a blend of the root of Russian хомяк (khomyak) "hamster" and a Baltic word (cf. Lithuanian staras "hamster"); or of Persian origin (cf. Av hamaēstar "oppressor").
The collective noun for a group of hamsters is "horde".
Description
Hamsters are typically stout-bodied, with tails shorter than body length, and have small, furry ears, short, stocky legs, and wide feet.
They have thick, silky fur, which can be long or short, colored black, grey, honey, white, brown, yellow, red, or a mix, depending on the species.
Two species of hamster belonging to the genus Phodopus, Campbell's dwarf hamster (P. campbelli) and the Djungarian hamster (P. sungorus), and two of the genus Cricetulus, the Chinese striped hamster (C. barabensis) and the Chinese hamster (C. griseus) have a dark stripe down their heads to their tails.
The species of genus Phodopus are the smallest, with bodies long; the largest is the European hamster (Cricetus cricetus), measuring up to long, not including a short tail of up to .
The hamster tail can be difficult to see, as it is usually not very long (about 1/6 the length of the body), with the exception of the Chinese hamster, which has a tail the same length as the body.
One rodent characteristic that can be highly visible in hamsters is their sharp incisors; they have an upper pair and lower pair which grow continuously throughout life, so must be regularly worn down.
Hamsters are very flexible, but their bones are somewhat fragile.
They are extremely susceptible to rapid temperature changes and drafts, as well as extreme heat or cold.
Senses
Hamsters have poor eyesight; they are nearsighted and colorblind.
Hamsters have scent glands on their flanks (and abdomens in Chinese and dwarf hamsters) which they rub against the substrate, leaving a scent trail.
Hamsters also use their sense of smell to distinguish between the sexes, and to locate food.
They are also particularly sensitive to high-pitched noises and can hear and communicate in the ultrasonic range.
Hamsters are hindgut fermenters and eat their own feces (coprophagy) to recover nutrients digested in the hindgut, but not absorbed.
Social behavior
Most hamsters are strictly solitary.
If housed together, acute and chronic stress may occur, When kept as house pets the Syrian hamster does not hibernate.
A burrow includes a steep entrance pipe (4-5 cm in diameter), a nesting and a hoarding chamber and a blind-ending branch for urination.
Laboratory hamsters have not lost their ability to dig burrows; in fact, they will do this with great vigor and skill if they are provided with the appropriate substrate.
Reproduction
Fertility
Hamsters become fertile at different ages depending on their species.
Both Syrian and Russian hamsters mature quickly and can begin reproducing at a young age (4-5 weeks), whereas Chinese hamsters will usually begin reproducing at two to three months of age, and Roborovskis at three to four months of age.
The female's reproductive life lasts about 18 months, but male hamsters remain fertile much longer.
Females are in estrus about every four days, which is indicated by a reddening of genital areas, a musky smell, and a hissing, squeaking vocalisation she will emit if she believes a male is nearby.
Other hamsters commonly kept as pets are the three species of dwarf hamster.
Campbell's dwarf hamster (Phodopus campbelli) is the most common-they are also sometimes called "Russian dwarfs"; however, many hamsters are from Russia, so this ambiguous name does not distinguish them from other species appropriately.
The coat of the winter white dwarf hamster (Phodopus sungorus) turns almost white during winter (when the hours of daylight decrease).
Hamster shows are also places where people share their enthusiasm for hamsters among attendees.
Hamster shows feature an exhibition of the hamsters participating in the judging.
