Houston ( ) is the most populous city in the U.S. state of Texas, fourth most populous city in the United States, as well as the sixth most populous in North America, with an estimated 2018 population of 2,325,502.
Located in Southeast Texas near Galveston Bay and the Gulf of Mexico, it is the seat of Harris County and the principal city of the Greater Houston metropolitan area, which is the fifth most populous metropolitan statistical area in the United States and the second most populous in Texas after the Dallas-Fort Worth metroplex, with a population of 6,997,384 in 2018.
Comprising a total area of , Houston is the eighth most expansive city in the United States (including consolidated city-counties).
It is the largest city in the United States by total area, whose government is not consolidated with that of a county, parish or borough.
Though primarily in Harris County, small portions of the city extend into Fort Bend and Montgomery counties, bordering other principal communities of Greater Houston such as Sugar Land and The Woodlands.
The city of Houston was founded by land speculators on August 30, 1836, at the confluence of Buffalo Bayou and White Oak Bayou (a point now known as Allen's Landing) and incorporated as a city on June 5, 1837.
The city is named after former General Sam Houston, who was president of the Republic of Texas and had won Texas' independence from Mexico at the Battle of San Jacinto east of Allen's Landing.
The arrival of the 20th century saw a convergence of economic factors which fueled rapid growth in Houston, including a burgeoning port and railroad industry, the decline of Galveston as Texas' primary port following a devastating 1900 hurricane, the subsequent construction of the Houston Ship Channel, and the Texas oil boom.
The Port of Houston ranks first in the United States in international waterborne tonnage handled and second in total cargo tonnage handled.
Nicknamed the "Bayou City" "Space City”, "H-Town", and “the 713”, Houston has become a global city, with strengths in culture, medicine, and research.
The city has a population from various ethnic and religious backgrounds and a large and growing international community.
Houston is the most diverse metropolitan area in Texas and has been described as the most racially and ethnically diverse major metropolis in the U.S.
It is home to many cultural institutions and exhibits, which attract more than 7 million visitors a year to the Museum District.
Houston has an active visual and performing arts scene in the Theater District and offers year-round resident companies in all major performing arts.
History
QTEMPLATE box |width
20em |align
left |bgcolor=#B0C4DE
The Allen brothers-Augustus Chapman and John Kirby-explored town sites on Buffalo Bayou and Galveston Bay.
According to historian David McComb, "The brothers, on August 26, 1836, bought from Elizabeth E. Parrott, wife of T.F.L. Parrott and widow of John Austin, the south half of the lower league tract granted to her by her late husband.
They paid $5,000 total, but only $1,000 of this in cash; notes made up the remainder."
The Allen brothers ran their first advertisement for Houston just four days later in the Telegraph and Texas Register, naming the notional town in honor of President Sam Houston.
About a dozen persons resided in the town at the beginning of 1837, but that number grew to about 1,500 by the time the Texas Congress convened in Houston for the first time that May.
In 1839, the Republic of Texas relocated its capital to Austin.
The town suffered another setback that year when a yellow fever epidemic claimed about one life out of every eight residents.
Yet it persisted as a commercial center, forming a symbiosis with its Gulf Coast port, Galveston.
Landlocked farmers brought their produce to Houston, using Buffalo Bayou to gain access to Galveston and the Gulf of Mexico.
Houston merchants profited from selling staples to farmers and shipping the farmers' produce to Galveston.
By 1860, Houston had emerged as a commercial and railroad hub for the export of cotton.
After the Civil War, Houston businessmen initiated efforts to widen the city's extensive system of bayous so the city could accept more commerce between Downtown and the nearby port of Galveston.
By 1890, Houston was the railroad center of Texas.
In 1900, after Galveston was struck by a devastating hurricane, efforts to make Houston into a viable deep-water port were accelerated.
The following year, the discovery of oil at the Spindletop oil field near Beaumont prompted the development of the Texas petroleum industry.
In 1902, President Theodore Roosevelt approved a $1 million improvement project for the Houston Ship Channel.
By 1910, the city's population had reached 78,800, almost doubling from a decade before.
African Americans formed a large part of the city's population, numbering 23,929 people, which was nearly one-third of Houston's residents.
President Woodrow Wilson opened the deep-water Port of Houston in 1914, seven years after digging began.
By 1930, Houston had become Texas' most populous city and Harris County the most populous county.
In 1940, the U.S. Census Bureau reported Houston's population as 77.5% white and 22.4% black.
Ellington Field, initially built during World War I, was revitalized as an advanced training center for bombardiers and navigators.
The Brown Shipbuilding Company was founded in 1942 to build ships for the U.S. Navy during World War II.
Due to the boom in defense jobs, thousands of new workers migrated to the city, both blacks and whites competing for the higher-paying jobs.
President Roosevelt had established a policy of nondiscrimination for defense contractors, and blacks gained some opportunities, especially in shipbuilding, although not without resistance from whites and increasing social tensions that erupted into occasional violence.
Economic gains of blacks who entered defense industries continued in the postwar years.
In 1945, the M.D. Anderson Foundation formed the Texas Medical Center.
After the war, Houston's economy reverted to being primarily port-driven.
In 1948, the city annexed several unincorporated areas, more than doubling its size.
Houston proper began to spread across the region.
In 1950, the availability of air conditioning provided impetus for many companies to relocate to Houston, where wages were lower than those in the North; this resulted in an economic boom and produced a key shift in the city's economy toward the energy sector.
The increased production of the expanded shipbuilding industry during World War II spurred Houston's growth, as did the establishment in 1961 of NASA's "Manned Spacecraft Center" (renamed the Lyndon B. Johnson Space Center in 1973).
This was the stimulus for the development of the city's aerospace industry.
The Astrodome, nicknamed the "Eighth Wonder of the World", opened in 1965 as the world's first indoor domed sports stadium.
During the late 1970s, Houston had a population boom as people from the Rust Belt states moved to Texas in large numbers.
The new residents came for numerous employment opportunities in the petroleum industry, created as a result of the Arab oil embargo.
With the increase in professional jobs, Houston has become a destination for many college-educated persons, most recently including African Americans in a reverse Great Migration from northern areas.
In 1997, Houstonians elected Lee P. Brown as the city's first African American mayor.
In June 2001, Tropical Storm Allison dumped up to of rain on parts of Houston, causing what was then the worst flooding in the city's history.
The storm cost billions of dollars in damage and killed 20 people in Texas.
By December of the same year, Houston-based energy company Enron collapsed into the largest U.S. bankruptcy (at that time), a result of being investigated for off-the-books partnerships which were allegedly used to hide debt and inflate profits.
The company lost no less than $70 billion.
In August 2005, Houston became a shelter to more than 150,000 people from New Orleans, who evacuated from Hurricane Katrina.
One month later, about 2.5 million Houston-area residents evacuated when Hurricane Rita approached the Gulf Coast, leaving little damage to the Houston area.
This was the largest urban evacuation in the history of the United States.
In September 2008, Houston was hit by Hurricane Ike.
As many as 40% of residents refused to leave Galveston Island because they feared the type of traffic problems that had happened after Hurricane Rita.
During its recent history, Houston has flooded several times from heavy rainfall, which has been becoming increasingly common.
This has been exacerbated by a lack of zoning laws, which allowed unregulated building of residential homes and other structures in flood-prone areas.
During the floods in 2015 and 2016, each of which dropped at least a foot of rain, parts of the city were covered in several inches of water.
Even worse flooding happened in late August 2017, when Hurricane Harvey stalled over southeastern Texas, much like Tropical Storm Allison did sixteen years earlier, causing severe flooding in the Houston area, with some areas receiving over of rain.
The rainfall exceeded 50 inches in several areas locally, breaking the national record for rainfall.
The damage for the Houston area is estimated at up to $125 billion U.S. dollars, and it is considered to be one of the worst natural disasters in the history of the United States, with the death toll exceeding 70 people.
On January 31, 2018, the Houston City Council agreed to forgive large water bills thousands of households faced in the aftermath of Hurricane Harvey, as Houston Public Works found 6,362 homeowners' water utility bills had at least doubled.
Houston has also been the site of numerous industrial disasters and construction accidents.
In 2019, OSHA found that Texas was the leading state in the nation for crane accidents.
In Houston, a 2008 crane collapse at a refinery killed 4 people and injured 6.
The crane that collapsed was one of the largest cranes in the nation, possessing a 400-foot boom that can lift more than a million pounds.
Due to the industrial infrastructure in and around Houston, natural disasters like Hurricane Harvey have also led to numerous toxic spills and disasters, including the 2017 Arkema plant explosion.
Geography
Houston is located east of Austin, west of the Louisiana border, and south of Dallas.
The city has a total area of ; Most of Houston is located on the gulf coastal plain, and its vegetation is classified as Western Gulf coastal grasslands while further north, it transitions into a subtropical jungle, the Big Thicket.
Much of the city was built on forested land, marshes, or swamps, and are all still visible in surrounding areas.
Flat terrain and extensive greenfield development have combined to worsen flooding.
Downtown stands about above sea level, and the highest point in far northwest Houston is about in elevation.
The city once relied on groundwater for its needs, but land subsidence forced the city to turn to ground-level water sources such as Lake Houston, Lake Conroe, and Lake Livingston.
The city owns surface water rights for 1.20 billion gallons of water a day in addition to 150 million gallons a day of groundwater.
Houston has four major bayous passing through the city that accept water from the extensive drainage system.
Buffalo Bayou runs through Downtown and the Houston Ship Channel, and has three tributaries: White Oak Bayou, which runs through the Houston Heights community northwest of Downtown and then towards Downtown; Brays Bayou, which runs along the Texas Medical Center; and Sims Bayou, which runs through the south of Houston and Downtown Houston.
The ship channel continues past Galveston and then into the Gulf of Mexico.
Underpinning Houston's land surface are unconsolidated clays, clay shales, and poorly cemented sands up to several miles deep.
The region's geology developed from river deposits formed from the erosion of the Rocky Mountains.
These sediments consist of a series of sands and clays deposited on decaying organic marine matter, that over time, transformed into oil and natural gas.
Beneath the layers of sediment is a water-deposited layer of halite, a rock salt.
The porous layers were compressed over time and forced upward.
As it pushed upward, the salt dragged surrounding sediments into salt dome formations, often trapping oil and gas that seeped from the surrounding porous sands.
The thick, rich, sometimes black, surface soil is suitable for rice farming in suburban outskirts where the city continues to grow.
The Houston area has over 150 active faults (estimated to be 300 active faults) with an aggregate length of up to , including the Long Point-Eureka Heights fault system which runs through the center of the city.
No significant historically recorded earthquakes have occurred in Houston, but researchers do not discount the possibility of such quakes having occurred in the deeper past, nor occurring in the future.
Land in some areas southeast of Houston is sinking because water has been pumped out of the ground for many years.
It may be associated with slip along the faults; however, the slippage is slow and not considered an earthquake, where stationary faults must slip suddenly enough to create seismic waves.
These faults also tend to move at a smooth rate in what is termed "fault creep",
Prevailing winds are from the south and southeast during most of the year, which bring heat and moisture from the nearby Gulf of Mexico and Galveston Bay.
During the summer, temperatures in Houston commonly reach over .
The city reaches or surpasses this temperature on an average of 106.5 days per year, including a majority of days from June to September; additionally, an average of 4.6 days per year reach or exceed .
Air conditioning is ubiquitous in Houston; in 1981, annual spending on electricity for interior cooling exceeded $600 million (equivalent to $ billion in ), and by the late 1990s, approximately 90% of Houston homes featured air conditioning systems.
The record highest temperature recorded in Houston is at Bush Intercontinental Airport, during September 4, 2000, and again on August 27, 2011.
and an event on December 7, 2017, which precipitated of snowfall.
Snowfalls of at least on both December 10, 2008, and December 4, 2009, marked the first time measurable snowfall had occurred in two consecutive years in the city's recorded history.
Overall, Houston has seen measurable snowfall 38 times between 1895 and 2018.
On February 14 and 15, 1895, Houston received of snow, its largest snowfall from one storm on record.
The coldest temperature officially recorded in Houston was on January 18, 1930.
ubiquitous low-permeability clay-silt prairie soils, and inadequate infrastructure.
2016 ("Tax Day"), and 2017 (Hurricane Harvey).
Overall, there have been more casualties and property loss from floods in Houston than in any other locality in the United States.
The majority of rainfall occurs between April and October (the wet season of Southeast Texas), when the moisture from the Gulf of Mexico evaporates extensively over the city.
Ground-level ozone, or smog, is Houston's predominant air pollution problem, with the American Lung Association rating the metropolitan area's ozone level twelfth on the "Most Polluted Cities by Ozone" in 2017, after major cities such as Los Angeles, Phoenix, New York City and Denver.
The industries located along the ship channel are a major cause of the city's air pollution.
The rankings are in terms of peak-based standards, focusing strictly on the worst days of the year; the average ozone levels in Houston are lower than what is seen in most other areas of the country, as dominant winds ensure clean, marine air from the Gulf.
Cityscape
Houston was incorporated in 1837 and adopted a ward system of representation shortly afterward in 1840.
The six original wards of Houston are the progenitors of the 11 modern-day geographically-oriented Houston City Council districts, though the city abandoned the ward system in 1905 in favor of a commission government, and, later, the existing mayor-council government.
Locations in Houston are generally classified as either being inside or outside the Interstate 610 loop.
The "Inner Loop" encompasses a area which includes Downtown, pre-World War II residential neighborhoods and streetcar suburbs, and newer high-density apartment and townhouse developments.
Outside the loop, the city's typology is more suburban, though many major business districts-such as Uptown, Westchase, and the Energy Corridor-lie well outside the urban core.
In addition to Interstate 610, two additional loop highways encircle the city: Beltway 8, with a radius of approximately from Downtown, and State Highway 99 (the Grand Parkway), with a radius of .
Approximately 470,000 people live within the Interstate 610 loop, while 1.65 million live between Interstate 610 and Beltway 8 and 2.25 million live within Harris County outside Beltway 8.
Though Houston is the largest city in the United States without formal zoning regulations, it has developed similarly to other Sun Belt cities because the city's land use regulations and legal covenants have played a similar role.
Regulations include mandatory lot size for single-family houses and requirements that parking be available to tenants and customers.
Such restrictions have had mixed results.
Though some have blamed the city's low density, urban sprawl, and lack of pedestrian-friendliness on these policies, others have credited the city's land use patterns with providing significant affordable housing, sparing Houston the worst effects of the 2008 real estate crisis.
The city issued 42,697 building permits in 2008 and was ranked first in the list of healthiest housing markets for 2009.
In referendums in 1948, 1962, and 1993, voters rejected efforts to establish separate residential and commercial land-use districts.
Consequently, rather than a single central business district as the center of the city's employment, multiple districts have grown throughout the city in addition to Downtown, which include Uptown, the Texas Medical Center, Midtown, Greenway Plaza, Memorial City, the Energy Corridor, Westchase, and Greenspoint.
Architecture
Houston has the fifth-tallest skyline in North America (after New York City, Chicago, Toronto and Miami) and 36th-tallest in the world in 2015.
A seven-mile (11 km) system of tunnels and skywalks links Downtown buildings containing shops and restaurants, enabling pedestrians to avoid summer heat and rain while walking between buildings.
In the 1960s, Downtown Houston consisted of a collection of midrise office structures.
Downtown was on the threshold of an energy industryled boom in 1970.
A succession of skyscrapers was built throughout the 1970s-many by real estate developer Gerald D. Hines-culminating with Houston's tallest skyscraper, the 75-floor, -tall JPMorgan Chase Tower (formerly the Texas Commerce Tower), completed in 1982.
It is the tallest structure in Texas, 19th tallest building in the United States, and was previously 85th-tallest skyscraper in the world, based on highest architectural feature.
In 1983, the 71-floor, -tall Wells Fargo Plaza (formerly Allied Bank Plaza) was completed, becoming the second-tallest building in Houston and Texas.
Based on highest architectural feature, it is the 21st-tallest in the United States.
In 2007, Downtown had over 43 million square feet (4,000,000 m²) of office space.
Centered on Post Oak Boulevard and Westheimer Road, the Uptown District boomed during the 1970s and early 1980s when a collection of midrise office buildings, hotels, and retail developments appeared along Interstate 610 West.
Uptown became one of the most prominent instances of an edge city.
The tallest building in Uptown is the 64-floor, -tall, Philip Johnson and John Burgee designed landmark Williams Tower (known as the Transco Tower until 1999).
At the time of construction, it was believed to be the world's tallest skyscraper outside a central business district.
The new 20-story Skanska building and BBVA Compass Plaza are the newest office buildings built in Uptown after 30 years.
The Uptown District is also home to buildings designed by noted architects I. M. Pei, César Pelli, and Philip Johnson.
In the late 1990s and early 2000s, a mini-boom of midrise and highrise residential tower construction occurred, with several over 30 stories tall.
Since 2000 over 30 skyscrapers have been developed in Houston; all told, 72 high-rises tower over the city, which adds up to about 8,300 units.
In 2002, Uptown had more than 23 million square feet (2,100,000 m²) of office space with 16 million square feet (1,500,000 m²) of class A office space.
File:Esperson building, 2008.jpg|The Niels Esperson Building stood as the tallest building in Houston from 1927 to 1929.
File:JP Morgan Chase Tower in Houston - Dec 2013.JPG|The JPMorgan Chase Tower is the tallest building in Texas and the tallest 5-sided building in the world.
File:Williamstower.jpg|The Williams Tower is the tallest building in the US outside a central business district.
File:Bank of America Center Houston 1.jpg|The Bank of America Center by Philip Johnson is an example of postmodern architecture.
Demographics
reside in the Houston area, comprising nearly 9% of the city's metropolitan population.
Per the American Community Survey's 2013-2017 estimates, Houston's age distribution was 569,656 under 18; 1,697,680 aged 18 to 20; 1,611,185 aged 21 to 61; 288,654 aged 62 to 64; and 228,460 aged 65 and older.
The median age was 32.9, down from 33.5 in 2014; the city's youthfulness has been attributed to an influx of an African American New Great Migration, Hispanic or Latin American, and Asian immigrants into Texas.
For every 100 females, there were 100.3 males.
There were 943,183 housing units in 2017 and 838,950 households.
43.3% of Houstonians owned housing units with an average of 2.66 persons per household.
The median monthly owner costs with a mortgage were $1,533, and $511 without a mortgage.
Houston's median gross rent from 2013-2017 was $940.
Houston's diversity, fueled by large waves of immigrants, has been attributed to its relatively low cost of living, strong job market, proximity to Latin America, and role as a hub for refugee resettlement.
Houston is now known as a center of African-American political power, education, economic prosperity, and culture, often called the next black mecca.
A 2012 Kinder Institute report found that, based on the evenness of population distribution between the four major racial groups in the United States (non-Hispanic white, non-Hispanic black, Hispanic or Latino, and Asian), Greater Houston was the most ethnically diverse metropolitan area in the United States, ahead of New York City.
In 2017, according to the U.S. Census Bureau, non-Hispanic whites made up 24.9% of the population of Houston proper, Hispanics or Latinos 44.5%, Blacks or African Americans 22.9%, and Asians 6.7%.
The proportion of non-Hispanic whites in Houston has decreased significantly since 1970, when it was 62.4%.
Religion
Historically, Houston has been a center of Protestant Christianity, being part of the Bible Belt.
Other Christian groups including Eastern and Oriental Orthodox Christianity, and non-Christian religions did not grow for much of the city's history because immigration was predominantly from Western Europe (which at the time was dominated by Western Christianity and favored by the quotas in federal immigration law).
The Immigration and Nationality Act of 1965 removed the quotas, allowing for the growth of other religions.
According to a 2014 study by the Pew Research Center, 73% of the population of the Houston area identified themselves as Christians, about 50% of whom claimed Protestant affiliations and about 19% claimed Roman Catholic affiliations.
Nationwide, about 71% of respondents identified as Christians.
About 20% of Houston-area residents claimed no religious affiliation, compared to about 23% nationwide.
The same study says that area residents identifying with other religions (including Judaism, Buddhism, Islam, and Hinduism) collectively made up about 7% of the area population.
Since 2005 it has occupied the former Compaq Center sports stadium.
In September 2010, Outreach Magazine published a list of the 100 largest Christian churches in the United States, and inside the list were the following Houston-area churches: Lakewood, Second Baptist Church Houston, Woodlands Church, Church Without Walls and First Baptist Church.
The Archdiocese of Galveston-Houston claims approximately 1.7 million Catholics within its boundaries.
In 2013 Father John Whiteford, the pastor of St. Jonah Orthodox Church near Spring, stated that there were about 6,000-9,000 Eastern Orthodox Christians in Houston.
Houston's Jewish community, estimated at 47,000 in 2001, has been present in the city from the 1800s.
Houstonian Jews have origins from throughout the United States, Israel, Mexico, Russia, and other places.
As of 2016 there were over 40 synagogues in Greater Houston.
It is estimated that Muslims make up 1.2% of Houston's population.
Economy
Houston is recognized worldwide for its energy industry-particularly for oil and natural gas-as well as for biomedical research and aeronautics.
Renewable energy sources-wind and solar-are also growing economic bases in the city.
The Houston Ship Channel is also a large part of Houston's economic base.
Because of these strengths, Houston is designated as a global city by the Globalization and World Cities Study Group and Network and global management consulting firm A.T. Kearney.
Petroleum products, chemicals, and oil and gas extraction equipment accounted for roughly two-thirds of the metropolitan area's exports last year.
The top three destinations for exports were Mexico, Canada, and Brazil.
The Houston area is a leading center for building oilfield equipment.
Much of its success as a petrochemical complex is due to its busy ship channel, the Port of Houston.
In the United States, the port ranks first in international commerce and 10th among the largest ports in the world.
Unlike most places, high oil and gasoline prices are beneficial for Houston's economy, as many of its residents are employed in the energy industry.
Houston is the beginning or end point of numerous oil, gas, and products pipelines.
The Houston-The Woodlands-Sugar Land MSA's gross domestic product (GDP) in 2016 was $478 billion, making it the sixth-largest of any metropolitan area in the United States and larger than Iran's, Colombia's, or the United Arab Emirates' GDP.
Only 27 countries other than the United States have a gross domestic product exceeding Houston's regional gross area product (GAP).
In 2010, mining (which consists almost entirely of exploration and production of oil and gas in Houston) accounted for 26.3% of Houston's GAP up sharply in response to high energy prices and a decreased worldwide surplus of oil production capacity, followed by engineering services, health services, and manufacturing.
The University of Houston System's annual impact on the Houston area's economy equates to that of a major corporation: $1.1 billion in new funds attracted annually to the Houston area, $3.13 billion in total economic benefit, and 24,000 local jobs generated.
This is in addition to the 12,500 new graduates the U.H. System produces every year who enter the workforce in Houston and throughout Texas.
These degree-holders tend to stay in Houston.
After five years, 80.5% of graduates are still living and working in the region.
Ninety-one foreign governments have established consular offices in Houston's metropolitan area, the third-highest in the nation.
Forty foreign governments maintain trade and commercial offices here with 23 active foreign chambers of commerce and trade associations.
Twenty-five foreign banks representing 13 nations operate in Houston, providing financial assistance to the international community.
In 2008, Houston received top ranking on Kiplinger's Personal Finance "Best Cities of 2008" list, which ranks cities on their local economy, employment opportunities, reasonable living costs, and quality of life.
The city ranked fourth for highest increase in the local technological innovation over the preceding 15 years, according to Forbes magazine.
In the same year, the city ranked second on the annual Fortune 500 list of company headquarters, first for Forbes magazine's "Best Cities for College Graduates", and first on their list of "Best Cities to Buy a Home".
In 2010, the city was rated the best city for shopping, according to Forbes.
In 2012, the city was ranked number one for paycheck worth by Forbes and in late May 2013, Houston was identified as America's top city for employment creation.
In 2013, Houston was identified as the number one U.S. city for job creation by the U.S. Bureau of Statistics after it was not only the first major city to regain all the jobs lost in the preceding economic downturn, but also after the crash, more than two jobs were added for every one lost.
Economist and vice president of research at the Greater Houston Partnership Patrick Jankowski attributed Houston's success to the ability of the region's real estate and energy industries to learn from historical mistakes.
Furthermore, Jankowski stated that "more than 100 foreign-owned companies relocated, expanded or started new businesses in Houston" between 2008 and 2010, and this openness to external business boosted job creation during a period when domestic demand was problematically low.
Culture
Located in the American South, Houston is a diverse city with a large and growing international community.
The Houston metropolitan area is home to an estimated 1.1 million (21.4 percent) residents who were born outside the United States, with nearly two-thirds of the area's foreign-born population from south of the United States-Mexico border.
Additionally, more than one in five foreign-born residents are from Asia.
Many annual events celebrate the diverse cultures of Houston.
The largest and longest-running is the annual Houston Livestock Show and Rodeo, held over 20 days from early to late March, and is the largest annual livestock show and rodeo in the world.
Another large celebration is the annual night-time Houston Gay Pride Parade, held at the end of June.
Other notable annual events include the Houston Greek Festival, Art Car Parade, the Houston Auto Show, the Houston International Festival, and the Bayou City Art Festival, which is considered to be one of the top five art festivals in the United States.
Houston is highly regarded for its diverse food and restaurant culture.
Several major publications have consistently named Houston one of "America's Best Food Cities".
Houston received the official nickname of "Space City" in 1967 because it is the location of NASA's Lyndon B. Johnson Space Center.
Other nicknames often used by locals include "Bayou City", "Clutch City", "Crush City", "Magnolia City", "H-Town", and "Culinary Capital of the South".
Arts and theater
The Houston Theater District, located in Downtown, is home to nine major performing arts organizations and six performance halls.
It is the second-largest concentration of theater seats in a downtown area in the United States.
Houston is one of few United States cities with permanent, professional, resident companies in all major performing arts disciplines: opera (Houston Grand Opera), ballet (Houston Ballet), music (Houston Symphony Orchestra), and theater (The Alley Theatre, Theatre Under the Stars).
Houston is also home to folk artists, art groups and various small progressive arts organizations.
Houston attracts many touring Broadway acts, concerts, shows, and exhibitions for a variety of interests.
Facilities in the Theater District include the Jones Hall-home of the Houston Symphony Orchestra and Society for the Performing Arts-and the Hobby Center for the Performing Arts.
The Museum District's cultural institutions and exhibits attract more than 7 million visitors a year.
Notable facilities include The Museum of Fine Arts, the Houston Museum of Natural Science, the Contemporary Arts Museum Houston, the Station Museum of Contemporary Art, the Holocaust Museum Houston, the Children's Museum of Houston, and the Houston Zoo.
Located near the Museum District are The Menil Collection, Rothko Chapel, and the Byzantine Fresco Chapel Museum.
Bayou Bend is a facility of the Museum of Fine Arts that houses one of America's most prominent collections of decorative art, paintings, and furniture.
Bayou Bend is the former home of Houston philanthropist Ima Hogg.
The National Museum of Funeral History is located in Houston near the George Bush Intercontinental Airport.
The museum houses the original Popemobile used by Pope John Paul II in the 1980s along with numerous hearses, embalming displays, and information on famous funerals.
Venues across Houston regularly host local and touring rock, blues, country, dubstep, and Tejano musical acts.
While Houston has never been widely known for its music scene, Houston hip-hop has become a significant, independent music scene that is influential nationwide.
Houston is the birthplace of the chopped and screwed remixing-technique in Hip-hop which was pioneered by DJ Screw from the city.
Other notable Hip-hop artists in the area include Geto Boys, Chamillionaire, Travis Scott & Megan Thee Stallion.
Tourism and recreation
The Theater District is a 17-block area in the center of Downtown Houston that is home to the Bayou Place entertainment complex, restaurants, movies, plazas, and parks.
Bayou Place is a large multilevel building containing full-service restaurants, bars, live music, billiards, and Sundance Cinema.
The Bayou Music Center stages live concerts, stage plays, and stand-up comedy.
Space Center Houston is the official visitors' center of NASA's Lyndon B. Johnson Space Center.
The Space Center has many interactive exhibits including moon rocks, a shuttle simulator, and presentations about the history of NASA's manned space flight program.
Other tourist attractions include the Galleria (Texas' largest shopping mall, located in the Uptown District), Old Market Square, the Downtown Aquarium, and Sam Houston Race Park.
Houston's current Chinatown and the Mahatma Gandhi District are two major ethnic enclaves, reflecting Houston's multicultural makeup.
Restaurants, bakeries, traditional-clothing boutiques, and specialty shops can be found in both areas.
Houston is home to 337 parks, including Hermann Park, Terry Hershey Park, Lake Houston Park, Memorial Park, Tranquility Park, Sesquicentennial Park, Discovery Green, Buffalo Bayou Park and Sam Houston Park.
Within Hermann Park are the Houston Zoo and the Houston Museum of Natural Science.
Sam Houston Park contains restored and reconstructed homes which were originally built between 1823 and 1905.
A proposal has been made to open the city's first botanic garden at Herman Brown Park.
Of the 10 most populous U.S. cities, Houston has the most total area of parks and green space, .
The city also has over 200 additional green spaces-totaling over that are managed by the city-including the Houston Arboretum and Nature Center.
The Lee and Joe Jamail Skatepark is a public skatepark owned and operated by the city of Houston, and is one of the largest skateparks in Texas consisting of a 30,000-ft2 (2,800 m2)in-ground facility.
The Gerald D. Hines Waterwall Park-located in the Uptown District of the city-serves as a popular tourist attraction and for weddings and various celebrations.
A 2011 study by Walk Score ranked Houston the 23rd most walkable of the 50 largest cities in the United States.
Sports
Minute Maid Park (home of the Astros) and Toyota Center (home of the Rockets), are located in Downtown Houston.
Houston has the NFL's first retractable-roof stadium with natural grass, NRG Stadium (home of the Texans).
Minute Maid Park is also a retractable-roof stadium.
Toyota Center also has the largest screen for an indoor arena in the United States built to coincide with the arena's hosting of the 2013 NBA All-Star Game.
BBVA Compass Stadium is a soccer-specific stadium for the Houston Dynamo, the Texas Southern Tigers football team, and Houston Dash, located in East Downtown.
Aveva Stadium (home of the SaberCats) is located in south Houston.
In addition, NRG Astrodome was the first indoor stadium in the world, built in 1965.
Other sports facilities include Hofheinz Pavilion (Houston Cougars basketball), Rice Stadium (Rice Owls football), and NRG Arena.
TDECU Stadium is where the University of Houston's Cougars football team plays.
Houston has hosted several major sports events: the 1968, 1986 and 2004 Major League Baseball All-Star Games; the 1989, 2006 and 2013 NBA All-Star Games; Super Bowl VIII, Super Bowl XXXVIII, and Super Bowl LI, as well as hosting the 1981, 1986, 1994 and 1995 NBA Finals, winning the latter two, and co-hosting the 2005 World Series and 2017 World Series, winning the latter.
NRG Stadium hosted Super Bowl LI on February 5, 2017.
The city has hosted several major professional and college sporting events, including the annual Houston Open golf tournament.
Houston hosts the annual Houston College Classic baseball tournament every February, and the Texas Kickoff and Bowl in September and December, respectively.
The Grand Prix of Houston, an annual auto race on the IndyCar Series circuit was held on a 1.7-mile temporary street circuit in NRG Park.
The October 2013 event was held using a tweaked version of the 2006-2007 course.
The event had a 5-year race contract through 2017 with IndyCar.
In motorcycling, the Astrodome hosted an AMA Supercross Championship round from 1974 to 2003 and the NRG Stadium since 2003.
Houston is also one of the first cities in the world to have a major eSports team represent it, in the form of the Houston Outlaws.
The Outlaws play in the Overwatch League and are one of two Texan teams, the other being the Dallas Fuel.
Government and politics
The city of Houston has a strong mayoral form of municipal government.
Houston is a home rule city and all municipal elections in the Texas are nonpartisan.
The city's elected officials are the mayor, city controller and 16 members of the Houston City Council.
The current mayor of Houston is Sylvester Turner, a Democrat elected on a nonpartisan ballot.
Houston's mayor serves as the city's chief administrator, executive officer, and official representative, and is responsible for the general management of the city and for seeing that all laws and ordinances are enforced.
The original city council line-up of 14 members (nine district-based and five at-large positions) was based on a U.S. Justice Department mandate which took effect in 1979.
At-large council members represent the entire city.
The city of Houston's official 2010 census count was 600 shy of the required number; however, as the city was expected to grow beyond 2.1 million shortly thereafter, the two additional districts were added for, and the positions filled during, the August 2011 elections.
The city controller is elected independently of the mayor and council.
The controller's duties are to certify available funds prior to committing such funds and processing disbursements.
The city's fiscal year begins on July 1 and ends on June 30.
Chris Brown is the city controller, serving his first term .
As the result of a 2015 referendum in Houston, a mayor is elected for a four-year term, and can be elected to as many as two consecutive terms.
The term limits were spearheaded in 1991 by conservative political activist Clymer Wright.
During 1991-2015, the city controller and city council members were subjected to a two-year, three-term limitation - the 2015 referendum amended term limits to two four-year terms.
some councilmembers who served two terms and won a final term will have served eight years in office, whereas a freshman councilmember who won a position in 2013 can serve up to two additional terms under the previous term limit law - a select few will have at least 10 years of incumbency once their term expires.
Texas has banned sanctuary cities, but Houston Mayor Sylvester Turner said that Houston will not assist ICE agents with immigration raids.
Crime
Houston had 303 homicides in 2015 and 302 homicides in 2016.
Officials predicted there would be 323 homicides in 2016.
Instead, there was no increase in Houston's homicide rate between 2015 and 2016.
Houston's murder rate ranked 46th of U.S. cities with a population over 250,000 in 2005 (per capita rate of 16.3 murders per 100,000 population).
In 2010, the city's murder rate (per capita rate of 11.8 murders per 100,000 population) was ranked sixth among U.S. cities with a population of over 750,000 (behind New York City, Chicago, Detroit, Dallas, and Philadelphia) according to the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI).
Murders fell by 37 percent from January to June 2011, compared with the same period in 2010.
Houston's total crime rate including violent and nonviolent crimes decreased by 11 percent.
The FBI's Uniform Crime Report (UCR) indicates a downward trend of violent crime in Houston over the ten- and twenty-year periods ending in 2016, which is consistent with national trends.
This trend toward lower rates of violent crime in Houston includes the murder rate, though it had seen a four-year uptick that lasted through 2015.
Houston's violent crime rate was 8.6% percent higher in 2016 from the previous year.
However, from 2006 to 2016, violent crime was still down 12 percent in Houston.
Houston is a significant hub for trafficking of cocaine, cannabis, heroin, MDMA, and methamphetamine due to its size and proximity to major illegal drug exporting nations.
Houston is one of the country's largest hubs for human trafficking.
In the early 1970s, Houston, Pasadena and several coastal towns were the site of the Houston mass murders, which at the time were the deadliest case of serial killing in American history.
In 1853 the first execution in Houston took place in public at Founder's Cemetery in the Fourth Ward; initially the cemetery was the execution site, but post-1868 executions took place in the jail facilities.
Education
Nineteen school districts exist within the city of Houston.
The Houston Independent School District (HISD) is the seventh-largest school district in the United States and the largest in Texas.
HISD has 112 campuses that serve as magnet or vanguard schools-specializing in such disciplines as health professions, visual and performing arts, and the sciences.
There are also many charter schools that are run separately from school districts.
In addition, some public school districts also have their own charter schools.
The Houston area encompasses more than 300 private schools, many of which are accredited by Texas Private School Accreditation Commission recognized agencies.
The Houston Area independent schools offer education from a variety of different religious as well as secular viewpoints.
The Houston area Catholic schools are operated by the Archdiocese of Galveston-Houston.
Colleges and universities
Four distinct state universities are located in Houston.
The University of Houston (UH) is a nationally recognized tier one research university and is the flagship institution of the University of Houston System.
The university in Texas, the http:/ University of Houston has nearly 44,000 students on its campus in the Third Ward.
The University of Houston-Clear Lake and the University of Houston-Downtown are universities within the University of Houston System; they are not branch campuses of the University of Houston.
Slightly west of the University of Houston is Texas Southern University (TSU), one of the largest and most comprehensive historically black universities in the United States with approximately 10,000 students.
Texas Southern University was the first state university in Houston, founded in 1927.
Several private institutions of higher learning are located within the city.
Rice University, the most selective university in Texas and one of the most selective in the United States, is a private, secular institution with a high level of research activity.
Founded in 1912, Rice's historic, heavily wooded campus, located adjacent to Hermann Park and the Texas Medical Center, hosts approximately 4,000 undergraduate and 3,000 post-graduate students.
To the north in Neartown, the University of St. Thomas, founded in 1947, is Houston's only Catholic university.
St. Thomas provides a liberal arts curriculum for roughly 3,000 students at its historic 19-block campus along Montrose Boulevard.
In southwest Houston, Houston Baptist University (HBU), founded in 1960, offers bachelor's and graduate degrees at its Sharpstown campus.
The school is affiliated with the Baptist General Convention of Texas and has a student population of approximately 3,000.
Three community college districts have campuses in and around Houston.
The Houston Community College System (HCC) serves most of Houston proper; its main campus and headquarters are located in Midtown.
Suburban northern and western parts of the metropolitan area are served by various campuses of the Lone Star College System, while the southeastern portion of Houston is served by San Jacinto College, and a northeastern portion is served by Lee College.
The https:/ Houston Community College and Lone Star College systems are among the 10 largest institutions of higher learning in the United States.
Houston also hosts a number of graduate schools in law and healthcare.
The University of Houston Law Center and Thurgood Marshall School of Law at Texas Southern University are public, ABA-accredited law schools, while the South Texas College of Law, located in Downtown, serves as a private, independent alternative.
The Texas Medical Center is home to a high density of health professions schools, including two medical schools: McGovern Medical School, part of The University of Texas Health Science Center at Houston, and Baylor College of Medicine, a highly selective private institution.
Prairie View A&M University's nursing school is located in the Texas Medical Center.
Additionally, both Texas Southern University and the University of Houston have pharmacy schools, and the University of Houston hosts a college of optometry.
File:TSU Campus.jpg|Texas Southern University, located in the Third Ward, is the first public institution of higher education in Houston and the largest HBCU in Texas.
File:University of Houston-Downtown Commerce Building.jpg|The University of Houston-Downtown, located in Downtown, is the second-largest institution of higher education in Houston.
File:Ezekiel W. Cullen building 3.jpg|The University of Houston, located in the Third Ward, is a tier-one public research university and the third-largest institution of higher education in Texas.
File:Lovett Hall.jpg|Rice University, located near the Museum District and Texas Medical Center, is a private tier-one research university and the most selective institution of higher education in Texas.
File:UniversityofSaintThomasHoustonNewentrance2008.JPG|The University of St. Thomas, located in Neartown, is a private Catholic liberal arts college.
File:HBU CIMG0209.JPG|Houston Baptist University, located in Sharpstown, is a private Baptist university.
Media
The primary network-affiliated television stations are KPRC-TV (NBC), KHOU (CBS), KTRK-TV (ABC), KRIV (Fox), KIAH (The CW), KTXH (MyNetworkTV) and KTMD-TV (Telemundo).
KTRK-TV, KRIV, KTXH and KTMD-TV operate as owned-and-operated stations of their networks.
The Houston-The Woodlands-Sugar Land metropolitan area is served by one public television station and one public radio station.
KUHT (Houston Public Media) is a PBS member station and is the first public television station in the United States.
Houston Public Radio is listener-funded and comprises one NPR member station, KUHF (News 88.7).
The University of Houston System owns and holds broadcasting licenses to KUHT and KUHF.
The stations broadcast from the Melcher Center for Public Broadcasting, located on the campus of the University of Houston.
Houston is served by the Houston Chronicle, its only major daily newspaper with wide distribution.
The Hearst Corporation, which owns and operates the Houston Chronicle, bought the assets of the Houston Post-its long-time rival and main competition-when Houston Post ceased operations in 1995.
The Houston Post was owned by the family of former Lieutenant Governor Bill Hobby of Houston.
The only other major publication to serve the city is the Houston Press-which was a free alternative weekly newspaper before the destruction caused by Hurricane Harvey resulted in the publication switching to an online-only format on November 2, 2017.
Infrastructure
Healthcare
Houston is the seat of the Texas Medical Center, which describes itself as containing the world's largest concentration of research and healthcare institutions.
All 49 member institutions of the Texas Medical Center are non-profit organizations.
They provide patient and preventive care, research, education, and local, national, and international community well-being.
Employing more than 73,600 people, institutions at the medical center include 13 hospitals and two specialty institutions, two medical schools, four nursing schools, and schools of dentistry, public health, pharmacy, and virtually all health-related careers.
It is where one of the first-and still the largest-air emergency service, Life Flight, was created, and an inter-institutional transplant program was developed.
Around 2007, more heart surgeries were performed at the Texas Medical Center than anywhere else in the world.
Some of the academic and research health institutions at the center include MD Anderson Cancer Center, Baylor College of Medicine, UT Health Science Center, Memorial Hermann Hospital, Houston Methodist Hospital, Texas Children's Hospital, and University of Houston College of Pharmacy.
In the 2000s, the Baylor College of Medicine was annually considered within the top ten medical schools in the nation; likewise, the MD Anderson Cancer Center had been consistently ranked as one of the top two U.S. hospitals specializing in cancer care by U.S. News & World Report since 1990.
The Menninger Clinic, a psychiatric treatment center, is affiliated with Baylor College of Medicine and the Houston Methodist Hospital System.
With hospital locations nationwide and headquarters in Houston, the Triumph Healthcare hospital system was the third largest long term acute care provider nationally in 2005.
Transportation
Houston is considered an automobile-dependent city, with an estimated 77.2% of commuters driving alone to work in 2016, up from 71.7% in 1990 and 75.6% in 2009.
In 2016, another 11.4% of Houstonians carpooled to work, while 3.6% used public transit, 2.1% walked, and 0.5% bicycled.
According to the 2013 American Community Survey, the average work commute in Houston (city) takes 26.3 minutes.
A 1999 Murdoch University study found that Houston had both the lengthiest commute and lowest urban density of 13 large American cities surveyed, and a 2017 Arcadis study ranked Houston 22nd out of 23 American cities in transportation sustainability.
Harris County is one of the largest consumers of gasoline in the United States, ranking second (behind Los Angeles County) in 2013.
Despite the region's high rate of automobile usage, attitudes towards transportation among Houstonians indicate a growing preference for walkability.
A 2017 study by the Rice University Kinder Institute for Urban Research found that 56% of Harris County residents have a preference for dense housing in a mixed-use, walkable setting as opposed to single-family housing in a low-density area.
A plurality of survey respondents also indicated that traffic congestion was the most significant problem facing the metropolitan area.
Roadways
The eight-county Greater Houston metropolitan area contains over of roadway, of which 10%, or approximately , is limited-access highway.
The Houston region's extensive freeway system handles over 40% of the regional daily vehicle miles traveled (VMT).
Completed segments D through G provide a continuous limited-access tollway connection between Sugar Land, Katy, Cypress, Spring, and Porter.
Greater Houston's arterial road network is established at the municipal level, with the City of Houston exercising planning control over both its incorporated area and extraterritorial jurisdiction (ETJ).
Therefore, Houston exercises transportation planning authority over a area over five counties, many times larger than its corporate area.
The Major Thoroughfare and Freeway Plan, updated annually, establishes the city's street hierarchy, identifies roadways in need of widening, and proposes new roadways in unserved areas.
Arterial roads are organized into four categories, in decreasing order of intensity: major thoroughfares, transit corridor streets, collector streets, and local streets.
METRO's local bus network services approximately 275,000 riders daily with a fleet of over 1,200 buses.
Downtown and the Texas Medical Center have the highest rates of transit use in the region, largely due to the park and ride system, with nearly 60% of commuters in each district utilizing public transit to get to work.
The Uptown Line, which would run along Post Oak Boulevard in Uptown, is currently under construction as a bus rapid transit line-the city's first-while the University Line has been postponed indefinitely.
The light rail system saw approximately 16.8 million boardings in fiscal year 2016.
In 2012, there was a 25 percent increase in ridership to 20,327 passengers embarking from the Houston Amtrak Station.
Cycling
Houston City Council approved the Houston Bike Plan in March 2017, at that time entering the plan into the Houston Code of Ordinances.
Houston has the largest number of bike commuters in Texas with over 160 miles of dedicated bikeways.
The city is currently in the process of expanding its on and off street bikeway network.
In 2015, Downtown Houston added a cycle track on Lamar Street, running from Sam Houston Park to Discovery Green.
In August 2017, Houston City Council approved spending for construction of 13 additional miles of bike trails.
Houston's bicycle sharing system started service with nineteen stations in May 2012.
Houston Bcycle (also known as B-Cycle), a local non-profit, runs the subscription program, supplying bicycles and docking stations, while partnering with other companies to maintain the system.
The network expanded to 29 stations and 225 bicycles in 2014, registering over 43,000 checkouts of equipment during the first half of the same year.
In 2017, Bcycle logged over 142,000 check outs while expanding to 56 docking stations.
Airports
The Houston Airport System, a branch of the municipal government, oversees the operation of three major public airports in the city.
Two of these airports, George Bush Intercontinental Airport and William P. Hobby Airport, offer commercial aviation service to a variety of domestic and international destinations and served 55 million passengers in 2016.
The third, Ellington Airport, is home to the Ellington Field Joint Reserve Base.
The Federal Aviation Administration and the state of Texas selected the Houston Airport System as "Airport of the Year" in 2005, largely due to the implementation of a $3.1 billion airport improvement program for both major airports in Houston.
George Bush Intercontinental Airport (IAH), located north of Downtown Houston between Interstates 45 and 69, is the eighth busiest commercial airport in the United States (by total passengers and aircraft movements) and forty-third busiest globally.
The five-terminal, five-runway, airport served 40 million passengers in 2016, including 10 million international travelers.
The Houston Air Route Traffic Control Center is located at Bush Intercontinental.
Houston was the headquarters of Continental Airlines until its 2010 merger with United Airlines with headquarters in Chicago; regulatory approval for the merger was granted in October of that year.
Bush Intercontinental is currently United Airlines' second largest hub, behind O'Hare International Airport.
United Airlines' share of the Houston Airport System's commercial aviation market was nearly 60% in 2017 with 16 million enplaned passengers.
In early 2007, Bush Intercontinental Airport was named a model "port of entry" for international travelers by U.S. Customs and Border Protection.
William P. Hobby Airport (HOU), known as Houston International Airport until 1967, operates primarily short- to medium-haul domestic and international flights to 60 destinations.
Houston's aviation history is showcased in the 1940 Air Terminal Museum, located in the old terminal building on the west side of the airport.
In 2009, Hobby Airport was recognized with two awards for being one of the top five performing airports globally and for customer service by Airports Council International.
Houston's third municipal airport is Ellington Airport, used by the military, government (including NASA) and general aviation sectors.
Sister cities
The Houston Office of Protocol and International Affairs is the city's liaison to Houston's sister cities and to the national governing organization, Sister Cities International.
Through their official city-to-city relationships, these volunteer associations promote people-to-people diplomacy and encourage citizens to develop mutual trust and understanding through commercial, cultural, educational, and humanitarian exchanges.
* Grampian Region, Aberdeen (United Kingdom) - 1979
Notes
Further reading
* http:/ 174 Years of Historic Houston .
Retrieved on 2007-01-13.
* Phelps, Wesley G.
A People's War on Poverty: Urban Politics and Grassroots Activists in Houston.
Athens, GA: University of Georgia Press, 2014.
* Pruitt, Bernadette.
The Other Great Migration: The Movement of Rural African-Americans to Houston, 1900-1941.
College Station, TX: Texas A&M University Press, 2013.
* Digital republication by the Portal to Texas History http:/ Portal to Texas History.
Reprinted in 2007 by Copano Bay Press.
* Digital republication by the Portal to Texas History.
Reprinted in 2007 by Copano Bay Press.
