The Parthenon , which referred to the "unmarried women's apartments" in a house and in the Parthenon's case seems to have been used at first only for a particular room of the temple; it is debated which room this is and how the room acquired its name.
The Liddell-Scott-Jones Greek-English Lexicon states that this room was the western cella of the Parthenon, as does J.B. Bury.
Jamauri D. Green holds that the parthenon was the room in which the peplos presented to Athena at the Panathenaic Festival was woven by the arrephoroi, a group of four young girls chosen to serve Athena each year.
Christopher Pelling asserts that Athena Parthenos may have constituted a discrete cult of Athena, intimately connected with, but not identical to, that of Athena Polias.
According to this theory, the name of the Parthenon means the "temple of the virgin goddess" and refers to the cult of Athena Parthenos that was associated with the temple.
The epithet parthénos () meant "maiden, girl", but also "virgin, unmarried woman" and was especially used for Artemis, the goddess of wild animals, the hunt, and vegetation, and for Athena, the goddess of strategy and tactics, handicraft, and practical reason.
It has also been suggested that the name of the temple alludes to the maidens , whose supreme sacrifice guaranteed the safety of the city.
Parthénos has also been applied to the Virgin Mary, Parthénos Maria, and the Parthenon had been converted to a Christian church dedicated to the Virgin Mary in the final decade of the 6th century.
and, in the 4th century and later, the building was referred to as the Hekatompedos or the Hekatompedon as well as the Parthenon; the 1st-century-AD writer Plutarch referred to the building as the Hekatompedos Parthenon.
Because the Parthenon was dedicated to the Greek goddess Athena, it has sometimes been referred to as the Temple of Minerva, the Roman name for Athena, particularly during the 19th century.
Function
Although the Parthenon is architecturally a temple and is usually called so, it is not really one in the conventional sense of the word.
A small shrine has been excavated within the building, on the site of an older sanctuary probably dedicated to Athena as a way to get closer to the goddess,
The colossal statue of Athena by Phidias was not related to any cult and is not known to have inspired any religious fervour.
According to Thucydides, Pericles once referred to the statue as a gold reserve, stressing that it "contained forty talents of pure gold and it was all removable".
The Athenian statesman thus implies that the metal, obtained from contemporary coinage, could be used again without any impiety.
It is said in many writings of the Greeks that there were many treasures stored inside the temple, such as Persian swords and small statue figures made of precious metals.
Archaeologist Joan Breton Connelly has recently argued for the coherency of the Parthenon's sculptural programme in presenting a succession of genealogical narratives that track Athenian identity back through the ages: from the birth of Athena, through .
Older Parthenon
The first endeavour to build a sanctuary for Athena Parthenos on the site of the present Parthenon was begun shortly after the Battle of Marathon (c. 490-488 BC) upon a solid limestone foundation that extended and levelled the southern part of the Acropolis summit.
This building replaced a hekatompedon ('hundred-footer') and would have stood beside the archaic temple dedicated to Athena Polias ('of the city').
The Older or Pre-Parthenon, as it is frequently referred to, was still under construction when the Persians sacked the city in 480 BC and razed the Acropolis.
The existence of both the proto-Parthenon and its destruction were known from Herodotus, and the drums of its columns were plainly visible built into the curtain wall north of the Erechtheion.
Further physical evidence of this structure was revealed with the excavations of Panagiotis Kavvadias of 1885-90.
The findings of this dig allowed Wilhelm Dörpfeld, then director of the German Archaeological Institute, to assert that there existed a distinct substructure to the original Parthenon, called Parthenon I by Dörpfeld, not immediately below the present edifice as had been previously assumed.
Dörpfeld's observation was that the three steps of the first Parthenon consisted of two steps of Poros limestone, the same as the foundations, and a top step of Karrha limestone that was covered by the lowest step of the Periclean Parthenon.
This platform was smaller and slightly to the north of the final Parthenon, indicating that it was built for a wholly different building, now completely covered over.
This picture was somewhat complicated by the publication of the final report on the 1885-90 excavations, indicating that the substructure was contemporary with the Kimonian walls, and implying a later date for the first temple.
If the original Parthenon was indeed destroyed in 480, it invites the question of why the site was left a ruin for thirty-three years.
One argument involves the oath sworn by the Greek allies before the Battle of Plataea in 479 BC declaring that the sanctuaries destroyed by the Persians would not be rebuilt, an oath from which the Athenians were only absolved with the Peace of Callias in 450.
The mundane fact of the cost of reconstructing Athens after the Persian sack is at least as likely a cause.
However, the excavations of Bert Hodge Hill led him to propose the existence of a second Parthenon, begun in the period of Kimon after 468 BC.
Hill claimed that the Karrha limestone step Dörpfeld thought was the highest of Parthenon I was in fact the lowest of the three steps of Parthenon II, whose stylobate dimensions Hill calculated at .
One difficulty in dating the proto-Parthenon is that at the time of the 1885 excavation the archaeological method of seriation was not fully developed; the careless digging and refilling of the site led to a loss of much valuable information.
An attempt to discuss and make sense of the potsherds found on the Acropolis came with the two-volume study by Graef and Langlotz published in 1925-33.
This inspired American archaeologist William Bell Dinsmoor to attempt to supply limiting dates for the temple platform and the five walls hidden under the re-terracing of the Acropolis.
Dinsmoor concluded that the latest possible date for Parthenon I was no earlier than 495 BC, contradicting the early date given by Dörpfeld.
Further, Dinsmoor denied that there were two proto-Parthenons, and held that the only pre-Periclean temple was what Dörpfeld referred to as Parthenon II.
Dinsmoor and Dörpfeld exchanged views in the American Journal of Archaeology in 1935.
Present building
In the mid-5th century BC, when the Athenian Acropolis became the seat of the Delian League and Athens was the greatest cultural centre of its time, Pericles initiated an ambitious building project that lasted the entire second half of the century.
The most important buildings visible on the Acropolis today-the Parthenon, the Propylaia, the Erechtheion and the temple of Athena Nike-were erected during this period.
The Parthenon was built under the general supervision of the artist Phidias, who also had charge of the sculptural decoration.
The architects Ictinos and Callicrates began their work in 447 BC, and the building was substantially completed by 432, but work on the decorations continued until at least 431.
Architecture
The Parthenon is a peripteral octastyle Doric temple with Ionic architectural features.
It stands on a platform or stylobate of three steps.
In common with other Greek temples, it is of post and lintel construction and is surrounded by columns ('peripteral') carrying an entablature.
There are eight columns at either end ('octastyle') and seventeen on the sides.
There is a double row of columns at either end.
The colonnade surrounds an inner masonry structure, the cella, which is divided into two compartments.
At either end of the building the gable is finished with a triangular pediment originally occupied by sculpted figures.
The columns are of the Doric order, with simple capitals, fluted shafts and no bases.
Above the architrave of the entablature is a frieze of carved pictorial panels (metopes), separated by formal architectural triglyphs, typical of the Doric order.
Around the cella and across the lintels of the inner columns runs a continuous sculptured frieze in low relief.
This element of the architecture is Ionic in style rather than Doric.
Measured at the stylobate, the dimensions of the base of the Parthenon are .
The cella was 29.8 metres long by 19.2 metres wide (97.8 × 63.0 ft).
On the exterior, the Doric columns measure in diameter and are high.
The corner columns are slightly larger in diameter.
The Parthenon had 46 outer columns and 23 inner columns in total, each column containing 20 flutes.
were stored the monetary contributions of the Delian League, of which Athens was the leading member.
Only a very small number of the sculptures remain in situ; most of the surviving sculptures are today (controversially) in the British Museum in London as the Elgin Marbles, and the Athens Acropolis Museum, but a few pieces are also in the Louvre, and museums in Rome, Vienna and Palermo.
Metopes
The frieze of the Parthenon's entablature contained ninety-two metopes, fourteen each on the east and west sides, thirty-two each on the north and south sides.
They were carved in high relief, a practice employed until then only in treasuries (buildings used to keep votive gifts to the gods).
According to the building records, the metope sculptures date to the years 446-440 BC.
The metopes of the east side of the Parthenon, above the main entrance, depict the Gigantomachy (the mythical battle between the Olympian gods and the Giants).
The metopes of the west end show the Amazonomachy (the mythical battle of the Athenians against the Amazons).
The metopes of the south side show the Thessalian Centauromachy (battle of the Lapiths aided by Theseus against the half-man, half-horse Centaurs).
Metopes 13-21 are missing, but drawings from 1674 attributed to Jaques Carrey indicate a series of humans; these have been variously interpreted as scenes from the Lapith wedding, scenes from the early history of Athens and various myths.
On the north side of the Parthenon, the metopes are poorly preserved, but the subject seems to be the sack of Troy.
The mythological figures of the metopes of the East, North, and West sides of the Parthenon were deliberately mutilated by Christian iconoclasts in late antiquitiy.
The metopes present examples of the Severe Style in the anatomy of the figures' heads, in the limitation of the corporal movements to the contours and not to the muscles, and in the presence of pronounced veins in the figures of the Centauromachy.
Several of the metopes still remain on the building, but, with the exception of those on the northern side, they are severely damaged.
Some of them are located at the Acropolis Museum, others are in the British Museum, and one is at the Louvre museum.
In March 2011, archaeologists announced that they had discovered five metopes of the Parthenon in the south wall of the Acropolis, which had been extended when the Acropolis was used as a fortress.
According to Eleftherotypia daily, the archaeologists claimed the metopes had been placed there in the 18th century when the Acropolis wall was being repaired.
The experts discovered the metopes while processing 2,250 photos with modern photographic methods, as the white Pentelic marble they are made of differed from the other stone of the wall.
It was previously presumed that the missing metopes were destroyed during the Morosini explosion of the Parthenon in 1687.
Frieze
The most characteristic feature in the architecture and decoration of the temple is the Ionic frieze running around the exterior walls of the cella, which is the inside structure of the Parthenon.
The bas-relief frieze was carved in situ; it is dated to 442 BC-438 BC.
One interpretation is that it depicts an idealized version of the Panathenaic procession from the Dipylon Gate in the Kerameikos to the Acropolis.
In this procession held every year, with a special procession taking place every four years, Athenians and foreigners were participating to honour the goddess Athena, offering sacrifices and a new peplos (dress woven by selected noble Athenian girls called ergastines).
Joan Breton Connelly offers a mythological interpretation for the frieze, one that is in harmony with the rest of the temple's sculptural programme which shows Athenian genealogy through a series of succession myths set in the remote past.
She identifies the central panel above the door of the Parthenon as the pre-battle sacrifice of the daughter of King Erechtheus, a sacrifice that ensured Athenian victory over Eumolpos and his Thracian army.
The great procession marching toward the east end of the Parthenon shows the post-battle thanksgiving sacrifice of cattle and sheep, honey and water, followed by the triumphant army of Erechtheus returning from their victory.
This represents the very first Panathenaia set in mythical times, the model on which historic Panathenaic processions was based.
Pediments
The traveller Pausanias, when he visited the Acropolis at the end of the 2nd century AD, only mentioned briefly the sculptures of the pediments (gable ends) of the temple, reserving the majority of his description for the gold and ivory statue of the goddess inside.
East pediment
The figures on the corners of the pediment depict the passage of time over the course of a full day.
Tethrippa of Helios and Selene are located on the left and right corners of the pediment respectively.
The horses of Helios's chariot are shown with livid expressions as they ascend into the sky at the start of the day; whereas the Selene's horses struggle to stay on the pediment scene as the day comes to an end.
West pediment
The supporters of Athena are extensively illustrated at the back of the left chariot, while the defenders of Poseidon are shown trailing behind the right chariot.
It is believed that the corners of the pediment are filled by Athenian water deities, such as Kephisos river, Ilissos river and nymph Callirhoe.
This belief merges from the fluid character of the sculptures' body position which represents the effort of the artist to give the impression of a flowing river.
, Next to the left river god, there are the sculptures of the mythical king of Athens (Kekrops) with his daughters (Aglauros, Pandrosos, Herse).
The statue of Poseidon was the largest sculpture in the pediment until it broke into pieces during Francesco Morosini's effort to remove it in 1688.
The posterior piece of the torso was found by Lusieri in the groundwork of a Turkish house in 1801 and is currently held in British Museum.
The anterior portion was revealed by Ross in 1835 and is now held in the Acropolis Museum of Athens.
Every statue on the west pediment has a fully completed back, which would have been impossible to see when the sculpture was on the temple; this indicates that the sculptors put great effort into accurately portraying the human body.
was the statue of Athena housed in the naos.
This massive chryselephantine sculpture is now lost and known only from copies, vase painting, gems, literary descriptions and coins.
Later history
Late antiquity
A major fire broke out in the Parthenon shortly after the middle of the third century AD which destroyed the Parthenon's roof and much of the sanctuary's interior.
Heruli pirates are also credited with sacking Athens in 276, and destroying most of the public buildings there, including the Parthenon.
Repairs were made in the fourth century AD, possibly during the reign of Julian the Apostate.
A new wooden roof overlaid with clay tiles was installed to cover the sanctuary.
It sloped at a greater incline than the original roof and left the building's wings exposed.
However, it is debated exactly when during the 5th-century that the closure of the Parthenon as a temple was actually put in practice.
It is suggested to have occurred in c. 481-484, in the instructions against the remaining temples by order of Emperor Zeno, because the temple had been the focus of Pagan Hellenic opposition against Zeno in Athens in support of Illus, who had promised to restore Hellenic rites to the temples that were still standing.
At some point in the fifth century, Athena's great cult image was looted by one of the emperors and taken to Constantinople, where it was later destroyed, possibly during the siege and sack of Constantinople during the Fourth Crusade in 1204 AD.
Christian church
The Parthenon was converted into a Christian church in the final decade of the sixth century AD to become the Church of the Parthenos Maria (Virgin Mary), or the Church of the Theotokos (Mother of God).
The orientation of the building was changed to face towards the east; the main entrance was placed at the building's western end, and the Christian altar and iconostasis were situated towards the building's eastern side adjacent to an apse built where the temple's pronaos was formerly located.
A large central portal with surrounding side-doors was made in the wall dividing the cella, which became the church's nave, from the rear chamber, the church's narthex.
In 1018, the emperor Basil II went on a pilgrimage to Athens directly after his final victory over the Bulgarians for the sole purpose of worshipping at the Parthenon.
Islamic mosque
Christians for continued use as a church.
Some time before the close of the fifteenth century, the Parthenon became a mosque.
The precise circumstances under which the Turks appropriated it for use as a mosque are unclear; one account states that Mehmed II ordered its conversion as punishment for an Athenian plot against Ottoman rule.
The apse became a was installed,
Despite the alterations accompanying the Parthenon's conversion into a church and subsequently a mosque, its structure had remained basically intact.
In 1667 the Turkish traveller Evliya Çelebi expressed marvel at the Parthenon's sculptures and figuratively described the building as "like some impregnable fortress not made by human agency".
He composed a poetic supplication that it, as "a work less of human hands than of Heaven itself, should remain standing for all time".
The French artist Jacques Carrey in 1674 visited the Acropolis and sketched the Parthenon's sculptural decorations.
Early in 1687, an engineer named Plantier sketched the Parthenon for the Frenchman Graviers d’Ortières.
On 26 September a Venetian mortar round, fired from the Hill of Philopappus, blew up the magazine, and the building was partly destroyed.
The explosion blew out the building's central portion and caused the cella's walls to crumble into rubble.
For the next century and a half, portions of the remaining structure were looted for building material and any remaining objects of value.
The 18th century was a period of Ottoman stagnation; as a result, many more Europeans found access to Athens, and the picturesque ruins of the Parthenon were much drawn and painted, spurring a rise in philhellenism and helping to arouse sympathy in Britain and France for Greek independence.
Amongst those early travellers and archaeologists were James Stuart and Nicholas Revett, who were commissioned by the Society of Dilettanti to survey the ruins of classical Athens.
What they produced was the first measured drawings of the Parthenon published in 1787 in the second volume of Antiquities of Athens Measured and Delineated.
In 1801, the British Ambassador at Constantinople, the Earl of Elgin, obtained a questionable firman (edict) from the Sultan, whose existence or legitimacy has not been proved until today, to make casts and drawings of the antiquities on the Acropolis, to demolish recent buildings if this was necessary to view the antiquities, and to remove sculptures from them.
Independent Greece
When independent Greece gained control of Athens in 1832, the visible section of the minaret was demolished; only its base and spiral staircase up to the level of the architrave remain intact.
Soon all the medieval and Ottoman buildings on the Acropolis were destroyed.
However, the image of the small mosque within the Parthenon's cella has been preserved in Joly de Lotbinière's photograph, published in Lerebours's Excursions Daguerriennes in 1842: the first photograph of the Acropolis.
The area became a historical precinct controlled by the Greek government.
Today it attracts millions of tourists every year, who travel up the path at the western end of the Acropolis, through the restored Propylaea, and up the Panathenaic Way to the Parthenon, which is surrounded by a low fence to prevent damage.
Dispute over the marbles
The dispute centres around the Parthenon Marbles removed by Thomas Bruce, 7th Earl of Elgin, from 1801 to 1803, which are in the British Museum.
A few sculptures from the Parthenon are also in the Louvre in Paris, in Copenhagen, and elsewhere, but more than half are in the Acropolis Museum in Athens.
A few can still be seen on the building itself.
The Greek government has campaigned since 1983 for the British Museum to return the sculptures to Greece.
and successive British governments have been unwilling to force the Museum to do so (which would require legislation).
Nevertheless, talks between senior representatives from Greek and British cultural ministries and their legal advisors took place in London on 4 May 2007.
These were the first serious negotiations for several years, and there were hopes that the two sides may move a step closer to a resolution.
Restoration
In 1975, the Greek government began a concerted effort to restore the Parthenon and other Acropolis structures.
After some delay, a Committee for the Conservation of the Acropolis Monuments was established in 1983.
The project later attracted funding and technical assistance from the European Union.
An archaeological committee thoroughly documented every artifact remaining on the site, and architects assisted with computer models to determine their original locations.
Particularly important and fragile sculptures were transferred to the Acropolis Museum.
A crane was installed for moving marble blocks; the crane was designed to fold away beneath the roofline when not in use.
In some cases, prior re-constructions were found to be incorrect.
These were dismantled, and a careful process of restoration began.
Originally, various blocks were held together by elongated iron H pins that were completely coated in lead, which protected the iron from corrosion.
Stabilizing pins added in the 19th century were not so coated, and corroded.
Since the corrosion product (rust) is expansive, the expansion caused further damage by cracking the marble.
File:Athen Baustelle Akropolis 20020809-262.jpg|Restoration works in 2002.
File:ParthenonRecon06185.jpg|Work in progress in 2007.
File:ParthenonRepairDetail06163.JPG|A reconstructed architrave block.
File:Parthenon in the rain.jpg|Wide-scale restoration in 2010.
File:Parthenon in November 2014.JPG|Western side works in 2014.
* Walhalla temple Regensburg - Exterior modelled on the Parthenon, but interior is a hall of fame for distinguished Germans
Sources
Printed sources
Online sources
Further reading
* Beard, Mary.
The Parthenon.
Harvard University: 2003. .
* http:/ Connelly, Joan Breton Connelly.
https:/ Parthenon-Enigma-Understanding-Iconic-Building 0307476596/ref
sr_1_1?s
books&ie
UTF8&qid
1439926583&sr
1-1&keywords
the+parthenon+enigma "The Parthenon Enigma: A New Understanding of the West's Most Iconic Building and the People Who Made It."
Knopf: 2014. .
* Cosmopoulos, Michael (editor).
The Parthenon and its Sculptures.
Cambridge University: 2004. .
* King, Dorothy "The Elgin Marbles" Hutchinson / Random House, 2006.
* Osada, T. (ed.)
The Parthenon Frieze.
The Ritual Communication between the Goddess and the Polis.
Parthenon Project Japan 2011-2014 Phoibos Verlag, Wien 2016, .
* Papachatzis, Nikolaos D. Pausaniou Ellados Periegesis- Attika Athens, 1974.
* Traulos, Ioannis N. I Poleodomike ekselikses ton Athinon Athens, 1960
* Woodford, Susan.
The Parthenon.
Cambridge University, 1981. .
