Beryllium is a chemical element with the symbol Be and atomic number 4.
It is a relatively rare element in the universe, usually occurring as a product of the spallation of larger atomic nuclei that have collided with cosmic rays.
Within the cores of stars, beryllium is depleted as it is fused into heavier elements.
It is a divalent element which occurs naturally only in combination with other elements in minerals.
Notable gemstones which contain beryllium include beryl (aquamarine, emerald) and chrysoberyl.
As a free element it is a steel-gray, strong, lightweight and brittle alkaline earth metal.
In structural applications, the combination of high flexural rigidity, thermal stability, thermal conductivity and low density (1.85 times that of water) make beryllium metal a desirable aerospace material for aircraft components, missiles, spacecraft, and satellites.
Characteristics
Physical properties
Beryllium is a steel gray and hard metal that is brittle at room temperature and has a close-packed hexagonal crystal structure.
It has exceptional stiffness (Young's modulus 287 GPa) and a melting point of 1287 C.
The modulus of elasticity of beryllium is approximately 50% greater than that of steel.
The combination of this modulus and a relatively low density results in an unusually fast sound conduction speed in beryllium - about 12.9 km/s at ambient conditions.
Other significant properties are high specific heat (1925 J·kg−1·K−1) and thermal conductivity (216 W·m−1·K−1), which make beryllium the metal with the best heat dissipation characteristics per unit weight.
In combination with the relatively low coefficient of linear thermal expansion (11.4×10−6 K−1), these characteristics result in a unique stability under conditions of thermal loading.
Nuclear properties
Naturally occurring beryllium, save for slight contamination by the cosmogenic radioisotopes, is isotopically pure beryllium-9, which has a nuclear spin of .
Beryllium has a large scattering cross section for high-energy neutrons, about 6 barns for energies above approximately 10 keV. Therefore, it works as a neutron reflector and neutron moderator, effectively slowing the neutrons to the thermal energy range of below 0.03 eV, where the total cross section is at least an order of magnitude lower - exact value strongly depends on the purity and size of the crystallites in the material.
The single primordial beryllium isotope 9Be also undergoes a (n,2n) neutron reaction with neutron energies over about 1.9 MeV, to produce 8Be, which almost immediately breaks into two alpha particles.
Thus, for high-energy neutrons, beryllium is a neutron multiplier, releasing more neutrons than it absorbs.
This nuclear reaction is:
Beryllium also releases neutrons under bombardment by gamma rays.
Thus, natural beryllium bombarded either by alphas or gammas from a suitable radioisotope is a key component of most radioisotope-powered nuclear reaction neutron sources for the laboratory production of free neutrons.
Small amounts of tritium are liberated when nuclei absorb low energy neutrons in the three-step nuclear reaction
: + n → + , → + β−, + n → +
Note that has a half-life of only 0.8 seconds, β− is an electron, and has a high neutron absorption cross-section.
Tritium is a radioisotope of concern in nuclear reactor waste streams.
As a metal, beryllium is transparent to most wavelengths of X-rays and gamma rays, making it useful for the output windows of X-ray tubes and other such apparatus.
Isotopes and nucleosynthesis
Both stable and unstable isotopes of beryllium are created in stars, but the radioisotopes do not last long.
It is believed that most of the stable beryllium in the universe was originally created in the interstellar medium when cosmic rays induced fission in heavier elements found in interstellar gas and dust.
Primordial beryllium contains only one stable isotope, 9Be, and therefore beryllium is a monoisotopic and mononuclidic element.
Radioactive cosmogenic 10Be is produced in the atmosphere of the Earth by the cosmic ray spallation of oxygen.
10Be accumulates at the soil surface, where its relatively long half-life (1.36 million years) permits a long residence time before decaying to boron-10.
Thus, 10Be and its daughter products are used to examine natural soil erosion, soil formation and the development of lateritic soils, and as a proxy for measurement of the variations in solar activity and the age of ice cores.
The production of 10Be is inversely proportional to solar activity, because increased solar wind during periods of high solar activity decreases the flux of galactic cosmic rays that reach the Earth.
Nuclear explosions also form 10Be by the reaction of fast neutrons with 13C in the carbon dioxide in air.
This is one of the indicators of past activity at nuclear weapon test sites.
The isotope 7Be (half-life 53 days) is also cosmogenic, and shows an atmospheric abundance linked to sunspots, much like 10Be.
8Be has a very short half-life of about 8 s that contributes to its significant cosmological role, as elements heavier than beryllium could not have been produced by nuclear fusion in the Big Bang.
This is due to the lack of sufficient time during the Big Bang's nucleosynthesis phase to produce carbon by the fusion of 4He nuclei and the very low concentrations of available beryllium-8.
British astronomer Sir Fred Hoyle first showed that the energy levels of 8Be and 12C allow carbon production by the so-called triple-alpha process in helium-fueled stars where more nucleosynthesis time is available.
This process allows carbon to be produced in stars, but not in the Big Bang.
Star-created carbon (the basis of carbon-based life) is thus a component in the elements in the gas and dust ejected by AGB stars and supernovae (see also Big Bang nucleosynthesis), as well as the creation of all other elements with atomic numbers larger than that of carbon.
The 2s electrons of beryllium may contribute to chemical bonding.
Therefore, when 7Be decays by L-electron capture, it does so by taking electrons from its atomic orbitals that may be participating in bonding.
This makes its decay rate dependent to a measurable degree upon its chemical surroundings - a rare occurrence in nuclear decay.
The shortest-lived known isotope of beryllium is 13Be which decays through neutron emission.
It has a half-life of 2.7 × 10−21 s. 6Be is also very short-lived with a half-life of 5.0 × 10−21 s.
The exotic isotopes 11Be and 14Be are known to exhibit a nuclear halo.
This phenomenon can be understood as the nuclei of 11Be and 14Be have, respectively, 1 and 4 neutrons orbiting substantially outside the classical Fermi 'waterdrop' model of the nucleus.
Occurrence
The Sun has a concentration of 0.1 parts per billion (ppb) of beryllium.
Beryllium has a concentration of 2 to 6 parts per million (ppm) in the Earth's crust.
It is most concentrated in the soils, 6 ppm.
Trace amounts of 9Be are found in the Earth's atmosphere.
The concentration of beryllium in sea water is 0.2-0.6 parts per trillion.
In stream water, however, beryllium is more abundant with a concentration of 0.1 ppb.
Beryllium is found in over 100 minerals, but most are uncommon to rare.
The more common beryllium containing minerals include: bertrandite (Be4Si2O7 (OH)2), beryl (Al2Be3Si6O18), chrysoberyl (Al2BeO4) and phenakite (Be2SiO4).
Precious forms of beryl are aquamarine, red beryl and emerald.
The green color in gem-quality forms of beryl comes from varying amounts of chromium (about 2% for emerald).
The two main ores of beryllium, beryl and bertrandite, are found in Argentina, Brazil, India, Madagascar, Russia and the United States.
Total world reserves of beryllium ore are greater than 400,000 tonnes.
Production
The extraction of beryllium from its compounds is a difficult process due to its high affinity for oxygen at elevated temperatures, and its ability to reduce water when its oxide film is removed.
The United States, China and Kazakhstan are the only three countries involved in the industrial-scale extraction of beryllium.
Beryllium production technology is in early stages of development in Russia after a 20-year hiatus.
Beryllium is most commonly extracted from the mineral beryl, which is either sintered using an extraction agent or melted into a soluble mixture.
The sintering process involves mixing beryl with sodium fluorosilicate and soda at to form sodium fluoroberyllate, aluminium oxide and silicon dioxide.
Beryllium's chemical behavior is largely a result of its small atomic and ionic radii.
It thus has very high ionization potentials and strong polarization while bonded to other atoms, which is why all of its compounds are covalent.
Its chemistry has similarities with the chemistry of aluminium, an example of a diagonal relationship.
An oxide layer forms on the surface of beryllium metal that prevents further reactions with air unless heated above 1000 °C.
Once ignited, beryllium burns brilliantly forming a mixture of beryllium oxide and beryllium nitride.
Beryllium dissolves readily in non-oxidizing acids, such as HCl and diluted H2SO4, but not in nitric acid or water as this forms the oxide.
This behavior is similar to that of aluminium metal.
Beryllium also dissolves in alkali solutions.
Binary compounds of beryllium (II) are polymeric in the solid state.
BeF2 has a silica-like structure with corner-shared BeF4 tetrahedra.
BeCl2 and BeBr2 have chain structures with edge-shared tetrahedra.
Beryllium oxide, BeO, is a white refractory solid, which has the wurtzite crystal structure and a thermal conductivity as high as in some metals.
BeO is amphoteric.
Beryllium sulfide, selenide and telluride are known, all having the zincblende structure.
Beryllium nitride, Be3N2 is a high-melting-point compound which is readily hydrolyzed.
Beryllium azide, BeN6 is known and beryllium phosphide, Be3P2 has a similar structure to Be3N2.
A number of beryllium borides are known, such as Be5B, Be4B, Be2B, BeB2, BeB6 and BeB12.
Beryllium carbide, Be2C, is a refractory brick-red compound that reacts with water to give methane.
Aqueous solutions of this salt contain ions such as Be (H2O)3F+.
Beryllium hydroxide reacts with ammonium bifluoride to form the ammonium salt of the tetrafluoroberyllate complex, (H4N+)2BeF42-.
Organic chemistry
Organoberyllium chemistry is limited to academic research due to the cost and toxicity of beryllium, beryllium derivatives and reagents required for the introduction of beryllium, such as beryllium chloride.
Organometallic beryllium compounds are known to be highly reactive Examples of known organoberyllium compounds are dineopentylberyllium, beryllocene (Cp2Be), diallylberyllium (by exchange reaction of diethyl beryllium with triallyl boron), bis (1,3-trimethylsilylallyl)beryllium and Be (mes)2.
Ligands can also be aryls and alkynyls.
History
The mineral beryl, which contains beryllium, has been used at least since the Ptolemaic dynasty of Egypt.
In the first century CE, Roman naturalist Pliny the Elder mentioned in his encyclopedia Natural History that beryl and emerald ("smaragdus") were similar.
The Papyrus Graecus Holmiensis, written in the third or fourth century CE, contains notes on how to prepare artificial emerald and beryl.
Early analyses of emeralds and beryls by Martin Heinrich Klaproth, Torbern Olof Bergman, Franz Karl Achard, and Johann Jakob Bindheim always yielded similar elements, leading to the fallacious conclusion that both substances are aluminium silicates.
Mineralogist René Just Haüy discovered that both crystals are geometrically identical, and he asked chemist Louis-Nicolas Vauquelin for a chemical analysis.
In a 1798 paper read before the Institut de France, Vauquelin reported that he found a new "earth" by dissolving aluminium hydroxide from emerald and beryl in an additional alkali.
The editors of the journal Annales de Chimie et de Physique named the new earth "glucine" for the sweet taste of some of its compounds.
Klaproth preferred the name "beryllina" due to the fact that yttria also formed sweet salts.
The name "beryllium" was first used by Wöhler in 1828.
Friedrich Wöhler and Antoine Bussy independently isolated beryllium in 1828 by the chemical reaction of metallic potassium with beryllium chloride, as follows:
:BeCl2 + 2 K → 2 KCl + Be
Using an alcohol lamp, Wöhler heated alternating layers of beryllium chloride and potassium in a wired-shut platinum crucible.
The above reaction immediately took place and caused the crucible to become white hot.
Upon cooling and washing the resulting gray-black powder he saw that it was made of fine particles with a dark metallic luster.
The highly reactive potassium had been produced by the electrolysis of its compounds, a process discovered 21 years before.
The chemical method using potassium yielded only small grains of beryllium from which no ingot of metal could be cast or hammered.
The direct electrolysis of a molten mixture of beryllium fluoride and sodium fluoride by Paul Lebeau in 1898 resulted in the first pure (99.5 to 99.8%) samples of beryllium.
However, industrial production started only after the First World War.
The original industrial involvement included subsidiaries and scientists related to the Union Carbide and Carbon Corporation in Cleveland OH and Siemens & Halske AG in Berlin.
In the US, the process was ruled by Hugh S. Cooper, director of The Kemet Laboratories Company.
In Germany, the first commercially successful process for producing beryllium was developed in 1921 by Alfred Stock and Hans Goldschmidt.
A sample of beryllium was bombarded with alpha rays from the decay of radium in a 1932 experiment by James Chadwick that uncovered the existence of the neutron.
This same method is used in one class of radioisotope-based laboratory neutron sources that produce 30 neutrons for every million α particles.
Electrolysis of a mixture of beryllium fluoride and sodium fluoride was used to isolate beryllium during the 19th century.
The metal's high melting point makes this process more energy-consuming than corresponding processes used for the alkali metals.
Early in the 20th century, the production of beryllium by the thermal decomposition of beryllium iodide was investigated following the success of a similar process for the production of zirconium, but this process proved to be uneconomical for volume production.
Pure beryllium metal did not become readily available until 1957, even though it had been used as an alloying metal to harden and toughen copper much earlier.
Beryllium could be produced by reducing beryllium compounds such as beryllium chloride with metallic potassium or sodium.
Currently, most beryllium is produced by reducing beryllium fluoride with magnesium.
The price on the American market for vacuum-cast beryllium ingots was about $338 per pound ($745 per kilogram) in 2001.
Between 1998 and 2008, the world's production of beryllium had decreased from 343 to about 200 tonnes, of which 176 tonnes (88%) came from the United States.
Etymology
Early precursors of the word beryllium can be traced to many languages, including Latin ; French ; Ancient Greek , , 'beryl'; Prakrit (); Pāli (), () or () - "to become pale", in reference to the pale semiprecious gemstone beryl.
The original source is probably the Sanskrit word (), which is of South Indian origin and could be related to the name of the modern city of Belur.
For about 160 years, beryllium was also known as glucinum or glucinium the sample holder is usually made of beryllium because its emitted X-rays have much lower energies (≈100 eV) than X-rays from most studied materials.
the Tevatron and the SLAC.
The low density of beryllium allows collision products to reach the surrounding detectors without significant interaction, its stiffness allows a powerful vacuum to be produced within the pipe to minimize interaction with gases, its thermal stability allows it to function correctly at temperatures of only a few degrees above absolute zero, and its diamagnetic nature keeps it from interfering with the complex multipole magnet systems used to steer and focus the particle beams.
Mechanical applications
Because of its stiffness, light weight and dimensional stability over a wide temperature range, beryllium metal is used for lightweight structural components in the defense and aerospace industries in high-speed aircraft, guided missiles, spacecraft, and satellites, including the James Webb telescope.
Several liquid-fuel rockets have used rocket nozzles made of pure beryllium.
Beryllium powder was itself studied as a rocket fuel, but this use has never materialized.
A small number of extreme high-end bicycle frames have been built with beryllium.
From 1998 to 2000, the McLaren Formula One team used Mercedes-Benz engines with beryllium-aluminium-alloy pistons.
The use of beryllium engine components was banned following a protest by Scuderia Ferrari.
Mixing about 2.0% beryllium into copper forms an alloy called beryllium copper that is six times stronger than copper alone.
Beryllium alloys are used in many applications because of their combination of elasticity, high electrical conductivity and thermal conductivity, high strength and hardness, nonmagnetic properties, as well as good corrosion and fatigue resistance.
Beryllium was also used for cantilevers in high performance phonograph cartridge styli, where its extreme stiffness and low density allowed for tracking weights to be reduced to 1 gram, yet still track high frequency passages with minimal distortion.
An earlier major application of beryllium was in brakes for military airplanes because of its hardness, high melting point, and exceptional ability to dissipate heat.
Environmental considerations have led to substitution by other materials.
will have 18 hexagonal beryllium sections for its mirrors.
Because JWST will face a temperature of 33 K, the mirror is made of gold-plated beryllium, capable of handling extreme cold better than glass.
Beryllium contracts and deforms less than glass - and remains more uniform - in such temperatures.
For the same reason, the optics of the Spitzer Space Telescope are entirely built of beryllium metal.
Magnetic applications
Beryllium is non-magnetic.
Therefore, tools fabricated out of beryllium-based materials are used by naval or military explosive ordnance disposal teams for work on or near naval mines, since these mines commonly have magnetic fuzes.
They are also found in maintenance and construction materials near magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) machines because of the high magnetic fields generated.
In the fields of radio communications and powerful (usually military) radars, hand tools made of beryllium are used to tune the highly magnetic klystrons, magnetrons, traveling wave tubes, etc., that are used for generating high levels of microwave power in the transmitters.
Nuclear applications
Thin plates or foils of beryllium are sometimes used in nuclear weapon designs as the very outer layer of the plutonium pits in the primary stages of thermonuclear bombs, placed to surround the fissile material.
These layers of beryllium are good "pushers" for the implosion of the plutonium-239, and they are good neutron reflectors, just as in beryllium-moderated nuclear reactors.
Neutron sources in which beryllium is bombarded with gamma rays from a gamma decay radioisotope, are also used to produce laboratory neutrons.
Beryllium is also used in fuel fabrication for CANDU reactors.
The fuel elements have small appendages that are resistance brazed to the fuel cladding using an induction brazing process with Be as the braze filler material.
Bearing pads are brazed in place to prevent fuel bundle to pressure tube contact, and inter-element spacer pads are brazed on to prevent element to element contact.
Beryllium is also used at the Joint European Torus nuclear-fusion research laboratory, and it will be used in the more advanced ITER to condition the components which face the plasma.
Beryllium has also been proposed as a cladding material for nuclear fuel rods, because of its good combination of mechanical, chemical, and nuclear properties.
Acoustics
The low weight and high rigidity of beryllium make it useful as a material for high-frequency speaker drivers.
Because beryllium is expensive (many times more than titanium), hard to shape due to its brittleness, and toxic if mishandled, beryllium tweeters are limited to high-end home, pro audio, and public address applications.
Some high-fidelity products have been fraudulently claimed to be made of the material.
Some high-end phonograph cartridges used beryllium cantilevers to improve tracking by reducing mass.
Electronic
Beryllium is a p-type dopant in III-V compound semiconductors.
It is widely used in materials such as GaAs, AlGaAs, InGaAs and InAlAs grown by molecular beam epitaxy (MBE).
Cross-rolled beryllium sheet is an excellent structural support for printed circuit boards in surface-mount technology.
In critical electronic applications, beryllium is both a structural support and heat sink.
The application also requires a coefficient of thermal expansion that is well matched to the alumina and polyimide-glass substrates.
The beryllium-beryllium oxide composite "E-Materials" have been specially designed for these electronic applications and have the additional advantage that the thermal expansion coefficient can be tailored to match diverse substrate materials.
Beryllium compounds were used in fluorescent lighting tubes, but this use was discontinued because of the disease berylliosis which developed in the workers who were making the tubes.
Healthcare
Beryllium is a component of several dental alloys.
Occupational safety and health
Beryllium is a health and safety issue for workers.
Exposure to beryllium in the workplace can lead to a sensitization immune response and can over time develop chronic beryllium disease (CBD).
The National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH) in the United States researches these effects in collaboration with a major manufacturer of beryllium products.
The goal of this research is to prevent sensitization and CBD by developing a better understanding of the work processes and exposures that may present a potential risk for workers, and to develop effective interventions that will reduce the risk for adverse health effects.
NIOSH also conducts genetic research on sensitization and CBD, independently of this collaboration.
Precautions
Approximately 35 micrograms of beryllium is found in the average human body, an amount not considered harmful.
Beryllium is chemically similar to magnesium and therefore can displace it from enzymes, which causes them to malfunction.
Because Be2+ is a highly charged and small ion, it can easily get into many tissues and cells, where it specifically targets cell nuclei, inhibiting many enzymes, including those used for synthesizing DNA.
Its toxicity is exacerbated by the fact that the body has no means to control beryllium levels, and once inside the body the beryllium cannot be removed.
Chronic berylliosis is a pulmonary and systemic granulomatous disease caused by inhalation of dust or fumes contaminated with beryllium; either large amounts over a short time or small amounts over a long time can lead to this ailment.
Symptoms of the disease can take up to five years to develop; about a third of patients with it die and the survivors are left disabled.
The International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC) lists beryllium and beryllium compounds as Category 1 carcinogens.
In the US, the Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) has designated a permissible exposure limit (PEL) in the workplace with a time-weighted average (TWA) 2 µg m3 over 30 minutes, with a maximum peak limit of 25 µg m3.
The IDLH (immediately dangerous to life and health) value is 4 mg/m3.
The toxicity of finely divided beryllium (dust or powder, mainly encountered in industrial settings where beryllium is produced or machined) is very well-documented.
Solid beryllium metal does not carry the same hazards as airborne inhaled dust, but any hazard associated with physical contact is poorly documented.
Workers handling finished beryllium pieces are routinely advised to handle them with gloves, both as a precaution and because many if not most applications of beryllium cannot tolerate residue of skin contact such as fingerprints.
Acute beryllium disease in the form of chemical pneumonitis was first reported in Europe in 1933 and in the United States in 1943.
A survey found that about 5% of workers in plants manufacturing fluorescent lamps in 1949 in the United States had beryllium-related lung diseases.
Chronic berylliosis resembles sarcoidosis in many respects, and the differential diagnosis is often difficult.
It killed some early workers in nuclear weapons design, such as Herbert L. Anderson.
Beryllium may be found in coal slag.
When the slag is formulated into an abrasive agent for blasting paint and rust from hard surfaces, the beryllium can become airborne and become a source of exposure.
Early researchers tasted beryllium and its various compounds for sweetness in order to verify its presence.
Modern diagnostic equipment no longer necessitates this highly risky procedure and no attempt should be made to ingest this highly toxic substance.
A successful test for beryllium in air and on surfaces has been recently developed and published as an international voluntary consensus standard ASTM D7202.
The procedure uses dilute ammonium bifluoride for dissolution and fluorescence detection with beryllium bound to sulfonated hydroxybenzoquinoline, allowing up to 100 times more sensitive detection than the recommended limit for beryllium concentration in the workplace.
Fluorescence increases with increasing beryllium concentration.
The new procedure has been successfully tested on a variety of surfaces and is effective for the dissolution and ultratrace detection of refractory beryllium oxide and siliceous beryllium (ASTM D7458).
Notes
| title=Nature's Building Blocks:
An A-Z Guide to the Elements
| last=Emsley
| first=John
| publisher=Oxford University Press
| year=2001
| location=Oxford, England, UK
| isbn=978-0-19-850340-8
| ref=CITEREFEmsley2001
Further reading
* Mroz MM, Balkissoon R, Newman LS.
"Beryllium".
In: Bingham E, Cohrssen B, Powell C (eds.)
Patty's Toxicology, Fifth Edition.
New York: John Wiley & Sons 2001, 177-220.
* Walsh, KA, https:/ books?id
3-GbhmSfyeYC&printsec
frontcover Beryllium Chemistry and Processing.
Vidal, EE. et al.
Eds.
2009, Materials Park, OH:ASM International.
* http:/ 2011 belpt/ Beryllium Lymphocyte Proliferation Testing (BeLPT).
DOE Specification 1142-2001.
Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Energy, 2001.
