Switzerland, officially the Swiss Confederation, is a sovereign state situated in the confluence of western, central, and southern Europe.
It is a federal republic composed of 26 cantons, with federal authorities seated in Bern.
Switzerland is a landlocked country bordered by Italy to the south, France to the west, Germany to the north, and Austria and Liechtenstein to the east.
It is geographically divided between the Alps, the Swiss Plateau and the Jura, spanning a total area of , and land area of .
While the Alps occupy the greater part of the territory, the Swiss population of approximately 8.5 million is concentrated mostly on the plateau, where the largest cities are located, among them the two global cities and economic centres of Zürich and Geneva.
The establishment of the Old Swiss Confederacy dates to the late medieval period, resulting from a series of military successes against Austria and Burgundy.
Swiss independence from the Holy Roman Empire was formally recognized in the Peace of Westphalia in 1648.
Since the Reformation of the 16th century, Switzerland has maintained a strong policy of armed neutrality; it has not fought an international war since 1815 and did not join the United Nations until 2002.
Nevertheless, it pursues an active foreign policy and is frequently involved in peace-building processes around the world.
Switzerland is the birthplace of the Red Cross, one of the world's oldest and best known humanitarian organisations, and is home to numerous international organisations, including the second largest UN office.
It is a founding member of the European Free Trade Association, but notably not part of the European Union, the European Economic Area or the Eurozone.
However, it participates in the Schengen Area and the European Single Market through bilateral treaties.
Switzerland occupies the crossroads of Germanic and Romance Europe, as reflected in its four main linguistic and cultural regions: German, French, Italian and Romansh.
Although the majority of the population are German-speaking, Swiss national identity is rooted in a common historical background, shared values such as federalism and direct democracy, and Alpine symbolism.
Due to its linguistic diversity, Switzerland is known by a variety of native names: Schweiz (German); Suisse (French); Svizzera (Italian); and Svizra (Romansh).
On coins and stamps, the Latin name, Confoederatio Helvetica - frequently shortened to "Helvetia" - is used instead of the four national languages.
Switzerland is one of the most developed countries in the world, with the highest nominal wealth per adult and the eighth-highest per capita gross domestic product.
It ranks at or near the top in several international metrics, including economic competitiveness and human development.
Zürich, Geneva and Basel have been ranked among the top ten cities in the world in terms of quality of life, with Zürich ranked second globally.
Etymology
The English name Switzerland is a compound containing Switzer, an obsolete term for the Swiss, which was in use during the 16th to 19th centuries.
The English adjective Swiss is a loan from French , also in use since the 16th century.
The name Switzer is from the Alemannic , in origin an inhabitant of Schwyz and its associated territory, one of the Waldstätten cantons which formed the nucleus of the Old Swiss Confederacy.
The Swiss began to adopt the name for themselves after the Swabian War of 1499, used alongside the term for "Confederates", Eidgenossen (literally: comrades by oath), used since the 14th century.
The data code for Switzerland, CH, is derived from Latin Confoederatio Helvetica ().
The toponym Schwyz itself was first attested in 972, as Old High German , ultimately perhaps related to ‘to burn’ (cf. Old Norse svíða ‘to singe, burn’), referring to the area of forest that was burned and cleared to build.
The name was extended to the area dominated by the canton, and after the Swabian War of 1499 gradually came to be used for the entire Confederation.
The Swiss German name of the country, , is homophonous to that of the canton and the settlement, but distinguished by the use of the definite article ( for the Confederation, but simply for the canton and the town).
The Latin name Confoederatio Helvetica was neologized and introduced gradually after the formation of the federal state in 1848, harking back to the Napoleonic Helvetic Republic, appearing on coins from 1879, inscribed on the Federal Palace in 1902 and after 1948 used in the official seal.
(for example, the ISO banking code "CHF" for the Swiss franc, and the country top-level domain ".ch", are both taken from the state's Latin name).
Helvetica is derived from the Helvetii, a Gaulish tribe living on the Swiss plateau before the Roman era.
Helvetia appears as a national personification of the Swiss confederacy in the 17th century with a 1672 play by Johann Caspar Weissenbach.
History
Switzerland has existed as a state in its present form since the adoption of the Swiss Federal Constitution in 1848.
The precursors of Switzerland established a protective alliance at the end of the 13th century (1291), forming a loose confederation of states which persisted for centuries.
Early history
The oldest traces of hominid existence in Switzerland date back about 150,000 years.
The oldest known farming settlements in Switzerland, which were found at Gächlingen, have been dated to around 5300 BC.
Throughout the rest of the 6th, 7th and 8th centuries the Swiss regions continued under Frankish hegemony (Merovingian and Carolingian dynasties).
But after its extension under Charlemagne, the Frankish Empire was divided by the Treaty of Verdun in 843.
By 1353, the three original cantons had joined with the cantons of Glarus and Zug and the Lucerne, Zürich and Bern city states to form the "Old Confederacy" of eight states that existed until the end of the 15th century.
The expansion led to increased power and wealth for the confederation.
Federal state
The restoration of power to the patriciate was only temporary.
After a period of unrest with repeated violent clashes, such as the Züriputsch of 1839, civil war (the Sonderbundskrieg) broke out in 1847 when some Catholic cantons tried to set up a separate alliance (the Sonderbund).
A system of single weights and measures was introduced and in 1850 the Swiss franc became the Swiss single currency.
the constitution forbade sending troops to serve abroad, with the exception of serving the Holy See, though the Swiss were still obliged to serve Francis II of the Two Sicilies with Swiss Guards present at the Siege of Gaeta in 1860, marking the end of foreign service.
An important clause of the constitution was that it could be re-written completely if this was deemed necessary, thus enabling it to evolve as a whole rather than being modified one amendment at a time.
This need soon proved itself when the rise in population and the Industrial Revolution that followed led to calls to modify the constitution accordingly.
An early draft was rejected by the population in 1872 but modifications led to its acceptance in 1874.
Swiss neutrality was seriously questioned by the Grimm-Hoffmann Affair in 1917, but it was short-lived.
In 1920, Switzerland joined the League of Nations, which was based in Geneva, on condition that it was exempt from any military requirements.
During World War II, detailed invasion plans were drawn up by the Germans, but Switzerland was never attacked.
Under General Henri Guisan, appointed the commander-in-chief for the duration of the war, a general mobilisation of the armed forces was ordered.
The Swiss military strategy was changed from one of static defence at the borders to protect the economic heartland, to one of organised long-term attrition and withdrawal to strong, well-stockpiled positions high in the Alps known as the Reduit.
Switzerland was an important base for espionage by both sides in the conflict and often mediated communications between the Axis and Allied powers.
and the International Red Cross, based in Geneva, played an important part during the conflict.
Strict immigration and asylum policies as well as the financial relationships with Nazi Germany raised controversy, but not until the end of the 20th century.
During the war, the Swiss Air Force engaged aircraft of both sides, shooting down 11 intruding Luftwaffe planes in May and June 1940, then forcing down other intruders after a change of policy following threats from Germany.
Over 100 Allied bombers and their crews were interned during the war.
Between 1940 and 1945, Switzerland was bombed by the Allies causing fatalities and property damage.
Court-martial proceedings took place in England and the U.S. Government paid 62,176,433.06 in Swiss francs for reparations of the bombings.
After the war, the Swiss government exported credits through the charitable fund known as the Schweizerspende and also donated to the Marshall Plan to help Europe's recovery, efforts that ultimately benefited the Swiss economy.
During the Cold War, Swiss authorities considered the construction of a Swiss nuclear bomb.
Leading nuclear physicists at the Federal Institute of Technology Zürich such as Paul Scherrer made this a realistic possibility.
In 1988, the Paul Scherrer Institute was founded in his name to explore the therapeutic uses of neutron scattering technologies.
Financial problems with the defence budget and ethical considerations prevented the substantial funds from being allocated, and the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty of 1968 was seen as a valid alternative.
All remaining plans for building nuclear weapons were dropped by 1988.
Switzerland was the last Western republic to grant women the right to vote.
Some Swiss cantons approved this in 1959, while at the federal level it was achieved in 1971 and, after resistance, in the last canton Appenzell Innerrhoden (one of only two remaining Landsgemeinde, along with Glarus) in 1990.
After obtaining suffrage at the federal level, women quickly rose in political significance, with the first woman on the seven member Federal Council executive being Elisabeth Kopp, who served from 1984 to 1989, The population is about 8 million, resulting in an average population density of around 195 people per square kilometre (500/sq mi).
The more mountainous southern half of the country is far more sparsely populated than the northern half.
Switzerland lies between latitudes 45° and 48° N, and longitudes 5° and 11° E.
It contains three basic topographical areas: the Swiss Alps to the south, the Swiss Plateau or Central Plateau, and the Jura mountains on the west.
The Alps are a high mountain range running across the central-south of the country, constituting about 60% of the country's total area.
The majority of the Swiss population live in the Swiss Plateau.
Among the high valleys of the Swiss Alps many glaciers are found, totalling an area of .
From these originate the headwaters of several major rivers, such as the Rhine, Inn, Ticino and Rhône, which flow in the four cardinal directions into the whole of Europe.
The hydrographic network includes several of the largest bodies of freshwater in Central and Western Europe, among which are included Lake Geneva (also called le Lac Léman in French), Lake Constance (known as Bodensee in German) and Lake Maggiore.
Switzerland has more than 1500 lakes, and contains 6% of Europe's stock of fresh water.
Lakes and glaciers cover about 6% of the national territory.
The largest lake is Lake Geneva, in western Switzerland shared with France.
The Rhône is both the main source and outflow of Lake Geneva.
Lake Constance is the second largest Swiss lake and, like the Lake Geneva, an intermediate step by the Rhine at the border to Austria and Germany.
While the Rhône flows into the Mediterranean Sea at the French Camargue region and the Rhine flows into the North Sea at Rotterdam in the Netherlands, about apart, both springs are only about apart from each other in the Swiss Alps.
48 of Switzerland's mountains are above sea in altitude or higher.
Switzerland has no exclaves in other countries.
Climate
The Swiss climate is generally temperate, but can vary greatly between the localities, from glacial conditions on the mountaintops to the often pleasant near Mediterranean climate at Switzerland's southern tip.
There are some valley areas in the southern part of Switzerland where some cold-hardy palm trees are found.
Summers tend to be warm and humid at times with periodic rainfall so they are ideal for pastures and grazing.
The less humid winters in the mountains may see long intervals of stable conditions for weeks, while the lower lands tend to suffer from inversion, during these periods, thus seeing no sun for weeks.
A weather phenomenon known as the föhn (with an identical effect to the chinook wind) can occur at all times of the year and is characterised by an unexpectedly warm wind, bringing air of very low relative humidity to the north of the Alps during rainfall periods on the southern face of the Alps.
This works both ways across the alps but is more efficient if blowing from the south due to the steeper step for oncoming wind from the south.
Valleys running south to north trigger the best effect.
The driest conditions persist in all inner alpine valleys that receive less rain because arriving clouds lose a lot of their content while crossing the mountains before reaching these areas.
Large alpine areas such as Graubünden remain drier than pre-alpine areas and as in the main valley of the Valais wine grapes are grown there.
The wettest conditions persist in the high Alps and in the Ticino canton which has much sun yet heavy bursts of rain from time to time.
Nevertheless, according to the 2014 Environmental Performance Index, Switzerland ranks first among 132 nations in safeguarding the environment, due to its high scores on environmental public health, its heavy reliance on renewable sources of energy (hydropower and geothermal energy), and its control of greenhouse gas emissions.
However, access to biocapacity in Switzerland is far lower than world average.
In 2016, Switzerland had 1.0 global hectares of biocapacity per person within its territory, 40 percent less than world average of 1.6 global hectares per person.
In contrast, in 2016, they used 4.6 global hectares of biocapacity - their ecological footprint of consumption.
This means they used about 4.6 times as much biocapacity as Switzerland contains.
The remainder comes from imports and overusing the global commons (such as the atmosphere through greenhouse gas emissions).
As a result, Switzerland is running a biocapacity deficit.
A new Swiss Constitution was adopted in 1999, but did not introduce notable changes to the federal structure.
It outlines basic and political rights of individuals and citizen participation in public affairs, divides the powers between the Confederation and the cantons and defines federal jurisdiction and authority.
There are three main governing bodies on the federal level: the bicameral parliament (legislative), the Federal Council (executive) and the Federal Court (judicial).
The Swiss Parliament consists of two houses: the Council of States which has 46 representatives (two from each canton and one from each half-canton) who are elected under a system determined by each canton, and the National Council, which consists of 200 members who are elected under a system of proportional representation, depending on the population of each canton.
Members of both houses serve for 4 years and only serve as members of parliament part-time (so-called Milizsystem or citizen legislature).
When both houses are in joint session, they are known collectively as the Federal Assembly.
Through referendums, citizens may challenge any law passed by parliament and through initiatives, introduce amendments to the federal constitution, thus making Switzerland a direct democracy.
Direct democracy
Direct democracy and federalism are hallmarks of the Swiss political system.
Swiss citizens are subject to three legal jurisdictions: the municipality, canton and federal levels.
The 1848 and 1999 Swiss Constitutions define a system of direct democracy (sometimes called half-direct or representative direct democracy because it is aided by the more commonplace institutions of a representative democracy).
The instruments of this system at the federal level, known as popular rights (, , ), include the right to submit a federal initiative and a referendum, both of which may overturn parliamentary decisions.
By calling a federal referendum, a group of citizens may challenge a law passed by parliament, if they gather 50,000 signatures against the law within 100 days.
If so, a national vote is scheduled where voters decide by a simple majority whether to accept or reject the law.
Any 8 cantons together can also call a constitutional referendum on a federal law.
The Federal Council and the Federal Assembly can supplement the proposed amendment with a counter-proposal, and then voters must indicate a preference on the ballot in case both proposals are accepted.
Constitutional amendments, whether introduced by initiative or in parliament, must be accepted by a double majority of the national popular vote and the cantonal popular votes.
The cantons are federated states, have a permanent constitutional status and, in comparison with the situation in other countries, a high degree of independence.
Under the Federal Constitution, all 26 cantons are equal in status, except that 6 (referred to often as the half-cantons) are represented by only one councillor (instead of two) in the Council of States and have only half a cantonal vote with respect to the required cantonal majority in referendums on constitutional amendments.
Each canton has its own constitution, and its own parliament, government, police and courts.
Only in 2002 did Switzerland become a full member of the United Nations
A large number of international institutions have their seats in Switzerland, in part because of its policy of neutrality.
Geneva is the birthplace of the Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement and the Geneva Conventions and, since 2006, hosts the United Nations Human Rights Council.
Even though Switzerland is one of the most recent countries to have joined the United Nations, the Palace of Nations in Geneva is the second biggest centre for the United Nations after New York, and Switzerland was a founding member and home to the League of Nations.
Apart from the United Nations headquarters, the Swiss Confederation is host to many UN agencies, like the World Health Organization (WHO), the International Labour Organization (ILO), the International Telecommunication Union (ITU), the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) and about 200 other international organisations, including the World Trade Organization and the World Intellectual Property Organization.
Military
The Swiss Armed Forces, including the Land Forces and the Air Force, are composed mostly of conscripts, male citizens aged from 20 to 34 (in special cases up to 50) years.
Being a landlocked country, Switzerland has no navy; however, on lakes bordering neighbouring countries, armed military patrol boats are used.
Swiss citizens are prohibited from serving in foreign armies, except for the Swiss Guards of the Vatican, or if they are dual citizens of a foreign country and reside there.
The structure of the Swiss militia system stipulates that the soldiers keep their Army issued equipment, including all personal weapons, at home.
Some organisations and political parties find this practice controversial.
Women can serve voluntarily.
Men usually receive military conscription orders for training at the age of 18.
About two thirds of the young Swiss are found suited for service; for those found unsuited, various forms of alternative service exist.
Annually, approximately 20,000 persons are trained in recruit centres for a duration from 18 to 21 weeks.
The reform "Army XXI" was adopted by popular vote in 2003, it replaced the previous model "Army 95", reducing the effectives from 400,000 to about 200,000.
Of those, 120,000 are active in periodic Army training and 80,000 are non-training reserves.
Overall, three general mobilisations have been declared to ensure the integrity and neutrality of Switzerland.
The first one was held on the occasion of the Franco-Prussian War of 1870-71.
The second was in response to the outbreak of the First World War in August 1914.
The third mobilisation of the army took place in September 1939 in response to the German attack on Poland; Henri Guisan was elected as the General-in-Chief.
Because of its neutrality policy, the Swiss army does not currently take part in armed conflicts in other countries, but is part of some peacekeeping missions around the world.
Since 2000 the armed force department has also maintained the Onyx intelligence gathering system to monitor satellite communications.
Switzerland decided not to sign the Nuclear Weapon Ban Treaty.
Following the end of the Cold War there have been a number of attempts to curb military activity or even abolish the armed forces altogether.
A notable referendum on the subject, launched by an anti-militarist group, was held on 26 November 1989.
It was defeated with about two thirds of the voters against the proposal.
A similar referendum, called for before, but held shortly after the 11 September attacks in the US, was defeated by over 78% of voters.
Gun politics in Switzerland are unique in Europe in that 29% of citizens are legally armed.
The large majority of firearms kept at home are issued by the Swiss army, but ammunition is no longer issued.
The capital or Federal City issue
Until 1848 the rather loosely coupled Confederation did not know a central political organisation, but representatives, mayors, and Landammänner met several times a year at the capital of the Lieu presiding the Confederal Diet for one year.
Until 1500 the legates met most of the time in Lucerne, but also in Zürich, Baden, Bern, Schwyz etc., but sometimes also at places outside of the confederation, such as Constance.
From the Swabian War in 1499 onwards until Reformation, most conferences met in Zurich.
Afterwards the town hall at Baden, where the annual accounts of the common people had been held regularly since 1426, became the most frequent, but not the sole place of assembly.
After 1712 Frauenfeld gradually dissolved Baden.
From 1526, the Catholic conferences were held mostly in Lucerne, the Protestant conferences from 1528 mostly in Aarau, the one for the legitimation of the French Ambassador in Solothurn.
At the same time the syndicate for the Ennetbirgischen Vogteien located in the present Ticino met from 1513 in Lugano and Locarno.
After the Helvetic Republic and during the Mediation from 1803 until 1815 the Confederal Diet of the 19 Lieus met at the capitals of the directoral cantons Fribourg, Berne, Basel, Zurich, Lucerne and Solothurn.
Thus as of today, no city in Switzerland has the official status either of capital or of Federal City, nevertheless Berne is commonly referred to as "Federal City" (, , ).
Economy and labour law
Switzerland has a stable, prosperous and high-tech economy and enjoys great wealth, being ranked as the wealthiest country in the world per capita in multiple rankings.
In 2011 it was ranked as the wealthiest country in the world in per capita terms (with "wealth" being defined to include both financial and non-financial assets), while the 2013 Credit Suisse Global Wealth Report showed that Switzerland was the country with the highest average wealth per adult in 2013.
It has the world's nineteenth largest economy by nominal GDP and the thirty-sixth largest by purchasing power parity.
It is the twentieth largest exporter, despite its small size.
Switzerland has the highest European rating in the Index of Economic Freedom 2010, while also providing large coverage through public services.
The nominal per capita GDP is higher than those of the larger Western and Central European economies and Japan.
If adjusted for purchasing power parity, Switzerland ranks 8th in the world in terms of GDP per capita, according to the World Bank and IMF (ranked 15th according to the CIA Worldfactbook while ranked by the European Union as Europe's most innovative country.
For much of the 20th century, Switzerland was the wealthiest country in Europe by a considerable margin (by GDP - per capita).
In 2017, average gross household income in Switzerland was 9,946 francs per month (equivalent to US$10,720 per month), though 61% of the population made less than the average income.
Switzerland also has one of the world's largest account balances as a percentage of GDP.
Switzerland is home to several large multinational corporations.
The largest Swiss companies by revenue are Glencore, Gunvor, Nestlé, Novartis, Hoffmann-La Roche, ABB, Mercuria Energy Group and Adecco.
Also, notable are UBS AG, Zurich Financial Services, Credit Suisse, Barry Callebaut, Swiss Re, Tetra Pak, The Swatch Group and Swiss International Air Lines.
Switzerland is ranked as having one of the most powerful economies in the world.
The service sector - especially banking and insurance, tourism, and international organisations - is another important industry for Switzerland.
Slightly more than 5 million people work in Switzerland; about 25% of employees belonged to a trade union in 2004.
Switzerland has a more flexible job market than neighbouring countries and the unemployment rate is very low.
The unemployment rate increased from a low of 1.7% in June 2000 to a peak of 4.4% in December 2009.
The unemployment rate decreased to 3.2% in 2014 without further decrease in 2015 and 2016.
Population growth from net immigration is quite high, at 0.52% of population in 2004.
Switzerland has an overwhelmingly private sector economy and low tax rates by Western World standards; overall taxation is one of the smallest of developed countries.
Switzerland is a relatively easy place to do business, currently ranking 20th of 189 countries in the Ease of Doing Business Index.
The slow growth Switzerland experienced in the 1990s and the early 2000s has brought greater support for economic reforms and harmonisation with the European Union.
Agricultural protectionism-a rare exception to Switzerland's free trade policies-has contributed to high food prices.
Product market liberalisation is lagging behind many EU countries according to the OECD.
Apart from agriculture, economic and trade barriers between the European Union and Switzerland are minimal and Switzerland has free trade agreements worldwide.
Switzerland is a member of the European Free Trade Association (EFTA).
Education and science
Education in Switzerland is very diverse because the constitution of Switzerland delegates the authority for the school system to the cantons.
There are both public and private schools, including many private international schools.
The minimum age for primary school is about six years in all cantons, but most cantons provide a free "children's school" starting at four or five years old.
The two institutes sponsored by the federal government are the Swiss Federal Institute of Technology Zurich (ETHZ) in Zürich, founded 1855 and the EPFL in Lausanne, founded 1969 as such, which was formerly an institute associated with the University of Lausanne.
In addition, there are various Universities of Applied Sciences.
In business and management studies, the University of St. Gallen, (HSG) is ranked 329th in the world according to QS World University Rankings and the International Institute for Management Development (IMD), was ranked first in open programmes worldwide by the Financial Times.
Switzerland has the second highest rate (almost 18% in 2003) of foreign students in tertiary education, after Australia (slightly over 18%).
As might befit a country that plays home to innumerable international organisations, the Graduate Institute of International and Development Studies, located in Geneva, is not only continental Europe's oldest graduate school of international and development studies, but also widely believed to be one of its most prestigious.
Many Nobel Prize laureates have been Swiss scientists.
They include the world-famous physicist Albert Einstein in the field of physics, who developed his special relativity while working in Bern.
More recently Vladimir Prelog, Heinrich Rohrer, Richard Ernst, Edmond Fischer, Rolf Zinkernagel, Kurt Wüthrich and Jacques Dubochet received Nobel Prizes in the sciences.
In total, 114 Nobel Prize winners in all fields stand in relation to Switzerland and the Nobel Peace Prize has been awarded nine times to organisations residing in Switzerland.
Geneva and the nearby French department of Ain co-host the world's largest laboratory, CERN, dedicated to particle physics research.
Another important research centre is the Paul Scherrer Institute.
Notable inventions include lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD), diazepam (Valium), the scanning tunnelling microscope (Nobel prize) and Velcro.
Some technologies enabled the exploration of new worlds such as the pressurised balloon of Auguste Piccard and the Bathyscaphe which permitted Jacques Piccard to reach the deepest point of the world's oceans.
Switzerland Space Agency, the Swiss Space Office, has been involved in various space technologies and programmes.
In addition it was one of the 10 founders of the European Space Agency in 1975 and is the seventh largest contributor to the ESA budget.
In the private sector, several companies are implicated in the space industry such as Oerlikon Space or Maxon Motors who provide spacecraft structures.
Switzerland and the European Union
Switzerland voted against membership in the European Economic Area in a referendum in December 1992 and has since maintained and developed its relationships with the European Union (EU) and European countries through bilateral agreements.
In March 2001, the Swiss people refused in a popular vote to start accession negotiations with the EU.
In recent years, the Swiss have brought their economic practices largely into conformity with those of the EU in many ways, in an effort to enhance their international competitiveness.
The economy grew at 3% in 2010, 1.9% in 2011, and 1% in 2012.
EU membership was a long-term objective of the Swiss government, but there was and remains considerable popular sentiment against membership, which is opposed by the conservative SVP party, the largest party in the National Council, and not currently supported or proposed by several other political parties.
The application for membership of the EU was formally withdrawn in 2016, having long been frozen.
The western French-speaking areas and the urban regions of the rest of the country tend to be more pro-EU, nonetheless with far from a significant share of the population.
The government has established an Integration Office under the Department of Foreign Affairs and the Department of Economic Affairs.
To minimise the negative consequences of Switzerland's isolation from the rest of Europe, Bern and Brussels signed seven bilateral agreements to further liberalise trade ties.
These agreements were signed in 1999 and took effect in 2001.
This first series of bilateral agreements included the free movement of persons.
A second series covering nine areas was signed in 2004 and has since been ratified, which includes the Schengen Treaty and the Dublin Convention besides others.
They continue to discuss further areas for cooperation.
In 2006, Switzerland approved 1 billion francs of supportive investment in the poorer Southern and Central European countries in support of cooperation and positive ties to the EU as a whole.
A further referendum will be needed to approve 300 million francs to support Romania and Bulgaria and their recent admission.
The Swiss have also been under EU and sometimes international pressure to reduce banking secrecy and to raise tax rates to parity with the EU. Preparatory discussions are being opened in four new areas: opening up the electricity market, participation in the European GNSS project Galileo, cooperating with the European centre for disease prevention and recognising certificates of origin for food products.
On 27 November 2008, the interior and justice ministers of European Union in Brussels announced Switzerland's accession to the Schengen passport-free zone from 12 December 2008.
The land border checkpoints will remain in place only for goods movements, but should not run controls on people, though people entering the country had their passports checked until 29 March 2009 if they originated from a Schengen nation.
On 9 February 2014, Swiss voters narrowly approved by 50.3% a ballot initiative launched by the national conservative Swiss People's Party (SVP/UDC) to restrict immigration, and thus reintroducing a quota system on the influx of foreigners.
This initiative was mostly backed by rural (57.6% approvals) and suburban agglomerations (51.2% approvals), and isolated towns (51.3% approvals) of Switzerland as well as by a strong majority (69.2% approval) in the canton of Ticino, while metropolitan centres (58.5% rejection) and the French-speaking part (58.5% rejection) of Switzerland rather rejected it.
Some news commentators claim that this proposal de facto contradicts the bilateral agreements on the free movement of persons from these respective countries.
In December 2016, a compromise with the European Union was attained effectively canceling quotas on EU citizens but still allowing for favourable treatment of Swiss-based job applicants.
Energy, infrastructure and environment
Electricity generated in Switzerland is 56% from hydroelectricity and 39% from nuclear power, resulting in a nearly CO2-free electricity-generating network.
On 18 May 2003, two anti-nuclear initiatives were turned down: Moratorium Plus, aimed at forbidding the building of new nuclear power plants (41.6% supported and 58.4% opposed), and Electricity Without Nuclear (33.7% supported and 66.3% opposed) after a previous moratorium expired in 2000.
However, as a reaction to the Fukushima nuclear disaster, the Swiss government announced in 2011 that it plans to end its use of nuclear energy in the next 2 or 3 decades.
In November 2016, Swiss voters rejected a proposal by the Green Party to accelerate the phaseout of nuclear power (45.8% supported and 54.2% opposed).
The Swiss Federal Office of Energy (SFOE) is the office responsible for all questions relating to energy supply and energy use within the Federal Department of Environment, Transport, Energy and Communications (DETEC).
The agency is supporting the 2000-watt society initiative to cut the nation's energy use by more than half by the year 2050.
The most dense rail network in Europe In 2015, each Swiss resident travelled on average by rail, which makes them the keenest rail users.
and the Matterhorn Gotthard Bahn (MGB), which co-operates together with RhB the Glacier Express between Zermatt and St. Moritz/Davos.
On 31 May 2016 the world's longest and deepest railway tunnel and the first flat, low-level route through the Alps, the Gotthard Base Tunnel, opened as the largest part of the New Railway Link through the Alps (NRLA) project after 17 years of realization.
It started its daily business for passenger transport on 11 December 2016 replacing the old, mountainous, scenic route over and through the St Gotthard Massif.
Switzerland has a publicly managed road network without road tolls that is financed by highway permits as well as vehicle and gasoline taxes.
The Swiss autobahn/autoroute system requires the purchase of a vignette (toll sticker)-which costs 40 Swiss francs-for one calendar year in order to use its roadways, for both passenger cars and trucks.
The Swiss autobahn/autoroute network has a total length of (as of 2000) and has, by an area of , also one of the highest motorway densities in the world.
Zurich Airport is Switzerland's largest international flight gateway, which handled 22.8 million passengers in 2012.
The other international airports are Geneva Airport (13.9 million passengers in 2012), EuroAirport Basel Mulhouse Freiburg which is located in France, Bern Airport, Lugano Airport, St. Gallen-Altenrhein Airport and Sion Airport.
Swiss International Air Lines is the flag carrier of Switzerland.
Its main hub is Zürich.
Switzerland has one of the best environmental records among nations in the developed world; it was one of the countries to sign the Kyoto Protocol in 1998 and ratified it in 2003.
With Mexico and the Republic of Korea it forms the Environmental Integrity Group (EIG).
The country is heavily active in recycling and anti-littering regulations and is one of the top recyclers in the world, with 66% to 96% of recyclable materials being recycled, depending on the area of the country.
The 2014 Global Green Economy Index ranked Switzerland among the top 10 green economies in the world.
Switzerland developed an efficient system to recycle most recyclable materials.
Publicly organised collection by volunteers and economical railway transport logistics started as early as 1865 under the leadership of the notable industrialist
Hans Caspar Escher (Escher Wyss AG) when the first modern Swiss paper manufacturing plant was built in Biberist.
Switzerland also has an economic system for garbage disposal, which is based mostly on recycling and energy-producing incinerators due to a strong political will to protect the environment.
As in other European countries, the illegal disposal of garbage is not tolerated at all and heavily fined.
In almost all Swiss municipalities, stickers or dedicated garbage bags need to be purchased that allow for identification of disposable garbage.
Demographics
In 2018, Switzerland's population slightly exceeded 8.5 million.
In common with other developed countries, the Swiss population increased rapidly during the industrial era, quadrupling between 1800 and 1990.
Growth has since stabilised, and like most of Europe, Switzerland faces an ageing population, albeit with consistent annual growth projected into 2035, due mostly to immigration and a fertility rate close to replacement level.
Switzerland subsequently has one of the oldest populations in the world, with the average age of 42.5 years.
, resident foreigners make up 25.2% of the population, one of the largest proportions in the developed world.
Italians were the largest single group of foreigners, with 15.6% of total foreign population, followed closely by Germans (15.2%), immigrants from Portugal (12.7%), France (5.6%), Serbia (5.3%), Turkey (3.8%), Spain (3.7%), and Austria (2%).
Immigrants from Sri Lanka, most of them former Tamil refugees, were the largest group among people of Asian origin (6.3%).
In the 2000s, domestic and international institutions expressed concern about what was perceived as an increase in xenophobia, particularly in some political campaigns.
In reply to one critical report, the Federal Council noted that "racism unfortunately is present in Switzerland", but stated that the high proportion of foreign citizens in the country, as well as the generally unproblematic integration of foreigners, underlined Switzerland's openness.
Languages
File:Karte Schweizer Sprachgebiete 2017.png|thumb|National languages in Switzerland (2016):
Switzerland has four national languages: mainly German (spoken by 62.8% of the population in 2016); French (22.9%) in the west; and Italian (8.2%) in the south.
In 2014 almost two-thirds (64.4%) of the permanent resident population indicated speaking more than one language regularly.
The federal government is obliged to communicate in the official languages, and in the federal parliament simultaneous translation is provided from and into German, French and Italian.
Aside from the official forms of their respective languages, the four linguistic regions of Switzerland also have their local dialectal forms.
The role played by dialects in each linguistic region varies dramatically: in the German-speaking regions, Swiss German dialects have become ever more prevalent since the second half of the 20th century, especially in the media, such as radio and television, and are used as an everyday language for many, while the Swiss variety of Standard German is almost always used instead of dialect for written communication (c.f. diglossic usage of a language).
Conversely, in the French-speaking regions the local dialects have almost disappeared (only 6.3% of the population of Valais, 3.9% of Fribourg, and 3.1% of Jura still spoke dialects at the end of the 20th century), while in the Italian-speaking regions dialects are mostly limited to family settings and casual conversation.
from French), from similar terms in another language (Italian azione used not only as act but also as discount from German Aktion).
The French spoken in Switzerland has similar terms, which are equally known as Helvetisms.
The most frequent characteristics of Helvetisms are in vocabulary, phrases, and pronunciation, but certain Helvetisms denote themselves as special in syntax and orthography likewise.
Duden, the comprehensive German dictionary, contains about 3000 Helvetisms.
Learning one of the other national languages at school is compulsory for all Swiss pupils, so many Swiss are supposed to be at least bilingual, especially those belonging to linguistic minority groups.
Health
Swiss residents are universally required to buy health insurance from private insurance companies, which in turn are required to accept every applicant.
While the cost of the system is among the highest, it compares well with other European countries in terms of health outcomes; patients have been reported as being, in general, highly satisfied with it.
In 2012, life expectancy at birth was 80.4 years for men and 84.7 years for women - the highest in the world.
However, spending on health is particularly high at 11.4% of GDP (2010), on par with Germany and France (11.6%) and other European countries, but notably less than spending in the USA (17.6%).
From 1990, a steady increase can be observed, reflecting the high costs of the services provided.
With an ageing population and new healthcare technologies, health spending will likely continue to rise.
Switzerland has gone from a largely rural country to an urban one in just 70 years.
Since 1935 urban development has claimed as much of the Swiss landscape as it did during the previous 2,000 years.
This urban sprawl does not only affect the plateau but also the Jura and the Alpine foothills and there are growing concerns about land use.
However, from the beginning of the 21st century, the population growth in urban areas is higher than in the countryside.
The weight of the largest metropolitan areas, which are Zürich, Geneva-Lausanne, Basel and Bern tend to increase.
Largest towns
Religion
Switzerland has no official state religion, though most of the cantons (except Geneva and Neuchâtel) recognise official churches, which are either the Roman Catholic Church or the Swiss Reformed Church.
These churches, and in some cantons also the Old Catholic Church and Jewish congregations, are financed by official taxation of adherents.
Christianity is the predominant religion of Switzerland (about 68% of resident population in 2016), divided between the Roman Catholic Church (37.2% of the population), the Swiss Reformed Church (25.0%), further Protestant churches (2.2%), Eastern Orthodoxy (around 2%), and other Christian denominations (1.3%).
The country was historically about evenly balanced between Catholic and Protestant, with a complex patchwork of majorities over most of the country.
Switzerland played an exceptional role during the Reformation as it became home to many reformers.
Geneva converted to Protestantism in 1536, just before John Calvin arrived there.
In 1541, he founded the Republic of Geneva on his own ideals.
It became known internationally as the Protestant Rome, and housed such reformers as Theodore Beza, William Farel or Pierre Viret.
Zürich became another stronghold around the same time, with Huldrych Zwingli and Heinrich Bullinger taking the lead there.
Anabaptists Felix Manz and Conrad Grebel also operated there.
They were later joined by the fleeing Peter Martyr Vermigli and Hans Denck.
Other centres included Basel (Andreas Karlstadt and Johannes Oecolampadius), Berne (Berchtold Haller and Niklaus Manuel), and St. Gallen (Joachim Vadian).
One canton, Appenzell, was officially divided into Catholic and Protestant sections in 1597.
The larger cities and their cantons (Bern, Geneva, Lausanne, Zürich and Basel) used to be predominantly Protestant.
Central Switzerland, the Valais, the Ticino, Appenzell Innerrhodes, the Jura, and Fribourg are traditionally Catholic.
The Swiss Constitution of 1848, under the recent impression of the clashes of Catholic vs. Protestant cantons that culminated in the Sonderbundskrieg, consciously defines a consociational state, allowing the peaceful co-existence of Catholics and Protestants.
A 1980 initiative calling for the complete separation of church and state was rejected by 78.9% of the voters.
Some traditionally Protestant cantons and cities nowadays have a slight Catholic majority, not because they were growing in members, quite the contrary, but only because since about 1970 a steadily growing minority became not affiliated with any church or other religious body (21.4% in Switzerland, 2012) especially in traditionally Protestant regions, such as Basel-City (42%), canton of Neuchâtel (38%), canton of Geneva (35%), canton of Vaud (26%), or Zürich city (city: >25%; canton: 23%).
Culture
Three of Europe's major languages are official in Switzerland.
Swiss culture is characterised by diversity, which is reflected in a wide range of traditional customs.
A region may be in some ways strongly culturally connected to the neighbouring country that shares its language, the country itself being rooted in western European culture.
The linguistically isolated Romansh culture in Graubünden in eastern Switzerland constitutes an exception, it survives only in the upper valleys of the Rhine and the Inn and strives to maintain its rare linguistic tradition.
Switzerland is home to many notable contributors to literature, art, architecture, music and sciences.
In addition the country attracted a number of creative persons during time of unrest or war in Europe.
Some 1000 museums are distributed through the country; the number has more than tripled since 1950.
Among the most important cultural performances held annually are the Paléo Festival, Lucerne Festival, the Montreux Jazz Festival, the Locarno International Film Festival and the Art Basel.
Alpine symbolism has played an essential role in shaping the history of the country and the Swiss national identity.
Nowadays some concentrated mountain areas have a strong highly energetic ski resort culture in winter, and a hiking () or Mountain biking culture in summer.
Other areas throughout the year have a recreational culture that caters to tourism, yet the quieter seasons are spring and autumn when there are fewer visitors.
A traditional farmer and herder culture also predominates in many areas and small farms are omnipresent outside the towns.
Folk art is kept alive in organisations all over the country.
In Switzerland it is mostly expressed in music, dance, poetry, wood carving and embroidery.
The alphorn, a trumpet-like musical instrument made of wood, has become alongside yodeling and the accordion an epitome of traditional Swiss music.
Literature
As the Confederation, from its foundation in 1291, was almost exclusively composed of German-speaking regions, the earliest forms of literature are in German.
In the 18th century, French became the fashionable language in Bern and elsewhere, while the influence of the French-speaking allies and subject lands was more marked than before.
Among the classic authors of Swiss German literature are Jeremias Gotthelf (1797-1854) and Gottfried Keller (1819-1890).
The undisputed giants of 20th-century Swiss literature are Max Frisch (1911-91) and Friedrich Dürrenmatt (1921-90), whose repertoire includes Die Physiker (The Physicists) and Das Versprechen (The Pledge), released in 2001 as a Hollywood film.
Famous French-speaking writers were Jean-Jacques Rousseau (1712-1778) and Germaine de Staël (1766-1817).
More recent authors include Charles Ferdinand Ramuz (1878-1947), whose novels describe the lives of peasants and mountain dwellers, set in a harsh environment and Blaise Cendrars (born Frédéric Sauser, 1887-1961).
The Swiss News Agency (SNA) broadcasts information around-the-clock in three of the four national languages-on politics, economics, society and culture.
The SNA supplies almost all Swiss media and a couple dozen foreign media services with its news.
The most influential newspapers are the German-language Tages-Anzeiger and Neue Zürcher Zeitung NZZ, and the French-language Le Temps, but almost every city has at least one local newspaper.
The cultural diversity accounts for a large number of newspapers.
Winter sports are practised by the natives and tourists since the second half of the 19th century with the invention of bobsleigh in St. Moritz.
The first world ski championships were held in Mürren (1931) and St. Moritz (1934).
The latter town hosted the second Winter Olympic Games in 1928 and the fifth edition in 1948.
Among the most successful skiers and world champions are Pirmin Zurbriggen and Didier Cuche.
The most prominently watched sports in Switzerland are football, ice hockey, Alpin skiing, "Schwingen", and tennis.
The headquarters of the international football's and ice hockey's governing bodies, the International Federation of Association Football (FIFA) and International Ice Hockey Federation (IIHF), are located in Zürich.
Actually many other headquarters of international sports federations are located in Switzerland.
For example, the International Olympic Committee (IOC), IOC's Olympic Museum and the Court of Arbitration for Sport (CAS) are located in Lausanne.
Switzerland hosted the 1954 FIFA World Cup, and was the joint host, with Austria, of the UEFA Euro 2008 tournament.
The Swiss Super League is the nation's professional football club league.
Europe's highest football pitch, at above sea level, is located in Switzerland and is named the Ottmar Hitzfeld Stadium.
Many Swiss also follow ice hockey and support one of the 12 teams of the National League, which is the most attended league in Europe.
In 2009, Switzerland hosted the IIHF World Championship for the 10th time.
It also became World Vice-Champion in 2013 and 2018.
The numerous lakes make Switzerland an attractive place for sailing.
The largest, Lake Geneva, is the home of the sailing team Alinghi which was the first European team to win the America's Cup in 2003 and which successfully defended the title in 2007.
Tennis has become an increasingly popular sport, and Swiss players such as Martina Hingis, Roger Federer, and Stanislas Wawrinka have won multiple Grand Slams.
Motorsport racecourses and events were banned in Switzerland following the 1955 Le Mans disaster with exception to events such as Hillclimbing.
During this period, the country still produced successful racing drivers such as Clay Regazzoni, Sébastien Buemi, Jo Siffert, Dominique Aegerter, successful World Touring Car Championship driver Alain Menu, 2014 24 Hours of Le Mans winner Marcel Fässler and 2015 24 Hours Nürburgring winner Nico Müller.
Switzerland also won the A1GP World Cup of Motorsport in 2007-08 with driver Neel Jani.
Swiss motorcycle racer Thomas Lüthi won the 2005 MotoGP World Championship in the 125cc category.
In June 2007 the Swiss National Council, one house of the Federal Assembly of Switzerland, voted to overturn the ban, however the other house, the Swiss Council of States rejected the change and the ban remains in place.
Traditional sports include Swiss wrestling or "Schwingen".
It is an old tradition from the rural central cantons and considered the national sport by some.
Hornussen is another indigenous Swiss sport, which is like a cross between baseball and golf.
Steinstossen is the Swiss variant of stone put, a competition in throwing a heavy stone.
Practised only among the alpine population since prehistoric times, it is recorded to have taken place in Basel in the 13th century.
It is also central to the Unspunnenfest, first held in 1805, with its symbol the 83.5 stone named Unspunnenstein.
Cuisine
The cuisine of Switzerland is multifaceted.
While some dishes such as fondue, raclette or rösti are omnipresent through the country, each region developed its own gastronomy according to the differences of climate and languages.
Traditional Swiss cuisine uses ingredients similar to those in other European countries, as well as unique dairy products and cheeses such as Gruyère or Emmental, produced in the valleys of Gruyères and Emmental.
The number of fine-dining establishments is high, particularly in western Switzerland.
Chocolate has been made in Switzerland since the 18th century but it gained its reputation at the end of the 19th century with the invention of modern techniques such as conching and tempering which enabled its production on a high quality level.
Also a breakthrough was the invention of solid milk chocolate in 1875 by Daniel Peter.
The Swiss are the world's largest consumers of chocolate.
Due to the popularisation of processed foods at the end of the 19th century, Swiss health food pioneer Maximilian Bircher-Benner created the first nutrition-based therapy in form of the well-known rolled oats cereal dish, called Birchermüesli.
The most popular alcoholic drink in Switzerland is wine.
Switzerland is notable for the variety of grapes grown because of the large variations in terroirs, with their specific mixes of soil, air, altitude and light.
Swiss wine is produced mainly in Valais, Vaud (Lavaux), Geneva and Ticino, with a small majority of white wines.
Vineyards have been cultivated in Switzerland since the Roman era, even though certain traces can be found of a more ancient origin.
The most widespread varieties are the Chasselas (called Fendant in Valais) and Pinot noir.
The Merlot is the main variety produced in Ticino.
Notes and references
Notes
References
Bibliography
* Church, Clive H. (2004)
The Politics and Government of Switzerland.
Palgrave Macmillan. .
* Dalton, O.M. (1927)
The History of the Franks, by Gregory of Tours.
Oxford: The Clarendon Press.
* Fahrni, Dieter.
An Outline History of Switzerland.
From the Origins to the Present Day.
8th enlarged edition.
Pro Helvetia, Zürich.
* von Matt, Peter: Das Kalb vor der Gotthardpost.
Zur Literatur und Politik in der Schweiz.
Carl Hanser Verlag, München, 2012, , S. 127-138.
* Historical Dictionary of Switzerland (2002-).
Published electronically and in print simultaneously in three national languages of Switzerland.
