David Copperfield is the eighth novel by Charles Dickens.
The novel's full title is The Personal History, Adventures, Experience and Observation of David Copperfield the Younger of Blunderstone Rookery (Which He Never Meant to Publish on Any Account).
It was first published as a serial in 1849-50, and as a book in 1850.
The novel features the character David Copperfield, and is written in the first person, as a description of his life until middle age, with his own adventures and the numerous friends and enemies he meets along his way.
It is his journey of change and growth from infancy to maturity, as people enter and leave his life and he passes through the stages of his development.
It has been called his masterpiece, "the triumph of the art of Dickens", Though written in the first person, David Copperfield is considered to be more than an autobiography, going beyond this framework in the richness of its themes and the originality of its writing, which makes it a true autobiographical novel.
Dickens wrote this novel without an outline, unlike the way he wrote Dombey and Son, the previous novel.
He wrote chapter summaries after the chapters were completed.
Some aspects of the story were fixed in his mind from the start, but others, like the obsession of Mr Dick with Charles I, the profession of David Copperfield as a writer, and the sad fate of Dora, were not decided by Dickens until the serial publications were underway; August 1849, December 1849 and May 1850, respectively, were the dates when those decisions were made.
but in reality, David Copperfield is a carefully structured and unified novel.
It begins, like other novels by Dickens, with a rather bleak painting of the conditions of childhood in Victorian England, notoriously when the troublesome children are parked in infamous boarding schools, then he strives to trace the slow social and intimate ascent of a young man who, painfully providing for the needs of his good aunt while continuing his studies, ends up becoming a writer; the story, writes Paul Davis, of "a Victorian everyman seeking self-understanding".
Paul Schlicke points out that in fact not all the pages have gone through the flames and that, as Dickens began writing David Copperfield some pages were unearthed.
Proof of this is found in the eleventh chapter of the novel: "I begin Life on my own Account and don't like it", where the story of Dickens' experience at the Warren Shoe Factory are almost verbatim with the only change, "Mr Micawber" instead of "my father".
John Forster also published substantial extracts relating to this period in Dickens biography, including a paragraph devoted to Wellington House College, which corresponds with second stage of childhood recounted in the novel.
Thus Dickens looks back on his painful past, already evoked by the martyrdom of Little Paul in Dombey and Son, though voiced by an omniscient narrator in that earlier novel.
Until Forster published his biography of Dickens in 1872-1874, no one knew that Dickens had worked in a factory as a child, not even his wife, until Dickens wrote it down and gave the papers to Forster in 1847.
The first generations of readers did not know this part of David Copperfield's story began like an incident in the author's life.
The autobiographical dimension
If David Copperfield has come to be Dickens's "darling", it is because it is the most autobiographical of all his novels.
Some of the most painful episodes of his life are barely disguised; others appear indirectly, termed oblique revelations as described by Paul Davis.
The autobiographical material
The most important autobiographical material concerns the months that Dickens, still a child, spent at the Warren factory, his diligence with his first love, Maria Beadnell (see Catherine Dickens and Ellen Ternan) finally his career as a journalist and writer.
As pointed out by his biographer and friend John Forster, these episodes are essentially factual: the description of forced labor to which David is subjected at Murdstone and Grinby reproduces verbatim the autobiographical fragments entrusted to his friend; David's fascination with Dora Spenlow is similar to that inspired by the capricious Maria; the major stages of his career, from his apprenticeship at Doctors' Commons to writing his first novel, via the shorthand reporting of parliamentary procedures, also follow those of its creator.
The end of this episode looks nothing like what happens in the novel; in reality, contrary to the desire of his mother that he continues to work, it is his father who took him out of the warehouse to send him to school.
Contrary to Charles's frustrated love for Maria Beadnell, who pushed him back in front of his parents' opposition, David, in the novel, marries Dora Spenlow and, with satisfaction ex post facto, writes Paul Davis, virtually "kills" the recalcitrant stepfather.
an autobiographical poem about the formative experiences of his youth, and Tennyson's In Memoriam (1850) which eulogises the memory of his friend, Arthur Hallam.
The intensely personal memories of Dickens are, according to Paul Schlicke, remarkably transmuted into fiction.
In fact, if the preoccupation with the adventures of an individualized hero, associated with a parade of comic or grotesque characters, looks back to Dickens's earlier novels, the interest in personal development, the pessimistic atmosphere, and the complex structure of Copperfield foreshadows the novels to come.
True or false, he had encountered Elizabeth Gaskell's Mary Barton a novel that called for understanding and sympathy in a class-eaten society Thackeray's Pendennis was serialised at the same time as David Copperfield, and it depicts its hero's personal and social journey from the countryside to the city.
A rivalry existed between these two major writers, though it preoccupied Thackeray more than Dickens.
But the most direct literary influence is "obviously Carlyle" claims that the most important modern character is "the hero as a man of letters".
Leech was an illustrator at Punch, a satirical magazine, and the first illustrator for A Christmas Carol by Dickens in 1843.
Lemon was a founding editor of the same Punch, and soon a contributor to Household Words, the weekly magazine Dickens was starting up; he co-authored Mr Nightingale's Diary, a farce, with Dickens in 1851.
The two cities, especially the second, became important in the novel, and Dickens informed Forster that Yarmouth seemed to him to be "the strangest place in the world" and that he would "certainly try my hand at it".
During a walk in the vicinity of Yarmouth, Dickens noticed a sign indicating the small locality of Blunderston, which became in his novel the village of "Blunderstone" where David is born and spends his childhood.
As always with Dickens, when a writing project began, he was agitated, melancholy, "even deeper than the customary birth pangs of other novels"; When Forster pointed out that his hero, now called David, has his own initials transposed, Dickens was intrigued and declared that this was a manifestation of his fate.
he told Forster.
No general plan, but an inspired novel
Contrary to the method previously used for Dombey and Son, Dickens did not elaborate an overall plan and often wrote the summary of a chapter after completing it.
Four character names were found at the last moment: Traddles, Barkis, Creakle and Steerforth; the profession of David remains uncertain until the eighth issue ; and Paul Schlicke notes that the future of Dora was still not determined on 17 May 1850 .
Other major aspects of the novel, however, were immediately fixed, such as David's meeting with Aunt Betsey, Emily's fall or Agnes's role as the "real" heroine of the story.
Once launched, Dickens becomes "quite confident".
The most difficult thing was to insert "what I know so well", his experience at the Warren factory; once the threads were woven, however, the truth mixed with fiction, he exulted and congratulated himself in a letter to Forster From now on, he wrote in this letter, the story "bore him irresistibly along".
Never, it seems, was he in the grip of failures of inspiration, so "ardent is his sympathy with the creatures of the fancy which always made real to him their sufferings or sorrows."
the first issue of which appeared on 31 March 1850.
This daunting task, however, did not seem to slow down the writing of David Copperfield: I am "busy as a bee", he writes happily to the actor William Macready.
A serious incident occurred in December: Mrs Jane Seymour Hill, chiropractor to Mrs Dickens, raised the threat of prosecution, because she recognised herself in the portrait of Miss Mowcher; Dickens did not do badly, gradually modifying the psychology of the character by making her less of a caricature and, at the very end of the novel, by making her a friend of the protagonist, whereas at the beginning she served rather contrary purposes.
His third daughter was born on 16 August 1850, called Dora Annie Dickens, the same name as his character's first wife.
The baby died nine months later after the last serial was issued and the book was published.
was published from 1 May 1849 to 1 November 1850 in 19 monthly one-shilling instalments, containing 32 pages of text and two illustrations by Hablot Knight Browne ("Phiz"), with a title cover simplified to The Personal History of David Copperfield.
The last instalment was a double-number.
On the other side of the Atlantic, John Wiley & Sons and G P Putnam published a monthly edition, then a two-volume book version.
Point of view
Whatever the borrowings from Dickens's own life, the reader knows as an essential precondition, that David Copperfield is a novel and not an autobiography; a work with fictional events and characters - including the hero-narrator - who are creations of Dickens' imagination.
First person narrator
The use of the first person determines the point of view: the narrator Copperfield, is a recognised writer, married to Agnes for more than ten years, who has decided to speak in public about his past life.
This recreation, in itself an important act, can only be partial and also biased, since, a priori, Copperfield is the only viewpoint and the only voice; not enjoying the prerogatives of the third person, omnipotence, ubiquity, clairvoyance, he relates only what he witnessed or participated in: all the characters appear in his presence or, failing that, he learns through hearsay, before being subjected to his pen through the prism of his conscience, deformed by the natural deficit of his perception and accentuated by the selective filter of memory.
Story teller and teacher, Copperfield does not let the facts speak for themselves, but constantly asserts himself as master of the narrative game, and he intervenes, explains, interprets and comments.
His point of view is that of the adult he has become, as he expresses himself just as he is writing.
At the end of his book, he feels a writer's pride to evoke "the threads in the web I have spun"
Gareth Cordery writes that "if David Copperfield is the paradigmatic Bildungsroman, it is also the quintessential novel of memory" and as such, according to Angus Wilson, the equal of Marcel Proust's In Search of Lost Time (À la recherche du temps perdu).
The memory of the hero engages so intensely with his memories that the past seems present:
How well I recollect the kind of day it was!
I smell the fog that hung about the place; I see the hoar-frost, ghostly, through it; I feel my rimy hair fall clammy on my cheek; I look along the dim perspective of the schoolroom, with a sputtering candle here and there to light up the foggy morning, and the breath of the boys wreathing and smoking in the raw cold as they blow upon their fingers, and rap their feet upon the floor.
In such passages, which punctuate the retrospective chapters, the relived moment replaces the lived, the historical present seals the collapse of the original experience and the recreation of a here and now that seizes the entire field of consciousness.
Sometimes this resuurected experience is more vivid than reality; so, in , about Traddles' face, he says: "His honest face, he looked at me with a serio-comic shake of his head impresses me more in the remembrance than it did in the reality."
These are "sacred moments", writes Gareth Cordery, which Copperfield has carefully guarded in "the treasure chambers" of his memory, where sings "the music of time":
Commentary via the illustrations
Without being Dickens, this narrator, Copperfield, is very like him and often becomes his spokesperson.
It adds to his point of view, directly or indirectly, that of the author, without there necessarily being total match between the two.
As such, Copperfield serves as "medium", mirror and also screen, Dickens sometimes subverting his speech to get to the forefront or, on the contrary, hide behind this elegant delegate to the nimble pen.
Dickens' voice, however, is in general well concealed and, according to Gareth Cordery, the most difficult to detect because mostly present by implication.
To help hear his voice, he adds, it is advisable to turn to Phiz, whose illustrations bring a point of view which is not always in agreement with that of Copperfield.
For example, in , the two friends arrive by surprise at the Peggotty home, and Copperfield presents Steerforth to Emily at the very moment when her betrothal with Ham has just been announced.
This sudden intrusion stops the girl as she has just jumped from Ham's arms to nestle in those of Mr Peggotty, a sign, says Cordery in passing, that the promise of marriage is as much for the uncle as for the nephew.
The text remains brief but Phiz interprets, anticipates the events, denounces even the future guilt of Copperfield: all eyes are on the girl, her bonnet, emblem of her social aspirations and her next wanderings with Steerforth, is ready to be seized.
Copperfield, dressed as a gentleman, stands in the doorway, one finger pointing at Steerforth who is taller by one head, the other measuring the gap between Ham and Dan Peggotty, as if offering Emily to his friend.
Emily, meanwhile, still has her head turned to
Ham
but the body is withdrawn and the look has become both challenging and provocative.
Phiz brings together in a single image a whole bunch of unwritten information, which Dickens approved and probably even suggested.
Reader's insight
A third perspective is the point of view of the discerning reader who, although generally carried away by sympathy for the narrator's self-interested pleading, does not remain blissfully ignorant and ends up recognizing the faults of the man and of the writer, just as he also learns to identify and gauge the covert interventions of the author.
The discerning reader listens to the adult Copperfield and hears what this adult wants or does not want them to hear.
"Even though this manuscript is intended for no eyes but mine", the book exists, and the reader becomes ipso facto a "father-confessor", which creates a question and an embarrassment: is Copperfield protecting himself from his confusion, or does he shed some crocodile tears for form?
Copperfield also examines some of his most culpable weaknesses, such as unconscious connivance in the defilement of the Peggotty home by Steerforth, which he remains forever incapable of opposing: "I believe that if I had been brought face to face with him, I could not have uttered one reproach."
The same treatment is given to his childhood love, his so much idealized Emily, who, once "fallen", is expelled from his consciousness to the point where his last comment, when he stealthily sees her aboard the ship leaving for Australia, is "a masterpiece of narrative duplicity": far from seeing in her what she has become, a real woman, he takes refuge behind the image of a pathetic religious icon elegantly allowing him to remove his own guilt for betraying her.
These underground currents are thus revealed in David's psychological struggle, Gareth Cordery concludes, currents that his narrative unconsciously attempts to disguise.
The necessary summaries
The narrative is linear in appearance, as is usual in traditional first-person form.
It covers the narrator's life until the day he decides to put an end to his literary endeavor.
However, whole sections of his life are summarized in a few paragraphs, or sometimes just a sentence or two, indicating that three or ten years have passed, or that Dora is dead, necessary to keep the story moving along.
Thus, the long stay of reflection in Switzerland which leads to the recognition of love for Agnes, or the lapse of time before the final chapter, are all blanks in the story.
Besides the hero, this story concerns important secondary characters such as Mr Micawber or Uriah Heep, or Betsey Trotwood and Traddles, the few facts necessary for a believable story are parsimoniously distilled in the final chapters: an impromptu visit to a prison, the unexpected return of Dan Peggotty from the Antipodes; so many false surprises for the narrator who needs them to complete each person's personal story.
As such, the epilogue that represents the last chapter (Ch 64) is a model of the genre, a systematic review, presumably inspired by his memory, without true connection.
There is the desire to finish with each one, with forced exclamations and ecstatic observations, scrolling through the lives of those who are frozen in time:
Dick with his "Memorial" and his kite, Dr Strong and his dictionary, and as a bonus, the news of David's "least child", which implies that there have been other children between him and eldest child Agnes of whom the reader has never heard by name.
So also goes the story of Dan Peggotty relating the sad tale of his niece.
The four chapters called "Retrospect" (Ch 18 A Retrospect, Ch 43 Another Retrospect, Ch 53 Another Retrospect and Ch 64 A Last Retrospect) are placed at strategic moments of the general discourse, which play a catch-up role more than one of meditation by the narrator, without venturing into event details.
Here, the narration has disappeared, it has given way to a list, an enumeration of events.
Restructuring a posteriori
Dickens' approach, as shown in David Copperfield, does not escape what , there is the obligatory absence of objectivity, the promotion of oblivion as an integral part of memory, the ruling power of the subjectivity of time found.
Thus, to use George Gusdorf's words again, David Copperfield appears as a "second reading of a man's experience", in this case, Charles Dickens, when he reached the fullness of his career, tried to give "a meaning to his legend".
Themes
This novel's main theme arises from the fact that it is a bildungsroman, a literary genre that focuses on the psychological and moral growth of the protagonist from youth to adulthood, which is common in Dickens's novels, and in which character change is extremely important.
The changes involve David leaving past selves behind on the way to maturity.
Other important themes relate especially to Dickens's social concerns, and his desire for reform.
This includes the plight of so-called 'fallen women', and prostitutes, as well as the attitude of middle-class society to these women; the status of women in marriage; the rigid class structure; the prison system; educational standards, and emigration to the colonies of what was becoming the British Empire.
The latter was a way for individuals to escape some of the rigidity of British society and start anew.
Some of these subjects are directly satirized, while others are worked into the novel in more complex ways by Dickens.
Bildungsroman
Different names
Copperfield's path to maturity is marked by the different names assigned to him: his mother calls him "Davy"; Murdstone calls him as "Brooks of Sheffield"; for Peggotty's family, he is "Mas'r Davy"; en route to boarding school from Yarmouth, he appears as "Master Murdstone"; at Murdstone and Grinby, he is known as "Master Copperfield"; Mr Micawber is content with "Copperfield"; for Steerforth he is "Daisy"; he becomes "Mister Copperfield" with Uriah Heep; and "Trotwood", soon shortened to "Trot" for Aunt Betsey; Mrs Crupp deforms his name into "Mr Copperfull"; and for Dora he is "Doady".
While striving to earn his real name once and for all, this plethora of names reflects the fluidity of Copperfield's personal and social relationships, and obscure his real identity.
It is by writing his own story, and giving him his name in the title, that Copperfield can finally assert who he is.
There is a process of forgetfulness, a survival strategy developed by memory, which poses a major challenge to the narrator; his art, in fact, depends on the ultimate reconciliation of differences in order to free and preserve the unified identity of his being a man.
"Will I be the hero of my own life?"
David opens his story with a question: Will I be the hero of my own life?
Which means that he does not know where his approach will lead him, that writing itself will be the test.
As Paul Davis puts it, "In this Victorian quest narrative, the pen might be lighter than the sword, and the reader will be left to judge those qualities of the man and the writer that constitute heroism.
Besides Steerforth, Heep, Micawber, for example, he often appears passive and lightweight.
Hence, concludes Paul Davis, the need to read his life differently; it is more by refraction through other characters that the reader has a true idea of the "hero" of the story.
What do these three men reveal to him, and also to Dora, whom he marries?
Another possible yardstick is a comparison with the other two "writers" of the novel, Dr Strong and Mr Dick.
The dictionary of Strong will never be completed and, as a story of a life, will end with the death of its author.
As for Mr Dick, his autobiographical project constantly raises the question of whether he can transcend the incoherence and indecision of his subject-narrator.
Will he be able to take the reins, provide a beginning, a middle, an end?
Will he succeed in unifying the whole, in overcoming the trauma of the past, his obsession with the decapitated royal head, so as to make sense of the present and find a direction for the future?
According to Paul Davis, only Copperfield succeeds in constructing a whole of his life, including suffering and failure, as well as successes, and that is "one measure of his heroism as a writer".
and as an adult he is endowed with a remarkable memory.
So much so that the story of his childhood is realized so concretely that the narrator, like the reader, sometimes forgets that it is a lived past and not a present that is given to see.
The past tense verb is often the preterite for the narrative, and the sentences are often short independent propositions, each one stating a fact.
Admittedly, the adult narrator intervenes to qualify or provide an explanation, without, however, taking precedence over the child's vision.
And sometimes, the story is prolonged by a reflection on the functioning of the memory.
So, again in , the second and third paragraphs comment on the first memory of the two beings surrounding David, his mother, and Peggotty:
I believe I can remember these two at a little distance apart, dwarfed to my sight by stooping or kneeling on the floor, and I going unsteadily from the one to the other.
I have an impression on my mind, which I cannot distinguish from actual remembrance, of the touch of Peggotty's forefinger as she used to hold it out to me, and of its being roughened by needlework, like a pocket nutmeg-grater.
This may be fancy, though I think the memory of most of us can go further back into such times than many of us suppose; just as I believe the power of observation in numbers of very young children to be quite wonderful for its closeness and accuracy.
Indeed, I think that most grown men who are remarkable in this respect may with greater propriety be said not to have lost the faculty than to have acquired it; the rather, as I generally observe such men to retain a certain freshness, and gentleness, and capacity of being pleased, which are also an inheritance they have preserved from their childhood.
in which, first blow to his confidence, he realizes little by little that Mr Murdstone and his comrade Quinion are mocking him badly:
'That's Davy,' returned Mr Murdstone.
'Davy who?' said the gentleman.
'Jones?'
'Copperfield' said Mr Murdstone.
'What!
Bewitching Mrs Copperfield's incumbrance?' cried the gentleman.
The pretty little widow?'
'Quinion,' said Mr Murdstone, 'take care, if you please.
Somebody's sharp.'
'Who is?' asked the gentleman laughing.
I looked up quickly, being curious to know.
'Only Brooks of Sheffield', said Mr Murdstone.
I was quite relieved to find that it was only Brooks of Sheffield, for, at first, I really thought it was I.
There seemed to be something very comical in the reputation of Mr Brooks of Sheffield, for both the gentlemen laughed heartily when he was mentioned, and Mr Murdstone was a good deal amused also.
The final blow, brutal and irremediable this time, is the vision, in , of his own reflection in his little dead brother lying on the breast of his mother: "The mother who lay in the grave was the mother of my infancy; the little creature in her arms was myself, as I had once been, hushed forever on her bosom".
A series of male models for David
David Copperfield is a posthumous child, that is, he was born after his father died.
From birth, his aunt, is the authority who stands in for the deceased father, and she decides Copperfield's identity by abandoning him because he is not female.
His first years are spent with women, two Claras, his mother and Peggotty, which, according to Paul Davis, "undermines his sense of masculinity".
and the American lament "The little Tafflin with the Silken Sash", whose attraction has decided her husband to "win that woman or perish in the attempt" In addition to the melodies that soothe and embellish, the words of the second, with her dream "Should e’er the fortune be my lot to be made a wealthy bride!"
and her aphorism "Like attracts like" have become emblematic of the couple, one is the opposite of reality and the other the very definition of its harmony.
New avatar of this quest, Uriah Heep is "a kind of negative mirror to David".
Now consider Traddles, the anti-Steerforth, the same age as the hero, not very brilliant at school, but wise enough to avoid the manipulations to which David succumbs.
His attraction for moderation and reserve assures him the strength of character that David struggles to forge.
Neither rich nor poor, he must also make a place for himself in the world, at which he succeeds by putting love and patience at the center of his priorities, the love that tempers the ambition and the patience that moderates the passion.
His ideal is to achieve justice in his actions, which he ends up implementing in his profession practically.
In the end, Traddles, in his supreme modesty, represents the best male model available to David.
The second was like a flash of revelation: "There can be no disparity in marriage like unsuitability of mind and purpose".
That said, the writer David, now David Copperfield, realised the vow expressed to Agnes : "If I had a conjurer's cap, there is no one I should have wished but for you".
At the end of his story, he realizes that the conjurer's cap is on his head, that he can draw his attention to the people he loves and trusts.
Thus, David Copperfield is the story of a journey through life and through oneself, but also, by the grace of the writer, the recreation of the tenuous thread uniting the child and the adult, the past and the present, in what Georges Gusdorf calls "fidelity to the person".
or, as Robert Ferrieux said,
Social questions
Admittedly, it is not the primary interest of David Copperfield that remains above all the story of a life told by the very one who lived it, but the novel is imbued with a dominant ideology, that of the middle class, advocating moral constancy, hard work, separate spheres for men and women, and, in general, the art of knowing one's place, indeed staying in that place.
Further, some social problems and repeated abuses being topical, Dickens took the opportunity to expose them in his own way in his fiction, and Trevor Blount, in his introduction to the 1966 edition Penguin Classics, reissued in 1985, devotes several pages to this topic.
However, Gareth Cordery shows that behind the display of Victorian values, often hides a watermarked discourse that tends to question, test, and even subvert them.
There are therefore two possible readings, the one that remains on the surface and another that questions below this surface, the implicit questions.
Among the social issues that David Copperfield is concerned with, are prostitution, the prison system, education, as well as society's treatment of the insane.
Dickens' views on education are reflected in the contrast he makes between the harsh treatment that David receives at at the hands of Creakle at Salem House and Dr Strong's school where the methods used inculcate honour and self-reliance in its pupils.
Through the character of "the amiable, innocent, and wise fool" Mr Dick, Dickens's "advocacy in the humane treatment of the insane" can be seen.
Mr Dick's brother
::didn’t like to have him visible about his house, and sent him away to some private asylum-place: though he had been left to his particular care by their deceased father, who thought him almost a natural.
And a wise man he must have been to think so!
Mad himself, no doubt.
So Betsy Trotwood, continuing Mr Dick's story in , stepped in to suggest that Mr Dick should be given "his little income, and come and live with" her: "I am ready to take care of him, and shall not ill-treat him as some people (besides the asylum-folks) have done."
Victorian child exploitation
The employment of young children in factories and mines under harsh conditions in the early Victorian era disturbed many.
There was a series of Parliamentary enquiries into the working conditions of children, and these "reports shocked writers Elizabeth Barrett Browning and Charles Dickens."
Prison discipline
Dickens satirises contemporary ideas about how prisoners should be treated in , 'I am Shown Two Interesting Penitents'.
In this chapter, published in November 1850, David along with Traddles is shown around a large well-built new prison, modelled on Pentonville prison (built in 1842), where a new, supposedly more humane, system of incarceration is in operation, under the management of David's former headmaster Creakle.
A believer in firmness, Dickens denounced comically the system of isolating prisoners in separate cells, the "separate system", and giving them healthy and pleasant food.
His satire appeals directly to the public, already warned by the long controversy over the prison discipline in the press.
Mr Creakle is very proud of this new system, but his enthusiasm is immediately undermined by the reminder of his former ferocity as a school principal.
In the prison David and Traddles encounter 'model prisoners' 27 and 28, who they discover are Uriah Heep and Mr Littimer.
Heep is seen reading a hymn book and Littimer also "walked forth, reading a good book": both have managed to convince the naïve Creakle, and his fellow magistrates, that they have seen the error of their ways.
Both are questioned about the quality of the food and Creakle promises improvements.
Dickens ideas in this chapter were in line with Carlyle, whose pamphlet, "Model Prisons", also denounced Pentonville Prison, was published in the spring of 1850.
Emigration to Australia
Dickens exploration of the subject of emigration in the novel has been criticized, initially by John Forster and later by G K Chesterton.
Chesterton accused Dickens of presenting emigration in an excessively optimistic light.
That Dickens believed that by sending a boatload of people overseas their 'souls' can be changed, while ignoring the fact that poor people like Peggotty have seen their home stained or, like Emily, their honour tarnished.
Micawber has been broken by the English social system and his journey to the antipodes is paid for by a paragon of the Victorian bourgeoisie, Betsey Trotwood, And he is supposed to regain control of his destiny once he has arrived in Australia.
Trevor Blount points out that the word 'soul' has a different meaning for Dickens than Chesterton.
Dickens cares about material and psychological happiness, and is convinced that physical well-being is a comfort for life's wounds.
Dickens sent his characters to America in Nicholas Nickleby and Martin Chuzzlewit, but he has the Peggotty and Micawber families emigrate to the Australia.
This approach was part of official policy of the 1840s, focusing on Australia as a land of welcome.
It was at this time necessary to stimulate interest in the new colony and propagandists arrived in England in particular John Dunmore Lang and Caroline Chisholm from Australia.
Dickens was only following this movement and, in any case, had faith in family colonisation.
Moreover, the idea that redemption could be achieved by such a new start in a person's life was a preoccupation of the author, and he saw here subject matter to charm his readers.
From the point of view of the novel's inner logic, in order for Copperfield to complete his psychological maturation and exist independently, Dickens must expel his surrogate fathers, including Peggotty and Micawber, and emigration is an easy way to remove them.
it represents Dickens's vision of the society in which he lives.
The same can be said of the episodes concerning prostitution and emigration, which illuminate the limits of Copperfield's moral universe and Dickens's own uncertainties.
That everything is put in order in Australia, that Martha marries a man from the bush, that Emily, in the strong arms of Dan Peggotty, becomes a lady of good works, that Micawber, who had been congenitally insolvent, suddenly acquires the management skills and becomes prosperous in dispensing justice.
All these conversions are somewhat 'ironic', and tend to undermine the hypothesis of 'a Dickens believing in the miracle of the antipodes', which Jane Rogers considers in her analysis of the 'fallen woman' as a plot device to gain the sympathy of Dickens' readers for Emily.
The middle-class ideology
John Forster, Dickens's early biographer, praises the bourgeois or middle-class values and ideology found in David Copperfield.
Like him the Victorian reading public shared Copperfield's complacent views, expressed with the assurance of success that is his, at the end, as a recognized writer who is happy in marriage and safe from need.
Gateth Cordery takes a close look at class consciousness.
According to him, Copperfield's relationship with aristocrat Steerforth and the humble Uriah Heep is "crucial".
In parallel there is a contempt of the upstart, Heep, hatred of the same nature as Copperfield's senseless adoration for Steerforth, but inverted.
That umble Heep goes from a lowly clerk to an associate at Wickfield's, to claiming to win the hand of Agnes, daughter of his boss, is intolerable to David, though it is very similar to his own efforts to go from shorthand clerk to literary fame, with Dora Spenlow, the daughter of his employer.
Heep's innuendo that Copperfield is no better than him feeds on the disdain in which he holds Heep as of right: "Copperfield, you've always been an upstart", an honesty of speech, comments Cordery, of which Copperfield himself is incapable.
Values, like the imperative need for women to marry and to be that ideal described as The Angel in the House (manages the home without aid and is always calm) are "interrogated, tested and even subverted", for example by having one mother-figure be the character Betsey Trotwood, who is not a mother.
When seeming to describe a stereotypical image in particularly the female characters, the story "does so in a way that reflects the fault-lines of the image."
Anne Brontë in The Tenant of Wildfell Hall (1848) explores this iniquity in the status of the character Helen Graham, separated from her alcoholic husband.
Dickens's understanding of the burden on women in marriage in this novel contrasts with his treatment of his own wife Catherine, whom he expected to be an Angel in the House.
On the eve of her wedding to her cousin and fiancé, Ham, she abandons him for Steerforth.
After Steerforth deserts her, she doesn't go back home, because she has disgraced herself and her family.
Her uncle, Mr Peggotty, finds her in London on the brink of being forced into prostitution.
So that she may have a fresh start away from her now degraded reputation, she and her uncle emigrate to Australia.
Martha has been a prostitute and contemplated suicide but towards the end of the novel, she redeems herself by helping Daniel Peggotty find his niece after she returns to London.
She goes with Emily to start a new life in Australia.
There, she marries and lives happily.
Their emigration to Australia, in the wake of that of Micawber, Daniel Peggotty, and Mr Mell, emphasizes Dickens' belief that social and moral redemption can be achieved in a distant place, where someone may create a new and healthy life.
However, despite their families' forgiveness , they remain "tainted" and their expulsion from England is symbolic of their status: it is only at the other end of the world that these "social outcasts" can be reinstated.
Morally, Dickens here conforms to the dominant middle-class opinion,
The exception of Rosa Dartle
John O Jordan devotes two pages to this woman, also "lost," though never having sinned.
The sanctification of the Victorian home, he says, depends on the opposition between two stereotypes, the "angel" and the "whore".
Dickens denounced this restrictive dichotomy by portraying women "in between".
Such is Rosa Dartle, passionate being, with the inextinguishable resentment of having been betrayed by Steerforth, a wound that is symbolised by the vibrant scar on her lip.
Never does she allow herself to be assimilated by the dominant morality, refusing tooth and nail to put on the habit of the ideal woman.
Avenger to the end, she wants the death of Little Emily, both the new conquest and victim of the same predator, and has only contempt for the efforts of David to minimize the scope of his words.
As virtuous as anyone else, she claims, especially that Emily, she does not recognize any ideal family, each being molded in the manner of its social class, nor any affiliation as a woman: she is Rosa Dartle, in herself.
David's vision, on the other hand, is marked by class consciousness: for him, Rosa, emaciated and ardent at the same time, as if there were incompatibility , is a being apart, half human, half animal, like the lynx, with its inquisitive forehead, always on the look out , which consumes an inner fire reflected in the gaunt eyes of the dead of which only this flame remains .
In reality, says Jordan, it is impossible for David to understand or even imagine any sexual tension, especially that which governs the relationship between Rosa and Steerforth, which, in a way, reassures his own innocence and protects what he calls his "candor" - frankness or angelism?
- his story.
Also, Rosa Dartle's irreducible and angry marginality represents a mysterious threat to his comfortable and reassuring domestic ideology.
Dickens's way of writing
Dickens's approach to the novel is influenced by various things, including the picaresque novel tradition, melodrama, and the novel of sensibility.
Satire and irony, are central to the picaresque novel.
Comedy is also an aspect of the British picaresque novel tradition of Laurence Sterne, Henry Fielding, and Tobias Smollett.
Fielding's Tom Jones was a major influence on the nineteenth novel including Dickens, who read it in his youth, and named a son Henry Fielding Dickens in his honour.
Melodrama is typically sensational and designed to appeal strongly to the emotions.
Trevor Blount comments on the fascination that Dickens has always exercised on the public, He mentions the lavishness, energy, vividness, brilliance, and tenderness of Dickens's writing, along with the range of his imagination.
Blount also refers to Dickens's humour, and his use of the macabre and of pathos.
Finally Blount celebrates the artistic mastery of an overflowing spontaneity, which is conveyed carried with both delicacy and subtlety.
What Blount admires, in the first place, is the vigor with which the characters "rise" from the page and create a "phantasmagorical" universe, which is seen by the reader with the intensity of an hallucination.
This is best illustrated in many of Dickens's works, by the powerful figure of a weak individual.
In David Copperfield Mr Wilkins Micawber is such a figure, someone who is formidably incompetent, grandiose in his irreducible optimism, sumptuous in his verbal virtuosity, and whose grandiloquent tenderness is irresistibly comical.
Micawber has been described, as "With the one exception of Falstaff, ... the greatest comic figure in English literature".
an innovative technique for the time, first tried in Dombey and Son with an omniscient narrator, and carried here to perfection through the use of the 'I'.
Modernist novelist Virginia Woolf writes, that when we read Dickens "we remodel our psychological geography ... as he produces characters who exist not in detail, not accurately or exactly, but abundantly in a cluster of wild yet extraordinarily revealing remarks".
Satire and pathos
The very principle of satire is to question, and to tear off the masks, so as to reveal the raw reality under the varnish.
Dickens use the whole arsenal of literary tools that are available to the satirist, or rather supplied by his narrator, David, who even directs satire upon himself.
These tools include irony, humour, and caricature.
How it is employed relates to the characters differing personalities.
Satire is thus gentler towards some characters than others; toward David the hero-narrator, it is at once indulgent and transparent.
Types of character
There are several different types of character: On the one hand there are the good ones, Peggotty, Dr Strong, Traddles, etc, on the hand there are the bad ones, Murdstone, Steerforth, Uriah Heep etc.
A third category are characters who change over time, including Betsey Trotwood, who at first is more obstinate than nasty, it is true, and Martha Endell, and Creakle etc.
There is also a contrast drawn between ever-frozen personalities such as Micawber, Dora, Rosa Dartle, and those who evolve.
The latter includes David, Mr Mell, Miss Mowcher.
The there is also a contrast drawn between the idiosyncrasies of Mr Dick, Barkis, Mrs Gummidge, and the subtle metamorphosis from innocence to maturity of characters like David, Traddles, Sophy Crewler.
Dickens worked intensively on developing arresting names for his characters that would reverberate with associations for his readers, and assist the development of motifs in the storyline, giving what one critic calls an "allegorical impetus" to a novel's meanings.
The name Mr Murdstone in David Copperfield conjures up twin allusions to "murder" and stony coldness; Strong is definitely not "strong"; Creakle "squeaks and grinds".
There can also be a visual dimension to Dickens's humour.
This includes Micawber's rotundity, his wife's dried-up body, which forever offers a sterile breast, Betsey's steadfast stiffness, Mr Sharp's bowed head, Daniel Peggotty's stubborn rudeness, Clara Copperfield's delicate silhouette, and Dora's mischievous air.
Then there are exaggerated attitudes that are constantly repeated.
Dickens creates humour out of character traits, such as Mr Dick's kite flying, James Maldon's insistent charm, Uriah Heep's obsequiousness, Betsey pounding David's room.
There are in addition the employment of repetitive verbal phrases: "umble" of the same Heep, the "willin" of Barkis, the "lone lorn creetur" of Mrs Gummidge.
Dickens also uses objects for a humorous purpose, like Traddles' skeletons, the secret box of Barkis, the image of Heep as a snake, and the metallic rigidity of Murdstone.
Pathos and indulgent humour
In David Copperfield idealised characters and highly sentimental scenes are contrasted with caricatures and ugly social truths.
While good characters are also satirised, a considered sentimentality replaces satirical ferocity.
This is a characteristic of all of Dickens's writing, but it is reinforced in David Copperfield by the fact that these people are the narrator's close family members and friends, who are devoted to David and sacrificing themselves for his happiness.
Hence the indulgence applied from the outset, with humour prevailing along with loving complicity.
David is the first to receive such treatment, especially in the section devoted to his early childhood, when he is lost in the depths of loneliness in London, following his punishment by Mr Murdstone.
Michael Hollington analyses a scene in that seems emblematic of the situation and how humour and sentimentality are employed by Dickens.
This is the episode where the very young David orders a pitcher of the best beer in a public house, "To moisten what I had for dinner".
David's memory has retained the image of the scene, which is so vivid that he sees himself as from the outside.
He has forgotten the exact date (his birthday).
This episode release David's emotional pain, writes Michael Hollington, obliterating the infected part of the wound.
Beyond the admiration aroused for the amazing self-confidence of the little child, in resolving this issue and taking control of his life with the assurance of someone much older, the passage "testifies to the work of memory, transfiguring the moment into a true myth".
a kiss, "Half admired and half compassionate", but above all full of kindness and femininity; at least, adds David, as a tender and precious reminder, "I am sure".
Theatricality
Dickens went to the theatre regularly from an early age and even considered becoming an actor in 1832.
"Many of the plays that he saw on the London stage in the 1820s and 1830s were melodramas".
There is a visual, theatrical-even cinematic-element in some scenes in David Copperfield.
The cry of Martha at the edge of the river belongs to the purest Victorian melodrama, as does the confrontation between Mr Peggotty and Mrs Steerforth, in :
::I justify nothing, I make no counter-accusations.
But I am sorry to repeat, it is impossible.
Such a marriage would irretrievably blight my son's career, and ruin his prospects.
Nothing is more certain than that, it never can take place, and never will.
If there is any other compensation.
Such language, according to Trevor Blount, is meant to be said aloud.
Many other scenes employ the same method: Micawber crossing the threshold, Heep harassing David in , the chilling apparition of Littimer in the middle of David's party in .
The climax of this splendid series of scenes is the storm off Yarmouth, which is an epilogue to the menacing references to the sea previously, which shows Dicken's most intense virtuosity .
Dickens made the following comment in 1858: "Every good actor plays direct to every good author, and every writer of fiction, though he may not adopt the dramatic form, writes in effect for the stage".
Setting
Setting is a major aspect of Dickens's "narrative artistry and of his methods of characterization", so that "the most memorable quality of his novels may well be their atmospheric density ... of the descriptive writing".
In David Copperfield setting is less urban, more rustic than in other novels, and especially maritime.
Besides Peggotty, who is a seaman whose home is an overturned hull, Mr Micawber goes to the naval port of Plymouth on the south coast after prison and appears finally on board a steamer.
David himself is connected to Yarmouth, and Aunt Betsey settled in the Channel port of Dover.
Young David notices the sea on his first day at her home; "the air from the sea came blowing in again, mixed with the perfume of the flowers".
The city, London, is especially the place of misfortune, where the dark warehouse of Murdstone and Grinby are found.
The philosopher Alain comments as follows about Dickens's portrayal of London (but it might also be applied to other locations), as cited by Lançon:
::The Dickensian atmosphere, unlike any other, comes from the way the distinctive nature of a dwelling is linked to the personality of its inhabitant ...
There is there a look that creates a sense of reality, with the remarkable connection between buildings and characters.
Symbolism
Important symbols include, imprisonment, the sea, flowers, animals, dreams, and Mr Dick's kite.
According to Henri Suhamy, "Dickens's symbolism consists in giving significance to physical details ...
The constant repetition of these details ... contributes to deepen their emblematic significance".
This may include the characters, aspects of the story, and, more prominently amongst the motifs, places or objects.
Separating realism and symbolism can be tricky, especially, for example, when it relates, to the subject of imprisonment, which is both a very real place of confinement for the Micawber family, and, more generally throughout David Copperfield, symbolic of the damage inflicted on a sick society, trapped in its inability to adapt or compromise, with many individuals walled within in themselves.
The imponderable power of the sea is almost always associated with death: it took Emily's father; will take Ham and Steerforth, and in general is tied to David's "unrest" associated with his Yarmouth experiences.
Referring to the climactic storm scene in this novel, the last in any Dickens novel, Kearney remarked that "The symbolism of sea, sky and storm is successfully integrated to achieve what amounts to a mystical dimension in the novel, and this mystical dimension is, on the whole, more acceptable than the ones found elsewhere in Dickens".
According to Daniel L Plung, four types of animal are a particularly important aspect of the way symbolism is used: song birds symbolize innocence.
"lions and raptors are associated with the fallen but not evil"; dogs, other than Jip, are associated "with the malicious and self-interested"; while snakes and eel represent evil.
A typical example of the way that animal symbolism is used is found in the following sentence: " 'the influence of the Murdstones upon me David was like the fascination of two snakes on a wretched young bird" '.
When David describes Steerforth as "brave as a lion" this is a clue to Steerforth's moral weakness and foreshadows subsequent events.
Flowers symbolize innocence, for example, David is called "Daisy" by Steerforth, because he is naive and pure, while Dora constantly paints bouquets, and when Heep was removed from Wickfield House, flowers return to the living room.
Mr Dick's kite, represents how much he is both outside and above society, immune to its hierarchical social system.
Furthermore, it flies among the innocent birds, and just as this toy soothes and gives joy to him, Mr Dick heals the wounds and restore peace where the others without exception have failed.
Dreams are also an important part of the novel's underlying symbolic structure, and are "used as a transitional device to bind its parts together" with twelve chapters ending "with a dream or reverie".
In the early dark period of David's life his dreams "are invariably ugly", but in later chapters they are more mixed, with some reflecting "fanciful hopes" that are never realised, while others are nightmares which foreshadow "actual problems".
reveals that the dialect of this town was taken from a book written by a local author, Major Edward Moor published in 1823.
There, Dickens found a beein (a house), fisherate (officiate), dodman (snail), clickesen (gossip), and winnicking (tears) from winnick (to cry) and so on.
Literary significance and reception
Many view this novel as Dickens's masterpiece, beginning with his friend and first biographer John Forster, who writes: "Dickens never stood so high in reputation as at the completion of Copperfield", and the author himself calls it "his favourite child".
It is true, he says that "underneath the fiction lay something of the author's life", that is, an experience of self-writing.
It is therefore not surprising that the book is often placed in the category of autobiographical works.
From a strictly literary point of view, however, it goes beyond this framework in the richness of its themes and the originality of its writing.
Situated in the middle of Dickens's career, it represents, according to Paul Davis, a turning point in his work, the point of separation between the novels of youth and those of maturity.
In 1850, Dickens was 38 years old and had twenty more to live, which he filled with other masterpieces, often denser, sometimes darker, that addressed most of the political, social and personal issues he faced.
"The privileged child" of Dickens
Dickens welcomed the publication of his work with intense emotion, and he continued to experience this until the end of his life.
When he went through a period of personal difficulty and frustration in the 1850s, he returned to David Copperfield as to a dear friend who resembled him: "Why," he wrote to Forster, "Why is it, as with poor David, a sense comes always crashing on me now, when I fall into low spirits, as of one happiness I have missed in life, and one friend and companion I have never made?”
When Dickens begins writing Great Expectations, which was also written in the first person, he reread Copperfield and confided his feelings to Forster: "was affected by it to a degree you would hardly believe" Criticism has not always been even-handed, though over time the high importance of this novel has been recognised.
Initial reception
Although Dickens became a Victorian celebrity his readership was mainly the middle classes, including the so-called skilled workers, according to the French critic Fabrice Bensimon, because ordinary people could not afford it.
Issues I to V of the serial version reached 25,000 copies in two years, modest sales compared to 32,000 Dombey and Son and 35,000 Bleak House, but Dickens was nevertheless happy: "Everyone is cheering David on", he writes to Mrs Watson, and, according to Forster, his reputation was at the top.
but the great contemporaries of Dickens showed their approval: Thackeray found the novel "freshly and simply simple"; John Ruskin, in his Modern Painters, was of the opinion that the scene of the storm surpasses Turner's evocations of the sea; more soberly, Matthew Arnold declared it "rich in merits"; and, in his autobiographical book A Small Boy and Others, Henry James evokes the memory of "treasure so hoarded in the dusty chamber of youth".
Subsequent reputation
After Dickens' death, David Copperfield rose to the forefront of the writer's works, both through sales, for example, in Household Words in 1872 where sales reached 83,000, and the praise of critics.
In 1871, Scottish novelist and poet Margaret Oliphant described it as "the culmination of Dickens's early comic fiction"; However, in the late nineteenth-century Dickens's critical reputation suffered a decline, though he continued to have many readers.
This began when Henry James in 1865 "relegated Dickens to the second division of literature on the grounds that he could not 'see beneath the surface of things'".
Then in 1872, two years after Dickens's death, George Henry Lewes wondered how to "reconcile Dickens's immense popularity with the 'critical contempt' which he attracted".
However, Dickens was defended by the novelist George Gissing in 1898 in Charles Dickens: A Critical Study.
Dickens's literary reputation grew in the 1940s and 1950s because of essays by George Orwell and Edmund Wilson (both published in 1940), and Humphrey House's The Dickens World (1941).
However, in 1948, F. R. Leavis in The Great Tradition, contentiously, excluded Dickens from his canon, characterising him as a "popular entertainer" without "mature standards and interests".
Dickens's reputation, however, continued to grow and K J Fielding (1965) and Geoffrey Thurley (1976) identify what they call David Copperfields "centrality", and Q D Leavis in 1970, looked at the images he draws of marriage, of women, and of moral simplicity.
In their 1970 publication Dickens the Novelist, F R and Q D Leavis called Dickens "one of the greatest of creative writers", and F R Leavis had changed his mind about Dickens since his 1948 work, no longer finding the popularity of the novels with readers as a barrier to their seriousness or profundity.
In 1968 Sylvère Monod, after having finely analyzed the structure and style of the novel, describe it as "the triumph of the art of Dickens", which analysis was shared by Paul B Davis.
The central themes are explored by Richard Dunne in 1981, including the autobiographical dimension, the narrator-hero characterization process, memory and forgetting, and finally the privileged status of the novel in the interconnection between similar works of Dickens.
In 2015, the BBC Culture section polled book critics outside the UK about novels by British authors; they ranked David Copperfield eighth on the list of the 100 Greatest British Novels.
The characters and their varied places in society in the novel evoked reviewer comments, for example, the novel is "populated by some of the most vivid characters ever created,” “David himself, Steerforth, Peggotty, Mr Dick - and it climbs up and down and off the class ladder.", remarked by critic Maureen Corrigan and echoed by Wendy Lesser.
Opinions of other writers
David Copperfield has pleased many writers.
Charlotte Brontë, for example, commented in 1849 in a letter to the reader of her publisher: I have read David Copperfield; it seems to me very good-admirable in some parts.
You said it had affinity to Jane Eyre: it has-now and then-only what an advantage has Dickens in his varied knowledge of men and things!
Tolstoy, for his part, considered it "the best work of the best English novelist" and, according to F R and Q D Leavis, was inspired by David and Dora's love story to have Prince Andrew marry Princess Lise in War and Peace.
Henry James remembered being moved to tears, while listening to the novel, hidden under a table, read aloud in the family circle.
Dostoevsky enthusiastically cultivated the novel in a prison camp in Siberia.
Franz Kafka wrote in his diary in 1917, that the first chapter of his novel Amerika was inspired by David Copperfield.
James Joyce parodied it in Ulysses.
Virginia Woolf, who was not very fond of Dickens, states that David Copperfield, along with Robinson Crusoe, Grimm's fairy tales, Scott's Waverley and Pickwick's Posthumous Papers, "are not books, but stories communicated by word of mouth in those tender years when fact and fiction merge, and thus belong to the memories and myths of life, and not to its esthetic experience."
Woolf also noted in a letter to Hugh Walpole in 1936, that she is re-reading it for the sixth time: "I'd forgotten how magnificent it is."
It also seems that the novel was Sigmund Freud's favourite; and Somerset Maugham sees it as a "great" work, although his hero seems to him rather weak, unworthy even of its author, while Mr Micawber never disappoints: "The most remarkable of them is, of course, Mr Micawber.
He never fails you."
Illustrations
As is the custom for a regular serialized publication for a wide audience, David Copperfield, like Dickens's earlier novels, was from the beginning a "story in pictures" whose many engravings are part of the novel and how the story is related.
Hablot Knight Browne (Phiz)
Phiz drew the original, the first two illustrations associated with David Copperfield: on the wrapper for the serial publication, for which he engraved the silhouette of a baby staring at a globe, probably referring to the working title (The Copperfield Survey of the World as it Rolled), and the frontispiece (later used in the published books), and the title page.
The green wrapper is shown at the top of this article.
Phiz drew the images around the central baby-over-the-globe with no information on the characters who would appear in the novel.
He knew only that it would be a bildungsroman.
When each issue was written, Phiz then worked with Dickens on the illustrations.
"In the monthly plates, Phiz would have to translate the memories of the protagonist-narrator into a third-person objective or dramatic point of view."
Dickens accepted and even encouraged these additional, sometimes subtle indications, which, commenting on the event, say more than the narrator says in print.
The latter intends to stay behind, just like the author who, thus, hides behind the illustrator.
Dickens was particularly scrupulous about illustrations; he scrutinized the smallest details and sometimes demanded modifications, for example to replace for a very particular episode the coat that David wears by "a little jacket".
The illustration of the meeting between David and Aunt Betsey was particularly delicate, and Phiz had to do it several times, the ultimate choice being that of Dickens.
Once the desired result was obtained, Dickens does not hide his satisfaction: the illustrations are "capital", he writes to Phiz, and especially that which depicts Mr Micawber in , "uncommonly characteristic".
Other illustrators
David Copperfield was later illustrated by many artists later, after the serialization, including:
* Fred Barnard (1846-1896), who illustrated David Copperfield in the Household Edition by Chapman & Hall in the 1870s;
* Harold Copping (1863-1932), who illustrated Dickens stories for children;
* Jessica Willcox Smith (1863-1935) who has illustrated many abbreviated editions for children.
Some of these works are full size paintings rather than illustrations included in editions of the novels.
Kyd painted watercolors.
Frank Reynolds provided the illustrations for a 1911 edition of David Copperfield.
Although the reputation of Dickens with literary critics went through a decline and a much later rise after he died, his popularity with readers followed a different pattern after his death.
Around 1900, his novels, including David Copperfield, began an increase in popularity, and the 40-year copyrights expired for all but his latest novels, opening the door to other publishers in the UK; by 1910 all of them had expired.
This created the opportunity for new illustrators in new editions of the novels, as both Fred Barnard (Household Edition) and Frank Reynolds (1911 edition of David Copperfield) provided, for example; their styles were different from that of Phiz who provided the illustrations for the first publications of the novel in 1850 and during the author's life.
As the books were read by so many (one publisher, Chapman & Hall, sold 2 million copies of Dickens' works in the period 1900-1906),
Dedication and preface
The 1850 book, published by Bradbury and Evans, was dedicated to The honorable Mr and Mrs Richard Watson, from Rockingham, Northamptonshire, aristocratic friends met on a trip to Switzerland five years ago.
A brief preface was written in 1850 by the author, already entrusted to Forster after he finished his manuscript, with the promise that a new work will follow.
This text was also used for the 1859 edition, the Cheap Edition.
The ultimate version of 1867, also called the Charles Dickens edition, included another preface by the author with the statement that David Copperfield is the favourite work of the author.
Other editions
Three volumes were published by Tauchnitz in 1849-50, in English for distribution outside Great Britain in Europe.
During Dickens' lifetime, many other editions were released, and many since he died.
According to Paul Schlicke, the most reliable edition is the 1981 edition from Clarendon Press with an introduction and notes by Nina Burgis; it serves as a reference for later editions, including those of Collins, Penguin Books and Wordsworth Classics.
The first adaptation, Born with a Caul by George Almar, was staged while the serial issues were not yet completed, with some changes from Dickens' plot, having Steerforth live and marry Emily, and inventing a character to kill Mr Murdstone.
The most spectacular dramatization, however, were those of Dickens himself.
Although he waited more than ten years to prepare a version for his public readings, it soon became one of his favourite performances, especially the storm scene, which he kept for the finale, "the most sublime moment in all the readings".
Radio
*Favourite Story, hosted by Ronald Colman - 25 October 1947
*Theater Guild on the Air - 24 December 1950 with Richard Burton, Boris Karloff, Flora Robson and Cyril Ritchard
*The Personal History of David Copperfield - BBC Radio 4, 1991 - a ten-part series with Gary Cady as David Copperfield, Miriam Margolyes, John Moffatt, Timothy Spall and Sheila Hancock
* Performed unabridged Audible by Richard Armitage 2018
Film and TV
David Copperfield has been filmed on several occasions:
*1911 David Copperfield, silent film directed by Theodore Marston
*1913 David Copperfield, silent film directed by Thomas Bentley
*1922 David Copperfield, silent film directed by A. W. Sandberg
*1935 David Copperfield, a film directed by George Cukor, featuring W.C. Fields
*1956 David Copperfield, a 13-part TV serial shown on BBC.
*1969 David Copperfield, a film directed by Delbert Mann.
*1974 David Copperfield, a 6-part TV serial directed by Joan Craft
*1983 David Copperfield, an animated film by Burbank Films Australia.
*1986 David Copperfield, a 10-part TV serial directed by Barry Letts, shown on BBC.
*1993 David Copperfield, animated TV film, shown on NBC
*1999 David Copperfield, a 2-part TV serial shown on BBC
*2000 David Copperfield, a film directed by Peter Medak
*2019 The Personal History of David Copperfield, a film directed by Armando Iannucci
