Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi (; 2 October 1869 - 30 January 1948) was an Indian lawyer, anti-colonial nationalist, and political ethicist, who employed nonviolent resistance to lead the successful campaign for India's independence from British Rule, and in turn inspire movements for civil rights and freedom across the world.
The honorific Mahātmā ( and Verulam referred to Gandhi as a 'Mahatma', 'great soul'.
He was seen as a great soul because he had taken up the poor's cause.
The whites too said good things about Gandhi, who predicted a future for the Empire if it respected justice."
(p. 172).
is now used throughout the world.
Born and raised in a Hindu family in coastal Gujarat, western India, Gandhi was trained in law at the Inner Temple, London, and called to the bar at age 22 in June 1891.
After two uncertain years in India, where he was unable to start a successful law practice, he moved to South Africa in 1893 to represent an Indian merchant in a lawsuit.
He went on to stay for 21 years.
It was in South Africa that Gandhi raised a family, and first employed nonviolent resistance in a campaign for civil rights.
In 1915, aged 45, he returned to India.
He set about organising peasants, farmers, and urban labourers to protest against excessive land-tax and discrimination.
Assuming leadership of the Indian National Congress in 1921, Gandhi led nationwide campaigns for easing poverty, expanding women's rights, building religious and ethnic amity, ending untouchability, and above all for achieving Swaraj or self-rule.
The same year Gandhi adopted the Indian loincloth, or short dhoti and, in the winter, a shawl, both woven with yarn hand-spun on a traditional Indian spinning wheel, or charkha, as a mark of identification with India's rural poor.
Thereafter, he lived modestly in a self-sufficient residential community, ate simple vegetarian food, and undertook long fasts as a means of self-purification and political protest.
Bringing anti-colonial nationalism to the common Indians, Gandhi led them in challenging the British-imposed salt tax with the Dandi Salt March in 1930, and later in calling for the British to Quit India in 1942.
He was imprisoned for many years, upon many occasions, in both South Africa and India.
Gandhi's vision of an independent India based on religious pluralism was challenged in the early 1940s by a new Muslim nationalism which was demanding a separate Muslim homeland carved out of India.
In August 1947, Britain granted independence, but the British Indian Empire As many displaced Hindus, Muslims, and Sikhs made their way to their new lands, religious violence broke out, especially in the Punjab and Bengal.
Eschewing the official celebration of independence in Delhi, Gandhi visited the affected areas, attempting to provide solace.
In the months following, he undertook several fasts unto death to stop religious violence.
The last of these, undertaken on 12 January 1948 when he was 78, also had the indirect goal of pressuring India to pay out some cash assets owed to Pakistan.
Gandhi's birthday, 2 October, is commemorated in India as Gandhi Jayanti, a national holiday, and worldwide as the International Day of Nonviolence.
Gandhi is commonly, though not formally considered the Father of the Nation in India.
Gandhi is also called Bapu (Gujarati: endearment for father,).
Biography
Early life and background
Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi was born on 2 October 1869 into an Indian Gujarati Hindu Modh Baniya family in Porbandar (also known as Sudamapuri), a coastal town on the Kathiawar Peninsula and then part of the small princely state of Porbandar in the Kathiawar Agency of the Indian Empire.
His father, Karamchand Uttamchand Gandhi (1822-1885), served as the diwan (chief minister) of Porbandar state.
Although he only had an elementary education and had previously been a clerk in the state administration, Karamchand proved a capable chief minister.
During his tenure, Karamchand married four times.
His first two wives died young, after each had given birth to a daughter, and his third marriage was childless.
In 1857, Karamchand sought his third wife's permission to remarry; that year, he married Putlibai (1844-1891), who also came from Junagadh, Karamchand and Putlibai had three children over the ensuing decade: a son, Laxmidas (c. 1860-1914); a daughter, Raliatbehn (1862-1960); and another son, Karsandas (c. 1866-1913).
On 2 October 1869, Putlibai gave birth to her last child, Mohandas, in a dark, windowless ground-floor room of the Gandhi family residence in Porbandar city.
As a child, Gandhi was described by his sister Raliat as "restless as mercury, either playing or roaming about.
One of his favourite pastimes was twisting dogs' ears."
The Indian classics, especially the stories of Shravana and king Harishchandra, had a great impact on Gandhi in his childhood.
In his autobiography, he admits that they left an indelible impression on his mind.
He writes: "It haunted me and I must have acted Harishchandra to myself times without number."
Gandhi's early self-identification with truth and love as supreme values is traceable to these epic characters.
The family's religious background was eclectic.
Gandhi's father Karamchand was Hindu and his mother Putlibai was from a Pranami Vaishnava Hindu family.
Gandhi's father was of Modh Baniya caste in the varna of Vaishya.
His mother came from the medieval Krishna bhakti-based Pranami tradition, whose religious texts include the Bhagavad Gita, the Bhagavata Purana, and a collection of 14 texts with teachings that the tradition believes to include the essence of the Vedas, the Quran and the Bible.
Gandhi was deeply influenced by his mother, an extremely pious lady who "would not think of taking her meals without her daily prayers...
she would take the hardest vows and keep them without flinching.
To keep two or three consecutive fasts was nothing to her."
In 1874, Gandhi's father Karamchand left Porbandar for the smaller state of Rajkot, where he became a counsellor to its ruler, the Thakur Sahib; though Rajkot was a less prestigious state than Porbandar, the British regional political agency was located there, which gave the state's diwan a measure of security.
In 1876, Karamchand became diwan of Rajkot and was succeeded as diwan of Porbandar by his brother Tulsidas.
His family then rejoined him in Rajkot.
At age 9, Gandhi entered the local school in Rajkot, near his home.
There he studied the rudiments of arithmetic, history, the Gujarati language and geography.
He was an average student, won some prizes, but was a shy and tongue tied student, with no interest in games; his only companions were books and school lessons.
While at high school, Gandhi's elder brother introduced him to a Muslim friend named Sheikh Mehtab.
Mehtab was older in age, taller and encouraged the strictly vegetarian boy to eat meat to gain height.
He also took Mohandas to a brothel one day, though Mohandas "was struck blind and dumb in this den of vice," rebuffed the prostitutes' advances and was promptly sent out of the brothel.
The experience caused Mohandas mental anguish, and he abandoned the company of Mehtab.
In May 1883, the 13-year-old Mohandas was married to 14-year-old Kasturbai Makhanji Kapadia (her first name was usually shortened to "Kasturba", and affectionately to "Ba") in an arranged marriage, according to the custom of the region at that time.
His wedding was a joint event, where his brother and cousin were also married.
Recalling the day of their marriage, he once said, "As we didn't know much about marriage, for us it meant only wearing new clothes, eating sweets and playing with relatives."
As was prevailing tradition, the adolescent bride was to spend much time at her parents' house, and away from her husband.
Writing many years later, Mohandas described with regret the lustful feelings he felt for his young bride, "even at school I used to think of her, and the thought of nightfall and our subsequent meeting was ever haunting me."
He later recalled feeling jealous and possessive of her, such as when she would visit a temple with her girlfriends, and being sexually lustful in his feelings for her.
In late 1885, Gandhi's father Karamchand died.
Gandhi, then 16 years old, and his wife of age 17 had their first baby, who survived only a few days.
The two deaths anguished Gandhi.
In January 1888, he enrolled at Samaldas College in Bhavnagar State, then the sole degree-granting institution of higher education in the region.
But he dropped out and returned to his family in Porbandar.
Three years in London
Student of law
Gandhi came from a poor family, and he had dropped out of the cheapest college he could afford.
Mavji Dave Joshiji, a Brahmin priest and family friend, advised Gandhi and his family that he should consider law studies in London.
In July 1888, his wife Kasturba gave birth to their first surviving son, Harilal.
His mother was not comfortable about Gandhi leaving his wife and family, and going so far from home.
Gandhi's uncle Tulsidas also tried to dissuade his nephew.
Gandhi wanted to go.
To persuade his wife and mother, Gandhi made a vow in front of his mother that he would abstain from meat, alcohol and women.
Gandhi's brother Laxmidas, who was already a lawyer, cheered Gandhi's London studies plan and offered to support him.
Putlibai gave Gandhi her permission and blessing.
On 10 August 1888, Gandhi aged 18, left Porbandar for Mumbai, then known as Bombay.
Upon arrival, he stayed with the local Modh Bania community while waiting for the ship travel arrangements.
The head of the community knew Gandhi's father.
After learning Gandhi's plans, he and other elders warned Gandhi that England would tempt him to compromise his religion, and eat and drink in Western ways.
Gandhi informed them of his promise to his mother and her blessings.
The local chief disregarded it, and excommunicated him from his caste.
But Gandhi ignored this, and on 4 September, he sailed from Bombay to London.
His brother saw him off.
Gandhi attended University College, London which is a constituent college of University of London.
His childhood shyness and self withdrawal had continued through his teens, and he remained so when he arrived in London, but he joined a public speaking practice group and overcame this handicap to practise law.
Vegetarianism and committee work
His time in London was influenced by the vow he had made to his mother.
He tried to adopt "English" customs, including taking dancing lessons.
However, he could not appreciate the bland vegetarian food offered by his landlady and was frequently hungry until he found one of London's few vegetarian restaurants.
Influenced by Henry Salt's writing, he joined the London Vegetarian Society and was elected to its executive committee under the aegis of its president and benefactor Arnold Hills.
An achievement while on the committee was the establishment of a Bayswater chapter.
It would have been hard for Gandhi to challenge Hills; Hills was 12 years his senior and unlike Gandhi, highly eloquent.
He bankrolled the LVS and was a captain of industry with his Thames Ironworks company employing more than 6,000 people in the East End of London.
He was also a highly accomplished sportsman who would go on to found the football club West Ham United.
QTEMPLATE |
The question deeply interested me...I had a high regard for Mr. Hills and his generosity.
But I thought it was quite improper to exclude a man from a vegetarian society simply because he refused to regard puritan morals as one of the objects of the society
A motion to remove Allinson was raised, and was debated and voted on by the committee.
Gandhi’s shyness was an obstacle to his defence of Allinson at the committee meeting.
He wrote his views down on paper but shyness prevented him reading out his arguments, so Hills, the President, asked another committee member to read them out for him.
Although some other members of the committee agreed with Gandhi, the vote was lost and Allinson excluded.
There were no hard feelings, with Hills proposing the toast at the LVS farewell dinner in honour of Gandhi’s return to India.
Called to the bar
Gandhi, at age 22, was called to the bar in June 1891 and then left London for India, where he learned that his mother had died while he was in London and that his family had kept the news from him.
Civil rights activist in South Africa (1893-1914)
In April 1893, Gandhi aged 23, set sail for South Africa to be the lawyer for Abdullah's cousin.
He spent 21 years in South Africa, where he developed his political views, ethics and politics.
Immediately upon arriving in South Africa, Gandhi faced discrimination because of his skin colour and heritage, like all people of colour.
He sat in the train station, shivering all night and pondering if he should return to India or protest for his rights.
In another incident, the magistrate of a Durban court ordered Gandhi to remove his turban, which he refused to do.
Indians were not allowed to walk on public footpaths in South Africa.
Gandhi was kicked by a police officer out of the footpath onto the street without warning.
When Gandhi arrived in South Africa, according to Herman, he thought of himself as "a Briton first, and an Indian second".
However, the prejudice against him and his fellow Indians from British people that Gandhi experienced and observed deeply bothered him.
He found it humiliating, struggling to understand how some people can feel honour or superiority or pleasure in such inhumane practices.
The Abdullah case that had brought him to South Africa concluded in May 1894, and the Indian community organised a farewell party for Gandhi as he prepared to return to India.
However, a new Natal government discriminatory proposal led to Gandhi extending his original period of stay in South Africa.
He planned to assist Indians in opposing a bill to deny them the right to vote, a right then proposed to be an exclusive European right.
He asked Joseph Chamberlain, the British Colonial Secretary, to reconsider his position on this bill.
and he escaped only through the efforts of the wife of the police superintendent.
However, he refused to press charges against any member of the mob.
Gandhi raised eleven hundred Indian volunteers, to support British combat troops against the Boers.
They were trained and medically certified to serve on the front lines.
They were auxiliaries at the Battle of Colenso to a White volunteer ambulance corps.
At the battle of Spion Kop Gandhi and his bearers moved to the front line and had to carry wounded soldiers for miles to a field hospital because the terrain was too rough for the ambulances.
Gandhi and thirty-seven other Indians received the Queen's South Africa Medal.
In 1906, the Transvaal government promulgated a new Act compelling registration of the colony's Indian and Chinese populations.
At a mass protest meeting held in Johannesburg on 11 September that year, Gandhi adopted his still evolving methodology of Satyagraha (devotion to the truth), or nonviolent protest, for the first time.
According to Anthony Parel, Gandhi was also influenced by the Tamil text Tirukkuṛaḷ because Leo Tolstoy mentioned it in their correspondence that began with "A Letter to a Hindu".
Gandhi urged Indians to defy the new law and to suffer the punishments for doing so.
Gandhi's ideas of protests, persuasion skills and public relations had emerged.
He took these back to India in 1915.
Europeans, Indians and Africans
Gandhi focused his attention on Indians while in South Africa.
He was not interested in politics.
This changed after he was discriminated against and bullied, such as by being thrown out of a train coach because of his skin colour by a white train official.
After several such incidents with Whites in South Africa, Gandhi's thinking and focus changed, and he felt he must resist this and fight for rights.
He entered politics by forming the Natal Indian Congress.
According to Ashwin Desai and Goolam Vahed, Gandhi's views on racism are contentious, and in some cases, distressing to those who admire him.
Gandhi suffered persecution from the beginning in South Africa.
Like with other coloured people, white officials denied him his rights, and the press and those in the streets bullied and called him a "parasite", "semi-barbarous", "canker", "squalid coolie", "yellow man", and other epithets.
People would spit on him as an expression of racial hate.
Scholars cite it as an example of evidence that Gandhi at that time thought of Indians and black South Africans differently.
In contrast, other Africa scholars state the evidence points to a rich history of co-operation and efforts by Gandhi and Indian people with nonwhite South Africans against persecution of Africans and the Apartheid.
In 1906, when the British declared war against the Zulu Kingdom in Natal, Gandhi at age 36, sympathised with the Zulus and encouraged the Indian volunteers to help as an ambulance unit.
Gandhi, a group of 20 Indians and black people of South Africa volunteered as a stretcher-bearer corps to treat wounded British soldiers and the opposite side of the war: Zulu victims.
Gandhi volunteering to help as a "staunch loyalist" during the Zulu and other wars made no difference in the British attitude, states Herman, and the African experience was a part of his great disillusionment with the West, transforming him into an "uncompromising non-cooperator".
There he nurtured his policy of peaceful resistance.
In the years after black South Africans gained the right to vote in South Africa (1994), Gandhi was proclaimed a national hero with numerous monuments.
Role in World War I
In April 1918, during the latter part of World War I, the Viceroy invited Gandhi to a War Conference in Delhi.
Gandhi's war recruitment campaign brought into question his consistency on nonviolence.
Gandhi's private secretary noted that "The question of the consistency between his creed of 'Ahimsa' (nonviolence) and his recruiting campaign was raised not only then but has been discussed ever since."
organising scores of supporters and fresh volunteers from the region, the most notable being Vallabhbhai Patel.
Using non-co-operation as a technique, Gandhi initiated a signature campaign where peasants pledged non-payment of revenue even under the threat of confiscation of land.
A social boycott of mamlatdars and talatdars (revenue officials within the district) accompanied the agitation.
Gandhi worked hard to win public support for the agitation across the country.
For five months, the administration refused but finally in end-May 1918, the Government gave way on important provisions and relaxed the conditions of payment of revenue tax until the famine ended.
In Kheda, Vallabhbhai Patel represented the farmers in negotiations with the British, who suspended revenue collection and released all the prisoners.
The increasing Muslim support for Gandhi, after he championed the Caliph's cause, temporarily stopped the Hindu-Muslim communal violence.
It offered evidence of inter-communal harmony in joint Rowlatt satyagraha demonstration rallies, raising Gandhi's stature as the political leader to the British.
His support for the Khilafat movement also helped him sideline Muhammad Ali Jinnah, who had announced his opposition to the satyagraha non-cooperation movement approach of Gandhi.
Jinnah began creating his independent support, and later went on to lead the demand for West and East Pakistan.
By the end of 1922 the Khilafat movement had collapsed.
Turkey's Ataturk had ended the Caliphate, Khilafat movement ended, and Muslim support for Gandhi largely evaporated.
Hindu-Muslim communal conflicts reignited.
Deadly religious riots re-appeared in numerous cities, with 91 in United Provinces of Agra and Oudh alone.
Non-co-operation
With his book Hind Swaraj (1909) Gandhi, aged 40, declared that British rule was established in India with the co-operation of Indians and had survived only because of this co-operation.
If Indians refused to co-operate, British rule would collapse and swaraj would come.
In February 1919, Gandhi cautioned the Viceroy of India with a cable communication that if the British were to pass the Rowlatt Act, he would appeal to Indians to start civil disobedience.
The British government ignored him and passed the law, stating it would not yield to threats.
The satyagraha civil disobedience followed, with people assembling to protest the Rowlatt Act.
On 30 March 1919, British law officers opened fire on an assembly of unarmed people, peacefully gathered, participating in satyagraha in Delhi.
The massacre and Gandhi's non-violent response to it moved many, but also made some Sikhs and Hindus upset that Dyer was getting away with murder.
Investigation committees were formed by the British, which Gandhi asked Indians to boycott.
In 1921, Gandhi was the leader of the Indian National Congress.
In addition to boycotting British products, Gandhi urged the people to boycott British institutions and law courts, to resign from government employment, and to forsake British titles and honours.
Gandhi thus began his journey aimed at crippling the British India government economically, politically and administratively.
The appeal of "Non-cooperation" grew, its social popularity drew participation from all strata of Indian society.
Gandhi was arrested on 10 March 1922, tried for sedition, and sentenced to six years' imprisonment.
He began his sentence on 18 March 1922.
With Gandhi isolated in prison, the Indian National Congress split into two factions, one led by Chitta Ranjan Das and Motilal Nehru favouring party participation in the legislatures, and the other led by Chakravarti Rajagopalachari and Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel, opposing this move.
Furthermore, co-operation among Hindus and Muslims ended as Khilafat movement collapsed with the rise of Ataturk in Turkey.
Muslim leaders left the Congress and began forming Muslim organisations.
The political base behind Gandhi had broken into factions.
Gandhi was released in February 1924 for an appendicitis operation, having served only two years.
Salt Satyagraha (Salt March)
After his early release from prison for political crimes in 1924, over the second half of the 1920s, Gandhi continued to pursue swaraj.
He pushed through a resolution at the Calcutta Congress in December 1928 calling on the British government to grant India dominion status or face a new campaign of non-co-operation with complete independence for the country as its goal.
After his support for the World War I with Indian combat troops, and the failure of Khilafat movement in preserving the rule of Caliph in Turkey, followed by a collapse in Muslim support for his leadership, some such as Subhas Chandra Bose and Bhagat Singh questioned his values and non-violent approach.
On 31 December 1929, the flag of India was unfurled in Lahore.
Gandhi led Congress celebrated 26 January 1930 as India's Independence Day in Lahore.
This day was commemorated by almost every other Indian organisation.
Gandhi then launched a new Satyagraha against the tax on salt in March 1930.
Gandhi sent an ultimatum in the form of a polite letter to the viceroy of India, Lord Irwin, on 2 March.
A young left wing British Quaker by the name of Reg Reynolds delivered the letter.
Gandhi condemned British rule in the letter, describing it as "a curse" that "has impoverished the dumb millions by a system of progressive exploitation and by a ruinously expensive military and civil administration...
It has reduced us politically to serfdom."
Gandhi also mentioned in the letter that the viceroy received a salary "over five thousand times India's average income."
British violence, Gandhi promised, was going to be defeated by Indian non-violence.
This was highlighted by the famous Salt March to Dandi from 12 March to 6 April, where, together with 78 volunteers, he marched from Ahmedabad to Dandi, Gujarat to make salt himself, with the declared intention of breaking the salt laws.
The march took 25 days to cover 240 miles with Gandhi speaking to often huge crowds along the way.
Thousands of Indians joined him in Dandi.
On 5 May he was interned under a regulation dating from 1827 in anticipation of a protest that he had planned.
The protest at Dharasana salt works on 21 May went ahead without its leader, Gandhi.
A horrified American journalist, Webb Miller, described the British response thus:
QTEMPLATE |In complete silence the Gandhi men drew up and halted a hundred yards from the stockade.
A picked column advanced from the crowd, waded the ditches and approached the barbed wire stockade... at a word of command, scores of native policemen rushed upon the advancing marchers and rained blows on their heads with their steel-shot lathis long bamboo sticks.
Not one of the marchers even raised an arm to fend off blows.
They went down like ninepins.
From where I stood I heard the sickening whack of the clubs on unprotected skulls...
Those struck down fell sprawling, unconscious or writhing with fractured skulls or broken shoulders.
This went on for hours until some 300 or more protesters had been beaten, many seriously injured and two killed.
At no time did they offer any resistance.
This campaign was one of his most successful at upsetting British hold on India; Britain responded by imprisoning over 60,000 people.
Congress estimates, however, put the figure at 90,000.
Among them was one of Gandhi's lieutenants, Jawaharlal Nehru.
According to Sarma, Gandhi recruited women to participate in the salt tax campaigns and the boycott of foreign products, which gave many women a new self-confidence and dignity in the mainstream of Indian public life.
Regardless of Gandhi's apprehensions and views, Indian women joined the Salt March by the thousands to defy the British salt taxes and monopoly on salt mining.
After Gandhi's arrest, the women marched and picketed shops on their own, accepting violence and verbal abuse from British authorities for the cause in a manner Gandhi inspired.
Gandhi as folk hero
According to Atlury Murali, Indian Congress in the 1920s appealed to Andhra Pradesh peasants by creating Telugu language plays that combined Indian mythology and legends, linked them to Gandhi's ideas, and portrayed Gandhi as a messiah, a reincarnation of ancient and medieval Indian nationalist leaders and saints.
The plays built support among peasants steeped in traditional Hindu culture, according to Murali, and this effort made Gandhi a folk hero in Telugu speaking villages, a sacred messiah-like figure.
These ideas sounded strange outside India, during his lifetime, but they readily and deeply resonated with the culture and historic values of his people.
Negotiations
The government, represented by Lord Irwin, decided to negotiate with Gandhi.
The Gandhi-Irwin Pact was signed in March 1931.
The British Government agreed to free all political prisoners, in return for the suspension of the civil disobedience movement.
According to the pact, Gandhi was invited to attend the Round Table Conference in London for discussions and as the sole representative of the Indian National Congress.
The conference was a disappointment to Gandhi and the nationalists.
Gandhi expected to discuss India's independence, while the British side focused on the Indian princes and Indian minorities rather than on a transfer of power.
Lord Irwin's successor, Lord Willingdon, took a hard line against India as an independent nation, began a new campaign of controlling and subduing the nationalist movement.
Gandhi was again arrested, and the government tried and failed to negate his influence by completely isolating him from his followers.
In Britain, Winston Churchill, a prominent Conservative politician who was then out of office but later became its prime minister, became a vigorous and articulate critic of Gandhi and opponent of his long-term plans.
Churchill often ridiculed Gandhi, saying in a widely reported 1931 speech:
QTEMPLATE |It is alarming and also nauseating to see Mr Gandhi, a seditious Middle Temple lawyer, now posing as a fakir of a type well known in the East, striding half-naked up the steps of the Vice-regal palace....to parley on equal terms with the representative of the King-Emperor.
Churchill's bitterness against Gandhi grew in the 1930s.
He called Gandhi as the one who was "seditious in aim" whose evil genius and multiform menace was attacking the British empire.
Churchill called him a dictator, a "Hindu Mussolini", fomenting a race war, trying to replace the Raj with Brahmin cronies, playing on the ignorance of Indian masses, all for selfish gain.
Round Table Conferences
During the discussions between Gandhi and the British government over 1931-32 at the Round Table Conferences, Gandhi, now aged about 62, sought constitutional reforms as a preparation to the end of colonial British rule, and begin the self-rule by Indians.
They invited Indian religious leaders, such as Muslims and Sikhs, to press their demands along religious lines, as well as B. R. Ambedkar as the representative leader of the untouchables.
Gandhi vehemently opposed a constitution that enshrined rights or representations based on communal divisions, because he feared that it would not bring people together but divide them, perpetuate their status and divert the attention from India's struggle to end the colonial rule.
The Second Round Table conference was the only time he left India between 1914 and his death in 1948.
He declined the government's offer of accommodation in an expensive West End hotel, preferring to stay in the East End, to live among working-class people, as he did in India.
He based himself in a small cell-bedroom at Kingsley Hall for the three-month duration of his stay and was enthusiastically received by East Enders.
During this time he renewed his links with the British vegetarian movement.
After Gandhi returned from the Second Round Table conference, he started a new satyagraha.
He was arrested and imprisoned at the Yerwada Jail, Pune.
While he was in prison, the British government enacted a new law that granted untouchables a separate electorate.
It came to be known as the Communal Award.
In protest, Gandhi started a fast-unto-death, while he was held in prison.
The resulting public outcry forced the government, in consultations with Ambedkar, to replace the Communal Award with a compromise Poona Pact.
Congress politics
In 1934 Gandhi resigned from Congress party membership.
He did not disagree with the party's position but felt that if he resigned, his popularity with Indians would cease to stifle the party's membership, which actually varied, including communists, socialists, trade unionists, students, religious conservatives, and those with pro-business convictions, and that these various voices would get a chance to make themselves heard.
Gandhi also wanted to avoid being a target for Raj propaganda by leading a party that had temporarily accepted political accommodation with the Raj.
Gandhi returned to active politics again in 1936, with the Nehru presidency and the Lucknow session of the Congress.
Although Gandhi wanted a total focus on the task of winning independence and not speculation about India's future, he did not restrain the Congress from adopting socialism as its goal.
Gandhi had a clash with Subhas Chandra Bose, who had been elected president in 1938, and who had previously expressed a lack of faith in nonviolence as a means of protest.
Despite Gandhi's opposition, Bose won a second term as Congress President, against Gandhi's nominee, Dr. Pattabhi Sitaramayya; but left the Congress when the All-India leaders resigned en masse in protest of his abandonment of the principles introduced by Gandhi.
World War II and Quit India movement
Gandhi opposed providing any help to the British war effort and he campaigned against any Indian participation in the World War II.
Gandhi opposition to the Indian participation in the World War II was motivated by his belief that India could not be party to a war ostensibly being fought for democratic freedom while that freedom was denied to India itself.
He also condemned Nazism and Fascism, a view which won endorsement of other Indian leaders.
As the war progressed, Gandhi intensified his demand for independence, calling for the British to Quit India in a 1942 speech in Mumbai.
This was Gandhi's and the Congress Party's most definitive revolt aimed at securing the British exit from India.
The British government responded quickly to the Quit India speech, and within hours after Gandhi's speech arrested Gandhi and all the members of the Congress Working Committee.
His countrymen retaliated the arrests by damaging or burning down hundreds of government owned railway stations, police stations, and cutting down telegraph wires.
He urged Indians to Karo ya maro ("Do or die") in the cause of their rights and freedoms.
Gandhi's arrest lasted two years, as he was held in the Aga Khan Palace in Pune.
During this period, his long time secretary Mahadev Desai died of a heart attack, his wife Kasturba died after 18 months' imprisonment on 22 February 1944; and Gandhi suffered a severe malaria attack.
While in jail, he agreed to an interview with Stuart Gelder, a British journalist.
Gelder then composed and released an interview summary, cabled it to the mainstream press, that announced sudden concessions Gandhi was willing to make, comments that shocked his countrymen, the Congress workers and even Gandhi.
The latter two claimed that it distorted what Gandhi actually said on a range of topics and falsely repudiated the Quit India movement.
These discussions continued through 1947.
While the leaders of Congress languished in jail, the other parties supported the war and gained organizational strength.
Underground publications flailed at the ruthless suppression of Congress, but it had little control over events.
At the end of the war, the British gave clear indications that power would be transferred to Indian hands.
At this point Gandhi called off the struggle, and around 100,000 political prisoners were released, including the Congress's leadership.
Partition and independence
Gandhi opposed partition of the Indian subcontinent along religious lines.
The Indian National Congress and Gandhi called for the British to Quit India.
However, the Muslim League demanded "Divide and Quit India".
Gandhi suggested an agreement which required the Congress and the Muslim League to co-operate and attain independence under a provisional government, thereafter, the question of partition could be resolved by a plebiscite in the districts with a Muslim majority.
Jinnah rejected Gandhi's proposal and called for Direct Action Day, on 16 August 1946, to press Muslims to publicly gather in cities and support his proposal for partition of Indian subcontinent into a Muslim state and non-Muslim state.
Huseyn Shaheed Suhrawardy, the Muslim League Chief Minister of Bengal - now Bangladesh and West Bengal, gave Calcutta's police special holiday to celebrate the Direct Action Day.
The Direct Action Day triggered a mass murder of Calcutta Hindus and the torching of their property, and holidaying police were missing to contain or stop the conflict.
The British government did not order its army to move in to contain the violence.
Gandhi visited the most riot-prone areas to appeal a stop to the massacres.
The British reluctantly agreed to grant independence to the people of the Indian subcontinent, but accepted Jinnah's proposal of partitioning the land into Pakistan and India.
Gandhi was involved in the final negotiations, but Stanley Wolpert states the "plan to carve up British India was never approved of or accepted by Gandhi".
The partition was controversial and violently disputed.
More than half a million were killed in religious riots as 10 million to 12 million non-Muslims (Hindus and Sikhs mostly) migrated from Pakistan into India, and Muslims migrated from India into Pakistan, across the newly created borders of India, West Pakistan and East Pakistan.
Gandhi spent the day of independence not celebrating the end of the British rule but appealing for peace among his countrymen by fasting and spinning in Calcutta on 15 August 1947.
The partition had gripped the Indian subcontinent with religious violence and the streets were filled with corpses.
In other accounts, such as one prepared by an eyewitness journalist, Gandhi was carried into the Birla House, into a bedroom.
There he died about 30 minutes later as one of Gandhi's family members read verses from Hindu scriptures.
Prime Minister Jawaharlal Nehru addressed his countrymen over the All-India Radio saying:
Friends and comrades, the light has gone out of our lives, and there is darkness everywhere, and I do not quite know what to tell you or how to say it.
Our beloved leader, Bapu as we called him, the father of the nation, is no more.
Perhaps I am wrong to say that; nevertheless, we will not see him again, as we have seen him for these many years, we will not run to him for advice or seek solace from him, and that is a terrible blow, not only for me, but for millions and millions in this country.
Gandhi's assassin Godse made no attempt to escape and was seized by the witnesses.
He was arrested.
In the weeks that followed, his collaborators were arrested as well.
Godse was a Hindu nationalist with links to the extremist Hindu Mahasabha.
They were tried in court at Delhi's Red Fort.
At his trial, Godse did not deny the charges nor express any remorse.
According to Claude Markovits, a French historian noted for his studies of colonial India, Godse stated that he killed Gandhi because of his complacence towards Muslims, holding Gandhi responsible for the frenzy of violence and sufferings during the subcontinent's partition into Pakistan and India.
Godse accused Gandhi of subjectivism and of acting as if only he had a monopoly of the truth.
Godse was found guilty and executed in 1949.
Gandhi's death was mourned nationwide.
Over a million people joined the five-mile long funeral procession that took over five hours to reach Raj Ghat from Birla house, where he was assassinated, and another million watched the procession pass by.
Nehru used the assassination to consolidate the authority of the new Indian state.
Gandhi's death helped marshal support for the new government and legitimise the Congress Party's control, leveraged by the massive outpouring of Hindu expressions of grief for a man who had inspired them for decades.
The government suppressed the RSS, the Muslim National Guards, and the Khaksars, with some 200,000 arrests.
Funeral and memorials
Gandhi was cremated in accordance with Hindu tradition.
Gandhi's ashes were poured into urns which were sent across India for memorial services.
Most of the ashes were immersed at the Sangam at Allahabad on 12 February 1948, but some were secretly taken away.
In 1997, Tushar Gandhi immersed the contents of one urn, found in a bank vault and reclaimed through the courts, at the Sangam at Allahabad.
A black marble platform, it bears the epigraph "Hē Rāma" ().
These are widely believed to be Gandhi's last words after he was shot, though the veracity of this statement has been disputed.
Principles, practices and beliefs
Gandhi's statements, letters and life have attracted much political and scholarly analysis of his principles, practices and beliefs, including what influenced him.
Some writers present him as a paragon of ethical living and pacifism, while others present him as a more complex, contradictory and evolving character influenced by his culture and circumstances.
Influences
Gandhi grew up in a Hindu and Jain religious atmosphere in his native Gujarat, which were his primary influences, but he was also influenced by his personal reflections and literature of Hindu Bhakti saints, Advaita Vedanta, Islam, Buddhism, Christianity, and thinkers such as Tolstoy, Ruskin and Thoreau.
At age 57 he declared himself to be Advaitist Hindu in his religious persuasion, but added that he supported Dvaitist viewpoints and religious pluralism.
Gandhi was influenced by his devout Vaishnava Hindu mother, the regional Hindu temples and saint tradition which co-existed with Jain tradition in Gujarat.
Historian R.B. Cribb states that Gandhi's thought evolved over time, with his early ideas becoming the core or scaffolding for his mature philosophy.
He committed himself early to truthfulness, temperance, chastity, and vegetarianism.
Gandhi's London lifestyle incorporated the values he had grown up with.
When he returned to India in 1891, his outlook was parochial and he could not make a living as a lawyer.
This challenged his belief that practicality and morality necessarily coincided.
By moving in 1893 to South Africa he found a solution to this problem and developed the central concepts of his mature philosophy.
According to Bhikhu Parekh, three books that influenced Gandhi most in South Africa were William Salter's Ethical Religion (1889); Henry David Thoreau's On the Duty of Civil Disobedience (1849); and Leo Tolstoy's The Kingdom of God Is Within You (1894).
Ruskin inspired his decision to live an austere life on a commune, at first on the Phoenix Farm in Natal and then on the Tolstoy Farm just outside Johannesburg, South Africa.
According to Indira Carr and others, Gandhi was influenced by Vaishnavism, Jainism and Advaita Vedanta.
Balkrishna Gokhale states that Gandhi was influenced by Hinduism and Jainism, and his studies of Sermon on the Mount of Christianity, Ruskin and Tolstoy.
Additional theories of possible influences on Gandhi have been proposed.
For example, in 1935, N. A. Toothi stated that Gandhi was influenced by the reforms and teachings of the Swaminarayan tradition of Hinduism.
According to Raymond Williams, Toothi may have overlooked the influence of the Jain community, and adds close parallels do exist in programs of social reform in the Swaminarayan tradition and those of Gandhi, based on "nonviolence, truth-telling, cleanliness, temperance and upliftment of the masses."
Historian Howard states the culture of Gujarat influenced Gandhi and his methods.
Tolstoy
Along with the book mentioned above, in 1908 Leo Tolstoy wrote A Letter to a Hindu, which said that only by using love as a weapon through passive resistance could the Indian people overthrow colonial rule.
In 1909, Gandhi wrote to Tolstoy seeking advice and permission to republish A Letter to a Hindu in Gujarati.
Tolstoy responded and the two continued a correspondence until Tolstoy's death in 1910 (Tolstoy's last letter was to Gandhi).
The letters concern practical and theological applications of nonviolence.
Gandhi saw himself a disciple of Tolstoy, for they agreed regarding opposition to state authority and colonialism; both hated violence and preached non-resistance.
However, they differed sharply on political strategy.
Gandhi called for political involvement; he was a nationalist and was prepared to use nonviolent force.
He was also willing to compromise.
It was at Tolstoy Farm where Gandhi and Hermann Kallenbach systematically trained their disciples in the philosophy of nonviolence.
Shrimad Rajchandra
Gandhi credited Shrimad Rajchandra, a poet and Jain philosopher, as his influential counsellor.
In Modern Review, June 1930, Gandhi wrote about their first encounter in 1891 at Dr. P.J. Mehta's residence in Bombay.
Gandhi exchanged letters with Rajchandra when he was in South Africa, referring to him as Kavi (literally, "poet").
In 1930, Gandhi wrote, "Such was the man who captivated my heart in religious matters as no other man ever has till now."
'I have said elsewhere that in moulding my inner life Tolstoy and Ruskin vied with Kavi.
But Kavi's influence was undoubtedly deeper if only because I had come in closest personal touch with him.'
Gandhi, in his autobiography, called Rajchandra his "guide and helper" and his "refuge ... in moments of spiritual crisis".
He had advised Gandhi to be patient and to study Hinduism deeply.
Religious texts
During his stay in South Africa, along with scriptures and philosophical texts of Hinduism and other Indian religions, Gandhi read translated texts of Christianity such as the Bible, and Islam such as the Quran.
His comparative studies of religions and interaction with scholars, led him to respect all religions as well as become concerned about imperfections in all of them and frequent misinterpretations.
Sufism
Gandhi was acquainted with Sufi Islam's Chishti Order during his stay in South Africa.
He attended Khanqah gatherings there at Riverside.
According to Margaret Chatterjee, Gandhi as a Vaishnava Hindu shared values such as humility, devotion and brotherhood for the poor that is also found in Sufism.
For decades he edited several newspapers including Harijan in Gujarati, in Hindi and in the English language; Indian Opinion while in South Africa and, Young India, in English, and Navajivan, a Gujarati monthly, on his return to India.
Later, Navajivan was also published in Hindi.
In addition, he wrote letters almost every day to individuals and newspapers.
Gandhi also wrote several books including his autobiography, The Story of My Experiments with Truth (Gujarātī "સત્યના પ્રયોગો અથવા આત્મકથા"), of which he bought the entire first edition to make sure it was reprinted.
This last essay can be considered his programme on economics.
He also wrote extensively on vegetarianism, diet and health, religion, social reforms, etc.
Gandhi usually wrote in Gujarati, though he also revised the Hindi and English translations of his books.
Gandhi's complete works were published by the Indian government under the name |date=16 November 2005
The Indian government later withdrew the revised edition.
Legacy and depictions in popular culture
* The word Mahatma, while often mistaken for Gandhi's given name in the West, is taken from the Sanskrit words maha (meaning Great) and atma (meaning Soul).
Rabindranath Tagore is said to have accorded the title to Gandhi.
In his autobiography, Gandhi nevertheless explains that he never valued the title, and was often pained by it.
* Innumerable streets, roads and localities in India are named after M.K.Gandhi.
These include M.G.Road (the main street of a number of Indian cities including Mumbai and Bangalore), Gandhi Market (near Sion, Mumbai) and Gandhinagar (the capital of the state of Gujarat, Gandhi's birthplace).
Followers and international influence
Gandhi influenced important leaders and political movements.
Leaders of the civil rights movement in the United States, including Martin Luther King Jr., James Lawson, and James Bevel, drew from the writings of Gandhi in the development of their own theories about nonviolence.
King said "Christ gave us the goals and Mahatma Gandhi the tactics."
King sometimes referred to Gandhi as "the little brown saint."
Anti-apartheid activist and former President of South Africa, Nelson Mandela, was inspired by Gandhi.
Others include Khan Abdul Ghaffar Khan, Steve Biko, and Aung San Suu Kyi.
In his early years, the former President of South Africa Nelson Mandela was a follower of the nonviolent resistance philosophy of Gandhi.
Einstein said of Gandhi:
Mahatma Gandhi's life achievement stands unique in political history.
He has invented a completely new and humane means for the liberation war of an oppressed country, and practised it with greatest energy and devotion.
The moral influence he had on the consciously thinking human being of the entire civilised world will probably be much more lasting than it seems in our time with its overestimation of brutal violent forces.
Because lasting will only be the work of such statesmen who wake up and strengthen the moral power of their people through their example and educational works.
We may all be happy and grateful that destiny gifted us with such an enlightened contemporary, a role model for the generations to come.
Generations to come will scarce believe that such a one as this walked the earth in flesh and blood.
Lanza del Vasto went to India in 1936 intending to live with Gandhi; he later returned to Europe to spread Gandhi's philosophy and founded the Community of the Ark in 1948 (modelled after Gandhi's ashrams).
Madeleine Slade (known as "Mirabehn") was the daughter of a British admiral who spent much of her adult life in India as a devotee of Gandhi.
In addition, the British musician John Lennon referred to Gandhi when discussing his views on nonviolence.
At the Cannes Lions International Advertising Festival in 2007, former US Vice-President and environmentalist Al Gore spoke of Gandhi's influence on him.
US President Barack Obama in a 2010 address to the Parliament of India said that:
I am mindful that I might not be standing before you today, as President of the United States, had it not been for Gandhi and the message he shared with America and the world.
Obama in September 2009 said that his biggest inspiration came from Gandhi.
His reply was in response to the question 'Who was the one person, dead or live, that you would choose to dine with?'.
He continued that "He's somebody I find a lot of inspiration in.
He inspired Dr. King with his message of nonviolence.
He ended up doing so much and changed the world just by the power of his ethics."
Time Magazine named The 14th Dalai Lama, Lech Wałęsa, Martin Luther King Jr., Cesar Chavez, Aung San Suu Kyi, Benigno Aquino, Jr., Desmond Tutu, and Nelson Mandela as Children of Gandhi and his spiritual heirs to nonviolence.
The Mahatma Gandhi District in Houston, Texas, United States, an ethnic Indian enclave, is officially named after Gandhi.
Gandhi's ideas had a significant influence on 20th-century philosophy.
It began with his engagement with Romain Rolland and Martin Buber.
Jean-Luc Nancy said that the French philosopher Maurice Blanchot engaged critically with Gandhi from the point of view of "European spirituality".
Since then philosophers including Hannah Arendt, Etienne Balibar and Slavoj Žižek found that Gandhi was a necessary reference to discuss morality in politics.
Recently in the light of climate change Gandhi's views on technology are gaining importance in the fields of environmental philosophy and philosophy of technology.
Global days that celebrate Gandhi
In 2007, the United Nations General Assembly declared Gandhi's birthday 2 October as "the International Day of Nonviolence."
First proposed by UNESCO in 1948, as the School Day of Nonviolence and Peace (DENIP in Spanish), 30 January is observed as the School Day of Nonviolence and Peace in schools of many countries In countries with a Southern Hemisphere school calendar, it is observed on 30 March.
Gandhi was also the runner-up to Albert Einstein as "Person of the Century" at the end of 1999.
The Government of India awarded the annual Gandhi Peace Prize to distinguished social workers, world leaders and citizens.
Nelson Mandela, the leader of South Africa's struggle to eradicate racial discrimination and segregation, was a prominent non-Indian recipient.
In 2011, Time magazine named Gandhi as one of the top 25 political icons of all time.
Gandhi did not receive the Nobel Peace Prize, although he was nominated five times between 1937 and 1948, including the first-ever nomination by the American Friends Service Committee, though he made the short list only twice, in 1937 and 1947.
Decades later, the Nobel Committee publicly declared its regret for the omission, and admitted to deeply divided nationalistic opinion denying the award.
When the 14th Dalai Lama was awarded the Prize in 1989, the chairman of the committee said that this was "in part a tribute to the memory of Mahatma Gandhi".
Father of the Nation
Indians widely describe Gandhi as the father of the nation.
On 28 April 1947, Sarojini Naidu during a conference also referred Gandhi as "Father of the Nation".
However, in response to an RTI application in 2012, the Government of India stated that the Constitution of India did not permit any titles except ones acquired through education or military service.
Film, theatre and literature
A five-hour nine-minute long biographical documentary film, .
The 1979 opera Satyagraha by American composer Philip Glass is loosely based on Gandhi's life.
The opera's libretto, taken from the Bhagavad Gita, is sung in the original Sanskrit.
Anti-Gandhi themes have also been showcased through films and plays.
The 1995 Marathi play Gandhi Virudh Gandhi explored the relationship between Gandhi and his son Harilal.
The 2007 film, Gandhi, My Father was inspired on the same theme.
The 1989 Marathi play Me Nathuram Godse Boltoy and the 1997 Hindi play Gandhi Ambedkar criticised Gandhi and his principles.
Several biographers have undertaken the task of describing Gandhi's life.
Among them are D. G. Tendulkar with his Mahatma.
Life of Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi in eight volumes, Chaman Nahal's Gandhi Quartet, and Pyarelal and Sushila Nayyar with their Mahatma Gandhi in 10 volumes.
The 2010 biography, Great Soul: Mahatma Gandhi and His Struggle With India by Joseph Lelyveld contained controversial material speculating about Gandhi's sexual life.
Lelyveld, however, stated that the press coverage "grossly distorts" the overall message of the book.
The 2014 film Welcome Back Gandhi takes a fictionalised look at how Gandhi might react to modern day India.
The 2019 play Bharat Bhagya Vidhata, inspired by Pujya Gurudevshri Rakeshbhai and produced by Sangeet Natak Akademi and Shrimad Rajchandra Mission Dharampur takes a look at how Gandhi cultivated the values of truth and non-violence.
"Mahatma Gandhi" is used by Cole Porter in his lyrics for the song You're the Top which is included in the 1934 musical Anything Goes.
In the song Porter rhymes "Mahatma Gandhi' with "Napoleon Brandy."
Current impact within India
India, with its rapid economic modernisation and urbanisation, has rejected Gandhi's economics but accepted much of his politics and continues to revere his memory.
Reporter Jim Yardley notes that, "modern India is hardly a Gandhian nation, if it ever was one.
His vision of a village-dominated economy was shunted aside during his lifetime as rural romanticism, and his call for a national ethos of personal austerity and nonviolence has proved antithetical to the goals of an aspiring economic and military power."
By contrast Gandhi is "given full credit for India's political identity as a tolerant, secular democracy."
Gandhi's birthday, 2 October, is a national holiday in India, Gandhi Jayanti.
Gandhi's image also appears on paper currency of all denominations issued by Reserve Bank of India, except for the one rupee note.
Gandhi's date of death, 30 January, is commemorated as a Martyrs' Day in India.
There are three temples in India dedicated to Gandhi.
One is located at Sambalpur in Orissa and the second at Nidaghatta village near Kadur in Chikmagalur district of Karnataka and the third one at Chityal in the district of Nalgonda, Telangana.
The Gandhi Memorial in Kanyakumari resembles central Indian Hindu temples and the Tamukkam or Summer Palace in Madurai now houses the Mahatma Gandhi Museum.
Descendants
Gandhi's children and grandchildren live in India and other countries.
Grandson Rajmohan Gandhi is a professor in Illinois and an author of Gandhi's biography titled Mohandas, while another, Tarun Gandhi, has authored several authoritative books on his grandfather.
Another grandson, Kanu Ramdas Gandhi (the son of Gandhi's third son Ramdas), was found living in an old age home in Delhi despite having taught earlier in the United States.
* Seven Social Sins (AKA Seven Blunders of the World)
* Gandhi Teerth - Gandhi International Research Institute and Museum for Gandhian study, research on Mahatma Gandhi and dialogue.
Bibliography
Books
*Ahmed, Talat (2018).
Mohandas Gandhi: Experiments in Civil Disobedience
* Brown, Judith M. (2004).
"Gandhi, Mohandas Karamchand Mahatma Gandhi (1869-1948)", Oxford Dictionary of National Biography, Oxford University Press.
* Brown, Judith M., and Anthony Parel, eds.
The Cambridge Companion to Gandhi (2012); 14 essays by scholars https:/ Cambridge-Companion-Gandhi-Companions-Religion-ebook B009UTEUP8 details e).
* (100 volumes).
Free online access from Gandhiserve.
