The cell (from Latin cella, meaning "small room") is the basic structural, functional, and biological unit of all known organisms.
A cell is the smallest unit of life.
Cells are often called the "building blocks of life".
The study of cells is called cell biology, cellular biology, or cytology.
Cells consist of cytoplasm enclosed within a membrane, which contains many biomolecules such as proteins and nucleic acids.
Organisms can be classified as unicellular (consisting of a single cell; including bacteria) or multicellular (including plants and animals).
Most plant and animal cells are visible only under a microscope, with dimensions between 1 and 100 micrometres.
Cells were discovered by Robert Hooke in 1665, who named them for their resemblance to cells inhabited by Christian monks in a monastery.
Cell theory, first developed in 1839 by Matthias Jakob Schleiden and Theodor Schwann, states that all organisms are composed of one or more cells, that cells are the fundamental unit of structure and function in all living organisms, and that all cells come from pre-existing cells.
Cells emerged on Earth at least 3.5 billion years ago.
A prokaryotic cell has three architectural regions:
* Enclosing the cell is the cell envelope - generally consisting of a plasma membrane covered by a cell wall which, for some bacteria, may be further covered by a third layer called a capsule.
Though most prokaryotes have both a cell membrane and a cell wall, there are exceptions such as Mycoplasma (bacteria) and Thermoplasma (archaea) which only possess the cell membrane layer.
The envelope gives rigidity to the cell and separates the interior of the cell from its environment, serving as a protective filter.
The cell wall consists of peptidoglycan in bacteria, and acts as an additional barrier against exterior forces.
It also prevents the cell from expanding and bursting (cytolysis) from osmotic pressure due to a hypotonic environment.
Some eukaryotic cells (plant cells and fungal cells) also have a cell wall.
* Inside the cell is the cytoplasmic region that contains the genome (DNA), ribosomes and various sorts of inclusions.
The genetic material is freely found in the cytoplasm.
Prokaryotes can carry extrachromosomal DNA elements called plasmids, which are usually circular.
Linear bacterial plasmids have been identified in several species of spirochete bacteria, including members of the genus Borrelia notably Borrelia burgdorferi, which causes Lyme disease.
Though not forming a nucleus, the DNA is condensed in a nucleoid.
Plasmids encode additional genes, such as antibiotic resistance genes.
* On the outside, flagella and pili project from the cell's surface.
These are structures (not present in all prokaryotes) made of proteins that facilitate movement and communication between cells.
Eukaryotic cells
Plants, animals, fungi, slime moulds, protozoa, and algae are all eukaryotic.
These cells are about fifteen times wider than a typical prokaryote and can be as much as a thousand times greater in volume.
The main distinguishing feature of eukaryotes as compared to prokaryotes is compartmentalization: the presence of membrane-bound organelles in which specific activities take place.
Most important among these is a cell nucleus,
* Motile eukaryotes can move using motile cilia or flagella.
Motile cells are absent in conifers and flowering plants.
Eukaryotic flagella are more complex than those of prokaryotes.
Subcellular components
All cells, whether prokaryotic or eukaryotic, have a membrane that envelops the cell, regulates what moves in and out (selectively permeable), and maintains the electric potential of the cell.
Inside the membrane, the cytoplasm takes up most of the cell's volume.
All cells (except red blood cells which lack a cell nucleus and most organelles to accommodate maximum space for hemoglobin) possess DNA, the hereditary material of genes, and RNA, containing the information necessary to build various proteins such as enzymes, the cell's primary machinery.
There are also other kinds of biomolecules in cells.
This article lists these primary cellular components, then briefly describes their function.
Membrane
The cell membrane, or plasma membrane, is a biological membrane that surrounds the cytoplasm of a cell.
In animals, the plasma membrane is the outer boundary of the cell, while in plants and prokaryotes it is usually covered by a cell wall.
This membrane serves to separate and protect a cell from its surrounding environment and is made mostly from a double layer of phospholipids, which are amphiphilic .
Hence, the layer is called a phospholipid bilayer, or sometimes a fluid mosaic membrane.
Embedded within this membrane is a macromolecular structure called the porosome the universal secretory portal in cells and a variety of protein molecules that act as channels and pumps that move different molecules into and out of the cell.
The subunit protein of microfilaments is a small, monomeric protein called actin.
The subunit of microtubules is a dimeric molecule called tubulin.
Intermediate filaments are heteropolymers whose subunits vary among the cell types in different tissues.
But some of the subunit protein of intermediate filaments include vimentin, desmin, lamin (lamins A, B and C), keratin (multiple acidic and basic keratins), neurofilament proteins (NF-L, NF-M).
Genetic material
Two different kinds of genetic material exist: deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) and ribonucleic acid (RNA).
Cells use DNA for their long-term information storage.
The biological information contained in an organism is encoded in its DNA sequence.
Structures outside the cell membrane
Many cells also have structures which exist wholly or partially outside the cell membrane.
These structures are notable because they are not protected from the external environment by the semipermeable cell membrane.
In order to assemble these structures, their components must be carried across the cell membrane by export processes.
Cell wall
Many types of prokaryotic and eukaryotic cells have a cell wall.
The cell wall acts to protect the cell mechanically and chemically from its environment, and is an additional layer of protection to the cell membrane.
Different types of cell have cell walls made up of different materials; plant cell walls are primarily made up of cellulose, fungi cell walls are made up of chitin and bacteria cell walls are made up of peptidoglycan.
Prokaryotic
Capsule
A gelatinous capsule is present in some bacteria outside the cell membrane and cell wall.
The capsule may be polysaccharide as in pneumococci, meningococci or polypeptide as Bacillus anthracis or hyaluronic acid as in streptococci.
Capsules are not marked by normal staining protocols and can be detected by India ink or methyl blue; which allows for higher contrast between the cells for observation.
Flagella
Flagella are organelles for cellular mobility.
The bacterial flagellum stretches from cytoplasm through the cell membrane (s) and extrudes through the cell wall.
They are long and thick thread-like appendages, protein in nature.
A different type of flagellum is found in archaea and a different type is found in eukaryotes.
Fimbriae
A fimbria (plural fimbriae also known as a pilus, plural pili) is a short, thin, hair-like filament found on the surface of bacteria.
Fimbriae are formed of a protein called pilin (antigenic) and are responsible for the attachment of bacteria to specific receptors on human cells (cell adhesion).
There are special types of pili involved in bacterial conjugation.
Cellular processes
Replication
Cell division involves a single cell (called a mother cell) dividing into two daughter cells.
This leads to growth in multicellular organisms (the growth of tissue) and to procreation (vegetative reproduction) in unicellular organisms.
Prokaryotic cells divide by binary fission, while eukaryotic cells usually undergo a process of nuclear division, called mitosis, followed by division of the cell, called cytokinesis.
A diploid cell may also undergo meiosis to produce haploid cells, usually four.
Haploid cells serve as gametes in multicellular organisms, fusing to form new diploid cells.
DNA replication, or the process of duplicating a cell's genome, Replication, like all cellular activities, requires specialized proteins for carrying out the job.
The process is divided into three steps - protrusion of the leading edge of the cell, adhesion of the leading edge and de-adhesion at the cell body and rear, and cytoskeletal contraction to pull the cell forward.
Each step is driven by physical forces generated by unique segments of the cytoskeleton.
Multicellularity
Cell specialization
Multicellular organisms are organisms that consist of more than one cell, in contrast to single-celled organisms.
In complex multicellular organisms, cells specialize into different cell types that are adapted to particular functions.
In mammals, major cell types include skin cells, muscle cells, neurons, blood cells, fibroblasts, stem cells, and others.
Cell types differ both in appearance and function, yet are genetically identical.
Cells are able to be of the same genotype but of different cell type due to the differential expression of the genes they contain.
Most distinct cell types arise from a single totipotent cell, called a zygote, that differentiates into hundreds of different cell types during the course of development.
Differentiation of cells is driven by different environmental cues (such as cell-cell interaction) and intrinsic differences (such as those caused by the uneven distribution of molecules during division).
Origin of multicellularity
Multicellularity has evolved independently at least 25 times, including in some prokaryotes, like cyanobacteria, myxobacteria, actinomycetes, Magnetoglobus multicellularis or Methanosarcina.
However, complex multicellular organisms evolved only in six eukaryotic groups: animals, fungi, brown algae, red algae, green algae, and plants.
It evolved repeatedly for plants (Chloroplastida), once or twice for animals, once for brown algae, and perhaps several times for fungi, slime molds, and red algae.
Multicellularity may have evolved from colonies of interdependent organisms, from cellularization, or from organisms in symbiotic relationships.
The first evidence of multicellularity is from cyanobacteria-like organisms that lived between 3 and 3.5 billion years ago.
The evolution of multicellularity from unicellular ancestors has been replicated in the laboratory, in evolution experiments using predation as the selective pressure.
Cells emerged at least 3.5 billion years ago.
The current belief is that these cells were heterotrophs.
The early cell membranes were probably more simple and permeable than modern ones, with only a single fatty acid chain per lipid.
Lipids are known to spontaneously form bilayered vesicles in water, and could have preceded RNA, but the first cell membranes could also have been produced by catalytic RNA, or even have required structural proteins before they could form.
Origin of eukaryotic cells
The eukaryotic cell seems to have evolved from a symbiotic community of prokaryotic cells.
DNA-bearing organelles like the mitochondria and the chloroplasts are descended from ancient symbiotic oxygen-breathing proteobacteria and cyanobacteria, respectively, which were endosymbiosed by an ancestral archaean prokaryote.
There is still considerable debate about whether organelles like the hydrogenosome predated the origin of mitochondria, or vice versa: see the hydrogen hypothesis for the origin of eukaryotic cells.
History of research
* 1632-1723: Antonie van Leeuwenhoek taught himself to make lenses, constructed basic optical microscopes and drew protozoa, such as Vorticella from rain water, and bacteria from his own mouth.
* 1665: Robert Hooke discovered cells in cork, then in living plant tissue using an early compound microscope.
He coined the term cell (from Latin cella, meaning "small room"
* 1839: Theodor Schwann and Matthias Jakob Schleiden elucidated the principle that plants and animals are made of cells, concluding that cells are a common unit of structure and development, and thus founding the cell theory.
* 1855:
Rudolf Virchow stated that new cells come from pre-existing cells by cell division (omnis cellula ex cellula).
* 1859:
The belief that life forms can occur spontaneously (generatio spontanea) was contradicted by Louis Pasteur (1822-1895)
(although Francesco Redi had performed an experiment in 1668 that suggested the same conclusion).
* 1931: Ernst Ruska built the first transmission electron microscope (TEM) at the University of Berlin.
By 1935, he had built an EM with twice the resolution of a light microscope, revealing previously unresolvable organelles.
* 1953:
Based on Rosalind Franklin's work, Watson and Crick made their first announcement on the double helix structure of DNA.
* 1981: Lynn Margulis published Symbiosis in Cell Evolution detailing the endosymbiotic theory.
Notes
Further reading
* ; The https:/ books/bv.fcgi?rid
mboc4.TOC&depth
2 fourth edition is freely available from National Center for Biotechnology Information Bookshelf.
