Steven Paul Jobs (; February 24, 1955 - October 5, 2011) was an American business magnate, entrepreneur, industrial designer, investor, and media proprietor.
He was the chairman, chief executive officer (CEO), and co-founder of Apple Inc., the chairman and majority shareholder of Pixar, a member of The Walt Disney Company's board of directors following its acquisition of Pixar, and the founder, chairman, and CEO of NeXT.
Jobs is widely recognized as a pioneer of the microcomputer revolution of the 1970s and 1980s, along with Apple co-founder Steve Wozniak.
Jobs was born in San Francisco, California, and put up for adoption.
He was raised in the San Francisco Bay Area.
He attended Reed College in 1972 before dropping out that same year, and traveled through India in 1974 seeking enlightenment and studying Zen Buddhism.
His declassified FBI report states that he used marijuana and LSD while he was in college, and once told a reporter that taking LSD was "one of the two or three most important things" he had done in his life.
Jobs and Wozniak co-founded Apple in 1976 to sell Wozniak's Apple I personal computer.
Together the duo gained fame and wealth a year later with the Apple II, one of the first highly successful mass-produced personal computers.
Jobs saw the commercial potential of the Xerox Alto in 1979, which was mouse-driven and had a graphical user interface (GUI).
This led to development of the unsuccessful Apple Lisa in 1983, followed by the breakthrough Macintosh in 1984, the first mass-produced computer with a GUI.
The Macintosh introduced the desktop publishing industry in 1985 with the addition of the Apple LaserWriter, the first laser printer to feature vector graphics.
Jobs was forced out of Apple in 1985 after a long power struggle with the company's board and its then-CEO John Sculley.
That same year, Jobs took a few of Apple's members with him to found NeXT, a computer platform development company that specialized in computers for higher-education and business markets.
In addition, he helped to develop the visual effects industry when he funded the computer graphics division of George Lucas's Lucasfilm in 1986.
The new company was Pixar, which produced the first 3D computer animated film Toy Story (1995).
Apple merged with NeXT in 1997, and Jobs became CEO of his former company within a few months.
He was largely responsible for helping revive Apple, which had been at the verge of bankruptcy.
He worked closely with designer Jony Ive to develop a line of products that had larger cultural ramifications, beginning in 1997 with the "Think different" advertising campaign and leading to the iMac, iTunes, iTunes Store, Apple Store, iPod, iPhone, App Store, and the iPad.
In 2001, the original Mac OS was replaced with a completely new Mac OS X, based on NeXT's NeXTSTEP platform, giving the OS a modern Unix-based foundation for the first time.
Jobs was diagnosed with a pancreatic neuroendocrine tumor in 2003.
He died of respiratory arrest related to the tumor at age 56 on October 5, 2011.
Background
Biological and adoptive family
Steven Paul Jobs was born on February 24, 1955, to Abdulfattah Jandali and Joanne Schieble, and was adopted by Paul and Clara Jobs (née Hagopian).
His biological father, Abdulfattah "John" (al-)Jandali (, additionally states that Schieble's father "threatened to cut Joanne off completely" if she continued the relationship.
was a Coast Guard mechanic.
After leaving the Coast Guard, Paul Jobs married Clara Hagopian in 1946.
Clara, the daughter of Armenian immigrants, grew up in San Francisco.
Paul Jobs was a "repo man" who repaired cars.
Birth
QTEMPLATE box|width
30%|align
right|quote
"Of all the inventions of humans, the computer is going to rank near or at the top as history unfolds and we look back.
It is the most awesome tool that we have ever invented.
I feel incredibly lucky to be at exactly the right place in Silicon Valley, at exactly the right time, historically, where this invention has taken form.
"|source
-Steve Jobs, 1995.
From the documentary, Steve Jobs: The Lost Interview.
Schieble became pregnant with Jobs in 1954 when she and Jandali spent the summer with his family in Homs, Syria.
Jandali has stated that he "was very much in love with Joanne ...
but sadly, her father was a tyrant, and forbade her to marry me, as I was from Syria.
And so she told me she wanted to give the baby up for adoption."
According to Jandali, Schieble deliberately did not involve him in the process: "without telling me, Joanne upped and left to move to San Francisco to have the baby without anyone knowing, including me ...
she did not want to bring shame onto the family and thought this was the best for everyone."
Jobs would become upset when Paul and Clara were referred to as his "adoptive parents"; he regarded them as his parents "1,000%".
With regard to his biological parents, Jobs referred to them as "my sperm and egg bank.
That's not harsh, it's just the way it was, a sperm bank thing, nothing more."
When he was 13 in 1968, Jobs was given a summer job by Bill Hewlett (of Hewlett-Packard) after Jobs cold-called him to ask for parts for an electronics project.
In 1971 after Wozniak began attending University of California, Berkeley, Jobs would visit him there a few times a week.
This experience led him to study in nearby Stanford University's student union.
Jobs also decided that rather than join the electronics club, he would put on light shows with a friend for Homestead's avant-garde Jazz program.
He was described by a Homestead classmate as "kind of a brain and kind of a hippie ... but he never fit into either group.
He was smart enough to be a nerd, but wasn't nerdy.
And he was too intellectual for the hippies, who just wanted to get wasted all the time.
He was kind of an outsider.
In high school everything revolved around what group you were in, and if you weren't in a carefully defined group, you weren't anybody.
He was an individual, in a world where individuality was suspect."
By his senior year in late 1971, he was taking freshman English class at Stanford and working on a Homestead underground film project with Chrisann Brennan.
Reed College
QTEMPLATE box|width
30%|align
right|quote
"I was interested in Eastern mysticism which hit the shores about then.
At Reed there was a constant flow of people stopping by - from Timothy Leary and Richard Alpert, to Gary Snyder.
There was a constant flow of intellectual questioning about the truth of life.
That was the time when every college student in the country read Be Here Now and Diet for a Small Planet."|source
-Steve Jobs
QTEMPLATE box|width
30%|align
right|quote
I was lucky to get into computers when it was a very young and idealistic industry.
There weren't many degrees offered in computer science, so people in computers were brilliant people from mathematics, physics, music, zoology, whatever.
They loved it, and no one was really in it for the money ...
There are people around here who start companies just to make money, but the great companies, well, that's not what they're about."|source
-Steve Jobs
Pre-Apple
In mid-1973, Jobs moved back to the San Francisco Bay Area and was renting his own apartment.
Jobs hitchhiked and worked around the West Coast and Brennan would occasionally join him.
Jobs and Brennan remained involved with each other while continuing to see other people.
Atari's cofounder Nolan Bushnell later described him as "difficult but valuable", pointing out that "he was very often the smartest guy in the room, and he would let people know that."
By early 1974, Jobs was living what Brennan describes as a "simple life" in a Los Gatos cabin, working at Atari, and saving money for his impending trip to India.
to visit Neem Karoli Baba at his Kainchi ashram with his Reed friend (and eventual Apple employee)
Daniel Kottke, in search of spiritual enlightenment.
When they got to the Neem Karoli ashram, it was almost deserted because Neem Karoli Baba had died in September 1973.
and returned to the US ahead of Daniel Kottke.
During this time, Jobs experimented with psychedelics, later calling his LSD experiences "one of the two or three most important things he had done in his life".
He spent a period at the All One Farm, a commune in Oregon that was owned by Robert Friedland.
Brennan joined him there for a period.
He considered taking up monastic residence at Eihei-ji in Japan, and maintained a lifelong appreciation for Zen.
Jobs then returned to Atari and was assigned to create a circuit board for the arcade video game Breakout.
According to Bushnell, Atari offered for each TTL chip that was eliminated in the machine.
Jobs had little specialized knowledge of circuit board design and made a deal with Wozniak to split the fee evenly between them if Wozniak could minimize the number of chips.
Much to the amazement of Atari engineers, Wozniak reduced the TTL count to 46, a design so tight that it was impossible to reproduce on an assembly line.
According to Wozniak, Jobs told him that Atari gave them only $700 (instead of the $5,000 paid out), and that Wozniak's share was thus $350.
Wozniak did not learn about the actual bonus until ten years later, but said that if Jobs had told him about it and explained that he needed the money, Wozniak would have given it to him.
Wozniak had designed a low-cost digital "blue box" to generate the necessary tones to manipulate the telephone network, allowing free long-distance calls.
Jobs decided that they could make money selling it.
The clandestine sales of the illegal "blue boxes" went well and perhaps planted the seed in Jobs's mind that electronics could be both fun and profitable.
Jobs, in a 1994 interview, recalled that it took six months for him and Wozniak to figure out how to build the blue boxes.
Jobs said that if not for the blue boxes, there would have been no Apple.
He states it showed them that they could take on large companies and beat them.
Jobs and Wozniak attended meetings of the Homebrew Computer Club in 1975, which was a stepping stone to the development and marketing of the first Apple computer.
Apple (1976-1985)
QTEMPLATE box|width
30%|align
right|quote
"Basically Steve Wozniak and I invented the Apple because we wanted a personal computer.
Not only couldn't we afford the computers that were on the market, those computers were impractical for us to use.
We needed a Volkswagen.
The Volkswagen isn't as fast or comfortable as other ways of traveling, but the VW owners can go where they want, when they want and with whom they want.
The VW owners have personal control of their car.
"|source
-Steve Jobs.
Wayne stayed only a short time, leaving Jobs and Wozniak as the active primary cofounders of the company.
The two decided on the name "Apple" after Jobs returned from the All One Farm commune in Oregon and told Wozniak about his time spent in the farm's apple orchard.
A neighbor on Crist Drive recalled Jobs as an odd individual who would greet his clients "with his underwear hanging out, barefoot and hippie-like".
Scott McNealy, one of the cofounders of Sun Microsystems, said that Jobs broke a "glass age ceiling" in Silicon Valley because he'd created a very successful company at a young age.
QTEMPLATE box|width
30%|align
right|quote
"For what characterizes Apple is that its scientific staff always acted and performed like artists - in a field filled with dry personalities limited by the rational and binary worlds they inhabit, Apple's engineering teams had passion.
They always believed that what they were doing was important and, most of all, fun.
Working at Apple was never just a job; it was also a crusade, a mission, to bring better computer power to people.
At its roots that attitude came from Steve Jobs.
It was "Power to the People", the slogan of the sixties, rewritten in technology for the eighties and called ."|source
-Jeffrey S. Young, Steve Jobs: The Journey is the Reward (1987).
and was primarily designed by Wozniak.
Jobs oversaw the development of the Apple II's unusual case and Rod Holt developed the unique power supply.
Jobs usually went to work wearing a black long-sleeved mock turtleneck made by Issey Miyake (it was sometimes reported as St. Croix brand), Levi's 501 blue jeans, and New Balance 991 sneakers.
He said his choice was inspired by that of Stuart Geman, a noted applied mathematics professor at Brown University.
Jobs told his biographer Walter Isaacson "...he came to like the idea of having a uniform for himself, both because of its daily convenience (the rationale he claimed) and its ability to convey a signature style."
Brennan's relationship with Jobs deteriorated as his position with Apple grew, and she began to consider ending the relationship.
In October 1977, Brennan was approached by Rod Holt, who asked her to take "a paid apprenticeship designing blueprints for the Apples".
Jobs went there for the birth after he was contacted by Robert Friedland, their mutual friend and the farm owner.
While distant, Jobs worked with her on a name for the baby, which they discussed while sitting in the fields on a blanket.
Brennan suggested the name "Lisa" which Jobs also liked and notes that Jobs was very attached to the name "Lisa" while he "was also publicly denying paternity."
She would discover later that during this time, Jobs was preparing to unveil a new kind of computer that he wanted to give a female name (his first choice was "Claire" after St. Clare).
She also stated that she never gave him permission to use the baby's name for a computer and he hid the plans from her.
Jobs also worked with his team to come up with the phrase, "Local Integrated Software Architecture" as an alternative explanation for the Apple Lisa.
Decades later, however, Jobs admitted to his biographer Walter Isaacson that "obviously, it was named for my daughter".
In the issue, Jobs questioned the reliability of the paternity test (which stated that the "probability of paternity for Jobs, Steven... is 94.1%").
Jobs responded by arguing that "28% of the male population of the United States could be the father".
He was also one of the youngest "people ever to make the Forbes list of the nation's richest people-and one of only a handful to have done it themselves, without inherited wealth".
he spent years renovating it with the help of I. M. Pei.
In 2003, he sold it to U2 singer Bono.
In 1984, Jobs bought the Jackling House and estate, and resided there for a decade.
After that, he leased it out for several years until 2000 when he stopped maintaining the house, allowing exposure to the weather to degrade it.
In 2004, Jobs received permission from the town of Woodside to demolish the house in order to build a smaller contemporary styled one.
After a few years in court, the house was finally demolished in 2011, a few months before he died.
In early 1984, Apple introduced the Macintosh, which was based on The Lisa (and Xerox PARC's mouse-driven graphical user interface) and conceived by early Apple employee Jef Raskin.
The following year, Apple aired a Super Bowl television commercial titled "1984".
At Apple's annual shareholders meeting on January 24, 1984, an emotional Jobs introduced the Macintosh to a wildly enthusiastic audience; Andy Hertzfeld described the scene as "pandemonium".
Though marketed and received in fanfare, the expensive Macintosh was a hard sell.
Shortly after its release in 1985, Bill Gates's then-developing company, Microsoft, threatened to stop developing Mac applications unless it was granted "a license for the Mac operating system software.
Microsoft was developing its graphical user interface ... for DOS, which it was calling Windows and didn't want Apple to sue over the similarities between the Windows GUI and the Mac interface."
Although its products provided 85 percent of Apple's sales in early 1985, the company's January 1985 annual meeting did not mention the Apple II division or employees.
Many left including Wozniak, who stated that the company had "been going in the wrong direction for the last five years" and sold most of his stock.
The Macintosh's failure to defeat the PC strengthened Sculley's position in the company.
In May 1985, Sculley-encouraged by Arthur Rock-decided to reorganize Apple, and proposed a plan to the board that would remove Jobs from the Macintosh group and put him in charge of "New Product Development".
This move would effectively render Jobs powerless within Apple.
NeXT computer
Following his resignation from Apple in 1985, Jobs founded NeXT Inc. with $7 million.
A year later he was running out of money, and he sought venture capital with no product on the horizon.
Eventually, Jobs attracted the attention of billionaire Ross Perot, who invested heavily in the company.
a lavish invitation only gala launch event that was described as a multimedia extravaganza.
The celebration was held at the Louise M. Davies Symphony Hall, San Francisco, California on Wednesday October 12, 1988.
Steve Wozniak said in a 2013 interview that while Jobs was at NeXT he was "really getting his head together".
The NeXT workstation was known for its technical strengths, chief among them its object-oriented software development system.
Jobs marketed NeXT products to the financial, scientific, and academic community, highlighting its innovative, experimental new technologies, such as the Mach kernel, the digital signal processor chip, and the built-in Ethernet port.
Making use of a NeXT computer, English computer scientist Tim Berners-Lee invented the World Wide Web in 1990 at CERN in Switzerland.
The revised, second generation NeXTcube was released in 1990.
Jobs touted it as the first "interpersonal" computer that would replace the personal computer.
With its innovative NeXTMail multimedia email system, NeXTcube could share voice, image, graphics, and video in email for the first time.
"Interpersonal computing is going to revolutionize human communications and groupwork", Jobs told reporters.
Jobs ran NeXT with an obsession for aesthetic perfection, as evidenced by the development of and attention to NeXTcube's magnesium case.
This put considerable strain on NeXT's hardware division, and in 1993, after having sold only 50,000 machines, NeXT transitioned fully to software development with the release of NeXTSTEP/Intel.
The company reported its first profit of $1.03 million in 1994.
The first film produced by Pixar with its Disney partnership, Toy Story (1995), with Jobs credited as executive producer, brought fame and critical acclaim to the studio when it was released.
Over the next 15 years, under Pixar's creative chief John Lasseter, the company produced box-office hits A Bug's Life (1998); Toy Story 2 (1999); Monsters, Inc. (2001); Finding Nemo (2003); The Incredibles (2004); Cars (2006); Ratatouille (2007); WALL-E (2008); Up (2009); and Toy Story 3 (2010).
Finding Nemo, The Incredibles, Ratatouille, WALL-E, Up and Toy Story 3 each received the Academy Award for Best Animated Feature, an award introduced in 2001.
In 2003 and 2004, as Pixar's contract with Disney was running out, Jobs and Disney chief executive Michael Eisner tried but failed to negotiate a new partnership, and in January 2004, Jobs announced that he would never deal with Disney again.
Pixar would seek a new partner to distribute its films after its contract expired.
In October 2005, Bob Iger replaced Eisner at Disney, and Iger quickly worked to mend relations with Jobs and Pixar.
On January 24, 2006, Jobs and Iger announced that Disney had agreed to purchase Pixar in an all-stock transaction worth $7.4 billion.
When the deal closed, Jobs became The Walt Disney Company's largest single shareholder with approximately seven percent of the company's stock.
Jobs's holdings in Disney far exceeded those of Eisner, who holds 1.7%, and of Disney family member Roy E. Disney, who until his 2009 death held about 1% of the company's stock and whose criticisms of Eisner-especially that he soured Disney's relationship with Pixar-accelerated Eisner's ousting.
Upon completion of the merger, Jobs received 7% of Disney shares, and joined the board of directors as the largest individual shareholder.
Upon Jobs's death his shares in Disney were transferred to the Steven P. Jobs Trust led by Laurene Jobs.
After Jobs's death Iger recalled in 2019 that many warned him about Jobs, "that he would bully me and everyone else".
Iger wrote, "Who wouldn't want Steve Jobs to have influence over how a company is run?", and that as an active Disney board member "he rarely created trouble for me.
Not never but rarely".
He speculated that they would have seriously considered merging Disney and Apple had Jobs lived.
Floyd Norman, of Pixar, described Jobs as a "mature, mellow individual" who never interfered with the creative process of the filmmakers.
In early June 2014, Pixar cofounder and Walt Disney Animation Studios President Ed Catmull revealed that Jobs once advised him to "just explain it to them until they understand" in disagreements.
Catmull released the book Creativity, Inc. in 2014, in which he recounts numerous experiences of working with Jobs.
Regarding his own manner of dealing with Jobs, Catmull writes:
QTEMPLATE |In all the 26 years with Steve, Steve and I never had one of these loud verbal arguments and it's not my nature to do that. ...
but we did disagree fairly frequently about things.
I would say something to him and he would immediately shoot it down because he could think faster than I could.
I would then wait a week ...
I'd call him up and I give my counter argument to what he had said and he'd immediately shoot it down.
So I had to wait another week, and sometimes this went on for months.
But in the end one of three things happened.
About a third of the time he said, 'Oh, I get it, you're right.'
And that was the end of it.
And it was another third of the time in which I'd say, 'Actually I think he is right.'
The other third of the time, where we didn't reach consensus, he just let me do it my way, never said anything more about it.
Family
Chrisann Brennan notes that after Jobs was forced out of Apple, "he apologized many times over for his behavior" towards her and Lisa.
She also states that Jobs "said that he never took responsibility when he should have, and that he was sorry".
By this time, Jobs had developed a strong relationship with Lisa and when she was nine, Jobs had her name on her birth certificate changed from "Lisa Brennan" to "Lisa Brennan-Jobs".
In 1989, Jobs first met his future wife, Laurene Powell, when he gave a lecture at the Stanford Graduate School of Business, where she was a student.
Soon after the event, he stated that Laurene "was right there in the front row in the lecture hall, and I couldn't take my eyes off of her ... kept losing my train of thought, and started feeling a little giddy."
Jobs's father, Paul, died a year and a half later, on March 5, 1993.
Jobs and Powell had two more children, Erin, born in August 1995, and Eve, born in 1998.
A journalist who grew up locally remembered him as owning the house with "the scariest Halloween decorations in Palo Alto...
I don't remember seeing him.
I was busy being terrified."
Return to Apple
In 1996, Apple announced that it would buy NeXT for $427 million.
The deal was finalized in February 1997, bringing Jobs back to the company he had cofounded.
Jobs became de facto chief after then-CEO Gil Amelio was ousted in July 1997.
He was formally named interim chief executive in September.
In March 1998, to concentrate Apple's efforts on returning to profitability, Jobs terminated a number of projects, such as Newton, Cyberdog, and OpenDoc.
In the coming months, many employees developed a fear of encountering Jobs while riding in the elevator, "afraid that they might not have a job when the doors opened.
The reality was that Jobs's summary executions were rare, but a handful of victims was enough to terrorize a whole company."
Jobs changed the licensing program for Macintosh clones, making it too costly for the manufacturers to continue making machines.
With the purchase of NeXT, much of the company's technology found its way into Apple products, most notably NeXTSTEP, which evolved into Mac OS X. Under Jobs's guidance, the company increased sales significantly with the introduction of the iMac and other new products; since then, appealing designs and powerful branding have worked well for Apple.
At the 2000 Macworld Expo, Jobs officially dropped the "interim" modifier from his title at Apple and became permanent CEO.
Jobs quipped at the time that he would be using the title "iCEO".
The company subsequently branched out, introducing and improving upon other digital appliances.
With the introduction of the iPod portable music player, iTunes digital music software, and the iTunes Store, the company made forays into consumer electronics and music distribution.
On June 29, 2007, Apple entered the cellular phone business with the introduction of the iPhone, a multi-touch display cell phone, which also included the features of an iPod and, with its own mobile browser, revolutionized the mobile browsing scene.
While nurturing open-ended innovation, Jobs also reminded his employees that "real artists ship".
Jobs had a public war of words with Dell Computer CEO Michael Dell, starting in 1987, when Jobs first criticized Dell for making "un-innovative beige boxes".
On October 6, 1997, at a Gartner Symposium, when Dell was asked what he would do if he ran the then-troubled Apple Computer company, he said: "I'd shut it down and give the money back to the shareholders."
Then, in 2006, Jobs sent an email to all employees when Apple's market capitalization rose above Dell's:
QTEMPLATE |Team, it turned out that Michael Dell wasn't perfect at predicting the future.
Based on today's stock market close, Apple is worth more than Dell.
Stocks go up and down, and things may be different tomorrow, but I thought it was worth a moment of reflection today.
Steve.
Jobs was both admired and criticized for his consummate skill at persuasion and salesmanship, which has been dubbed the "reality distortion field" and was particularly evident during his keynote speeches (colloquially known as "Stevenotes") at Macworld Expos and at Apple Worldwide Developers Conferences.
Jobs was a board member at Gap Inc. from 1999 to 2002.
In 2001, Jobs was granted stock options in the amount of 7.5 million shares of Apple with an exercise price of $18.30.
It was alleged that the options had been backdated, and that the exercise price should have been $21.10.
It was further alleged that Jobs had thereby incurred taxable income of $20,000,000 that he did not report, and that Apple overstated its earnings by that same amount.
As a result, Jobs potentially faced a number of criminal charges and civil penalties.
The case was the subject of active criminal and civil government investigations, though an independent internal Apple investigation completed on December 29, 2006 found that Jobs was unaware of these issues and that the options granted to him were returned without being exercised in 2003.
In 2005, Jobs responded to criticism of Apple's poor recycling programs for e-waste in the US by lashing out at environmental and other advocates at Apple's annual meeting in Cupertino in April.
A few weeks later, Apple announced it would take back iPods for free at its retail stores.
The Computer TakeBack Campaign responded by flying a banner from a plane over the Stanford University graduation at which Jobs was the commencement speaker.
The banner read "Steve, don't be a mini-player-recycle all e-waste."
In 2006, he further expanded Apple's recycling programs to any US customer who buys a new Mac.
This program includes shipping and "environmentally friendly disposal" of their old systems.
The success of Apple's unique products and services provided several years of stable financial returns, propelling Apple to become the world's most valuable publicly traded company in 2011.
Jobs was perceived as a demanding perfectionist who always aspired to position his businesses and their products at the forefront of the information technology industry by foreseeing and setting innovation and style trends.
He summed up this self-concept at the end of his keynote speech at the Macworld Conference and Expo in January 2007, by quoting ice hockey player Wayne Gretzky:
QTEMPLATE |There's an old Wayne Gretzky quote that I love.
"I skate to where the puck is going to be, not where it has been."
And we've always tried to do that at Apple.
Since the very, very beginning.
And we always will.
On July 1, 2008, a billion class action suit was filed against several members of the Apple board of directors for revenue lost because of alleged securities fraud.
In a 2011 interview with biographer Walter Isaacson, Jobs revealed that he had met with US President Barack Obama, complained about the nation's shortage of software engineers, and told Obama that he was "headed for a one-term presidency".
Health issues
In October 2003, Jobs was diagnosed with cancer.
In mid-2004, he announced to his employees that he had a cancerous tumor in his pancreas.
Jobs stated that he had a rare, much less aggressive type, known as islet cell neuroendocrine tumor.
Despite his diagnosis, Jobs resisted his doctors' recommendations for medical intervention for nine months, instead relying on alternative medicine to thwart the disease.
According to Harvard researcher Ramzi Amri, his choice of alternative treatment "led to an unnecessarily early death".
Other doctors agree that Jobs's diet was insufficient to address his disease.
However, cancer researcher and alternative medicine critic David Gorski wrote that "it's impossible to know whether and by how much he might have decreased his chances of surviving his cancer through his flirtation with woo.
My best guess was that Jobs probably only modestly decreased his chances of survival, if that."
Barrie R. Cassileth, the chief of Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center's integrative medicine department, said, "Jobs's faith in alternative medicine likely cost him his life....
He had the only kind of pancreatic cancer that is treatable and curable....
He essentially committed suicide."
According to Jobs's biographer, Walter Isaacson, "for nine months he refused to undergo surgery for his pancreatic cancer - a decision he later regretted as his health declined".
"Instead, he tried a vegan diet, acupuncture, herbal remedies, and other treatments he found online, and even consulted a psychic.
He was also influenced by a doctor who ran a clinic that advised juice fasts, bowel cleansings and other unproven approaches, before finally having surgery in July 2004."
He eventually underwent a pancreaticoduodenectomy (or "Whipple procedure") in July 2004, that appeared to remove the tumor successfully.
Jobs did not receive chemotherapy or radiation therapy.
During Jobs's absence, Tim Cook, head of worldwide sales and operations at Apple, ran the company.
In early August 2006, Jobs delivered the keynote for Apple's annual Worldwide Developers Conference.
His "thin, almost gaunt" appearance and unusually "listless" delivery, together with his choice to delegate significant portions of his keynote to other presenters, inspired a flurry of media and Internet speculation about the state of his health.
In contrast, according to an Ars Technica journal report, Worldwide Developers Conference (WWDC) attendees who saw Jobs in person said he "looked fine".
Following the keynote, an Apple spokesperson said that "Steve's health is robust."
Two years later, similar concerns followed Jobs's 2008 WWDC keynote address.
Apple officials stated that Jobs was victim to a "common bug" and was taking antibiotics, while others surmised his cachectic appearance was due to the Whipple procedure.
Based on an off-the-record phone conversation with Jobs, The New York Times reported, "While his health problems amounted to a good deal more than 'a common bug', they weren't life-threatening and he doesn't have a recurrence of cancer."
On August 28, 2008, Bloomberg mistakenly published a 2500-word obituary of Jobs in its corporate news service, containing blank spaces for his age and cause of death.
News carriers customarily stockpile up-to-date obituaries to facilitate news delivery in the event of a well-known figure's death.
Although the error was promptly rectified, many news carriers and blogs reported on it, intensifying rumors concerning Jobs's health.
Jobs responded at Apple's September 2008 Let's Rock keynote by paraphrasing Mark Twain: "Reports of my death are greatly exaggerated."
At a subsequent media event, Jobs concluded his presentation with a slide reading "110/70", referring to his blood pressure, stating he would not address further questions about his health.
On December 16, 2008, Apple announced that marketing vice-president Phil Schiller would deliver the company's final keynote address at the Macworld Conference and Expo 2009, again reviving questions about Jobs's health.
In a statement given on January 5, 2009, on , Jobs said that he had been suffering from a "hormone imbalance" for several months.
On January 14, 2009, Jobs wrote in an internal Apple memo that in the previous week he had "learned that my health-related issues are more complex than I originally thought".
He announced a six-month leave of absence until the end of June 2009, to allow him to better focus on his health.
Tim Cook, who previously acted as CEO in Jobs's 2004 absence, became acting CEO of Apple, with Jobs still involved with "major strategic decisions".
In April 2009, Jobs underwent a liver transplant at Methodist University Hospital Transplant Institute in Memphis, Tennessee.
Jobs's prognosis was described as "excellent".
Resignation
On January 17, 2011, a year and a half after Jobs returned to work following the liver transplant, Apple announced that he had been granted a medical leave of absence.
Jobs announced his leave in a letter to employees, stating his decision was made "so he could focus on his health".
As it did at the time of his 2009 medical leave, Apple announced that Tim Cook would run day-to-day operations and that Jobs would continue to be involved in major strategic decisions at the company.
While on leave, Jobs appeared at the iPad 2 launch event on March 2, the WWDC keynote introducing iCloud on June 6, and before the Cupertino City Council on June 7.
On August 24, 2011, Jobs announced his resignation as Apple's CEO, writing to the board, "I have always said if there ever came a day when I could no longer meet my duties and expectations as Apple's CEO, I would be the first to let you know.
Unfortunately, that day has come."
Jobs became chairman of the board and named Tim Cook as his successor as CEO.
Jobs continued to work for Apple until the day before his death six weeks later.
Death
Jobs died at his Palo Alto, California, home around 3 p.m. (PDT) on October 5, 2011, due to complications from a relapse of his previously treated islet-cell pancreatic neuroendocrine tumor, which resulted in respiratory arrest.
He had lost consciousness the day before and died with his wife, children, and sisters at his side.
A small private funeral was held on October 7, 2011, the details of which, out of respect for Jobs's family, were not made public.
Apple and Pixar each issued announcements of his death.
Apple announced on the same day that they had no plans for a public service, but were encouraging "well-wishers" to send their remembrance messages to an email address created to receive such messages.
Apple and Microsoft both flew their flags at half-staff throughout their respective headquarters and campuses.
Bob Iger ordered all Disney properties, including Walt Disney World and Disneyland, to fly their flags at half-staff from October 6 to 12, 2011.
For two weeks following his death, Apple displayed on its corporate Web site a simple page that showed Jobs's name and lifespan next to his grayscale portrait.
On October 19, 2011, Apple employees held a private memorial service for Jobs on the Apple campus in Cupertino.
Jobs's widow, Laurene, was in attendance, as well as Cook, Bill Campbell, Norah Jones, Al Gore, and Coldplay.
California Governor Jerry Brown declared Sunday, October 16, 2011, to be "Steve Jobs Day".
On that day, an invitation-only memorial was held at Stanford University.
Those in attendance included Apple and other tech company executives, members of the media, celebrities, close friends of Jobs, and politicians, along with Jobs's family.
Bono, Yo Yo Ma, and Joan Baez performed at the service, which lasted longer than an hour.
The service was highly secured, with guards at all of the university's gates, and a helicopter flying overhead from an area news station.
Each attendee was given a small brown box as a "farewell gift" from Jobs.
The box contained a copy of the Autobiography of a Yogi by Paramahansa Yogananda.
Apple co-founder Steve Wozniak, former owner of what would become Pixar, George Lucas, former rival, Microsoft co-founder Bill Gates, and President Barack Obama all offered statements in response to his death.
Jobs is buried in an unmarked grave at Alta Mesa Memorial Park, the only nonsectarian cemetery in Palo Alto.
Portrayals and coverage in books, film, and theater
Steve Jobs is the subject of a number of books and films.
Lisa Brennan-Jobs, Jobs's eldest daughter, described Jobs in her memoir as sexually inappropriate and described patterns of cruel behavior by him during her adolescent years.
Innovations and designs
Jobs's design aesthetic was influenced by philosophies of Zen and Buddhism.
In India, he experienced Buddhism while on his seven-month spiritual journey, and his sense of intuition was influenced by the spiritual people with whom he studied.
and Dieter Rams.
According to Apple co-founder Steve Wozniak, "Steve didn't ever code.
He wasn't an engineer and he didn't do any original design..."
Daniel Kottke, one of Apple's earliest employees and a college friend of Jobs's, stated that "Between Woz and Jobs, Woz was the innovator, the inventor.
Steve Jobs was the marketing person."
He is listed as either primary inventor or co-inventor in 346 United States patents or patent applications related to a range of technologies from actual computer and portable devices to user interfaces (including touch-based), speakers, keyboards, power adapters, staircases, clasps, sleeves, lanyards and packages.
Jobs's contributions to most of his patents were to "the look and feel of the product".
His industrial design chief Jonathan Ive had his name along with him for 200 of the patents.
Most of these are design patents (specific product designs; for example, Jobs listed as primary inventor in patents for both original and lamp-style iMacs, as well as PowerBook G4 Titanium) as opposed to utility patents (inventions).
He has 43 issued US patents on inventions.
Although Jobs had little involvement in the engineering and technical side of the original Apple computers,
Involved in many projects throughout his career was his long-time marketing executive and confidant Joanna Hoffman, known as one of the few employees at Apple and NeXT who could successfully stand up to Jobs while also engaging with him.
Even while terminally ill in the hospital, Jobs sketched new devices that would hold the iPad in a hospital bed.
Since his death, the former Apple CEO has won 141 patents, more than most inventors win during their lifetimes.
Currently, Jobs holds over 450 patents.
Apple II
The Apple II is an 8-bit home computer, one of the world's first highly successful mass-produced microcomputer products, The Lisa sold poorly, with only 100,000 units sold.
In 1982, after Jobs was forced out of the Lisa project, he joined the Macintosh project.
The Macintosh is not a direct descendant of Lisa, although there are obvious similarities between the systems.
The final revision, the Lisa 2/10, was modified and sold as the Macintosh XL.
Macintosh
Once he joined the original Macintosh team, Jobs took over the project after Wozniak had experienced a traumatic airplane accident and temporarily left the company.
Jobs introduced the Macintosh computer on January 24, 1984.
This was the first mass-market personal computer featuring an integral graphical user interface and mouse.
This first model was later renamed to "Macintosh 128k" for uniqueness amongst a populous family of subsequently updated models which are also based on Apple's same proprietary architecture.
Since 1998, Apple has largely phased out the Macintosh name in favor of "Mac", though the product family has been nicknamed "Mac" or "the Mac" since the development of the first model.
The Macintosh was introduced by a US$1.5 million Ridley Scott television commercial, "1984".
It most notably aired during the third quarter of Super Bowl XVIII on January 22, 1984, and some people consider the ad a "watershed event" and a "masterpiece".
Regis McKenna called the ad "more successful than the Mac itself".
"1984" uses an unnamed heroine to represent the coming of the Macintosh (indicated by a Picasso-style picture of the computer on her white tank top) as a means of saving humanity from the conformity of IBM's attempts to dominate the computer industry.
The ad alludes to George Orwell's novel, Nineteen Eighty-Four, which describes a dystopian future ruled by a televised "Big Brother."
The Macintosh, however, was expensive, which hindered its ability to be competitive in a market already dominated by the Commodore 64 for consumers, as well as the IBM Personal Computer and its accompanying clone market for businesses.
Macintosh systems still found success in education and desktop publishing and kept Apple as the second-largest PC manufacturer for the next decade.
NeXT Computer
After Jobs was forced out of Apple in 1985, he started a company that built workstation computers.
The NeXT Computer was introduced in 1988 at a lavish launch event.
Tim Berners-Lee created the world's first web browser (WorldWideWeb) using the NeXT Computer.
The NeXT Computer's operating system, named NeXTSTEP, was the basis for Darwin, the kernel for the operating system on most of Apple's products (namely, macOS, iOS, watchOS, and audioOS)
iMac
Apple iMac was introduced in 1998 and its innovative design was directly the result of Jobs's return to Apple.
Apple boasted "the back of our computer looks better than the front of anyone else's."
Described as "cartoonlike", the first iMac, clad in Bondi Blue plastic, was unlike any personal computer that came before.
In 1999, Apple introduced the Graphite gray Apple iMac and since has varied the shape, colour and size considerably while maintaining the all-in-one design.
Design ideas were intended to create a connection with the user such as the handle and a breathing light effect when the computer went to sleep.
The Apple iMac sold for $1,299 at that time.
The iMac also featured forward-thinking changes, such as eschewing the floppy disk drive and moving exclusively to USB for connecting peripherals.
This latter change resulted, through the iMac's success, in the interface being popularised among third-party peripheral makers-as evidenced by the fact that many early USB peripherals were made of translucent plastic (to match the iMac design).
iTunes
iTunes is a media player, media library, online radio broadcaster, and mobile device management application developed by Apple.
It is used to play, download, and organize digital audio and video (as well as other types of media available on the iTunes Store) on personal computers running the macOS and Microsoft Windows operating systems.
The iTunes Store is also available on the iPod Touch, iPhone, and iPad.
Through the iTunes Store, users can purchase and download music, music videos, television shows, audiobooks, podcasts, movies, and movie rentals in some countries, and ringtones, available on the iPhone and iPod Touch (fourth generation onward).
Application software for the iPhone, iPad and iPod Touch can be downloaded from the App Store.
iPod
The first generation of iPod was released October 23, 2001.
The major innovation of the iPod was its small size achieved by using a 1.8" hard drive compared to the 2.5" drives common to players at that time.
The capacity of the first generation iPod ranged from 5 GB to 10 GB.
The iPod sold for US$399 and more than 100,000 iPods were sold before the end of 2001.
The introduction of the iPod resulted in Apple becoming a major player in the music industry.
Also, the iPod's success prepared the way for the iTunes music store and the iPhone.
After the 1st generation of iPod, Apple released the hard drive-based iPod Classic, the touchscreen iPod Touch, the video-capable iPod Nano, and the screenless iPod Shuffle in the following years.
The completed iPhone had multimedia capabilities and functioned as a quad-band touch screen smartphone.
A year later, the iPhone 3G was released in July 2008 with three key features: support for GPS, 3G data and tri-band UMTS/HSDPA.
In June 2009, the iPhone 3GS, whose improvements included voice control, a better camera, and a faster processor, was introduced by Phil Schiller.
The iPhone 4 is thinner than previous models, has a five megapixel camera capable of recording video in 720p HD, and adds a secondary front-facing camera for video calls.
A major feature of the iPhone 4S, introduced in October 2011, was Siri, a virtual assistant capable of voice recognition.
Honors and awards
* 1985:
National Medal of Technology (with Steve Wozniak), awarded by US President Ronald Reagan
* 2007: Named the most powerful person in business by Fortune magazine
* 2007: Inducted into the California Hall of Fame, located at The California Museum for History, Women and the Arts
* 2012: Grammy Trustees Award, an award for those who have influenced the music industry in areas unrelated to performance
