George Gordon Byron, 6th Baron Byron (22 January 1788 - 19 April 1824), known simply as Lord Byron, was an English poet, peer, and politician who became a revolutionary in the Greek War of Independence, and is considered one of the historical leading figures of the Romantic movement of his era.
He is regarded as one of the greatest English poets and remains widely read and influential.
Among his best-known works are the lengthy narrative poems Don Juan and Childe Harold's Pilgrimage; many of his shorter lyrics in Hebrew Melodies also became popular.
He travelled extensively across Europe, especially in Italy, where he lived for seven years in the cities of Venice, Ravenna and Pisa.
During his stay in Italy he frequently visited his friend and fellow poet Percy Bysshe Shelley.
Later in life Byron joined the Greek War of Independence fighting the Ottoman Empire and died of disease leading a campaign during that war, for which Greeks revere him as a national hero.
He died in 1824 at the age of 36 from a fever contracted after the First and Second Siege of Missolonghi.
Often described as the most flamboyant and notorious of the major Romantics, Byron was considered a celebrity in his era both for his success as a Romantic poet and for his aristocratic excesses, which included huge debts and many sex scandals - numerous love affairs with both men and women in a time when bisexuality was considered a crime, as well as rumours of a scandalous, incestuous liaison with his half-sister.
Byron's illegitimate children include Allegra Byron, who died in childhood, and possibly Elizabeth Medora Leigh.
Early life
Ethel Colburn Mayne states that George Gordon Byron was born on 22 January 1788, in a house on 16 Holles Street in London.
His birthplace is now occupied by a branch of the English department store John Lewis.
However, Robert Charles Dallas in his Recollections states that Byron was born in Dover.
Byron was the son of Captain John "Mad Jack" Byron and his second wife, the former Catherine Gordon (d. 1811), a descendant of Cardinal Beaton and heiress of the Gight estate in Aberdeenshire, Scotland.
Byron's father had previously seduced the married Marchioness of Carmarthen and, after she divorced her husband, he married her.
His treatment of her was described as "brutal and vicious", and she died after giving birth to two daughters, only one of whom survived, Byron's half-sister, Augusta.
To claim his second wife's estate in Scotland, Byron's father took the additional surname "Gordon", becoming "John Byron Gordon", and he was occasionally styled "John Byron Gordon of Gight."
Byron himself used this surname for a time and was registered at school in Aberdeen as "George Byron Gordon."
At the age of 10 he inherited the English Barony of Byron of Rochdale, becoming "Lord Byron", and eventually dropped the double surname.
Byron's paternal grandparents were Vice-Admiral the Hon.
John "Foulweather Jack" Byron, and Sophia Trevanion.
Vice Admiral John Byron had circumnavigated the globe and was the younger brother of the 5th Baron Byron, known as "the Wicked Lord".
He was christened at St Marylebone Parish Church as "George Gordon Byron", after his maternal grandfather George Gordon of Gight, a descendant of James I of Scotland, who had committed suicide in 1779.
"Mad Jack" Byron married his second wife for the same reason that he married his first, her fortune.
Byron's mother had to sell her land and title to pay her new husband's debts, and in the space of two years, the large estate, worth some £23,500, had been squandered, leaving the former heiress with an annual income in trust of only £150.
When Byron's great-uncle, the "wicked" Lord Byron, died on 21 May 1798, the 10-year-old boy became the sixth Baron Byron of Rochdale and inherited the ancestral home, Newstead Abbey, in Nottinghamshire.
His mother proudly took him to England, but the Abbey was in an embarrassing state of disrepair and, rather than living there, she decided to lease it to Lord Grey de Ruthyn, among others, during Byron's adolescence.
Described as "a woman without judgment or self-command," Catherine either spoiled and indulged her son or vexed him with her capricious stubbornness.
Her drinking disgusted him and he often mocked her for being short and corpulent, which made it difficult for her to catch him to discipline him.
Byron had been born with a deformed right foot; his mother once retaliated and, in a fit of temper, referred to him as "a lame brat."
However, Byron's biographer, Doris Langley-Moore, in her 1974 book, Accounts Rendered, paints a more sympathetic view of Mrs Byron, showing how she was a staunch supporter of her son and sacrificed her own precarious finances to keep him in luxury at Harrow and Cambridge.
Langley-Moore questions the Galt claim that she over-indulged in alcohol.
Upon the death of Byron's mother-in-law Judith Noel, the Hon.
Lady Milbanke, in 1822, her will required that he change his surname to "Noel" so as to inherit half of her estate.
He obtained a Royal Warrant, allowing him to "take and use the surname of Noel only" and to "subscribe the said surname of Noel before all titles of honour".
From that point he signed himself "Noel Byron" (the usual signature of a peer being merely the peerage, in this case simply "Byron").
It is speculated that this was so that his initials would read "N.B.", mimicking those of his hero, Napoleon Bonaparte.
Lady Byron eventually succeeded to the Barony of Wentworth, becoming "Lady Wentworth."
Education and early loves
Byron received his early formal education at Aberdeen Grammar School, and in August 1799 entered the school of Dr. William Glennie, in Dulwich.
His lack of moderation was not restricted to physical exercise.
Byron fell in love with Mary Chaworth, whom he met while at school,
Byron finally returned in January 1804, The most enduring of those was with John FitzGibbon, 2nd Earl of Clare - four years Byron's junior - whom he was to meet unexpectedly many years later in Italy (1821).
His nostalgic poems about his Harrow friendships, Childish Recollections (1806), express a prescient "consciousness of sexual differences that may in the end make England untenable to him."
Letters to Byron in the John Murray archive contain evidence of a previously unremarked if short-lived romantic relationship with a younger boy at Harrow, John Thomas Claridge.
The following autumn, he went up to Trinity College, Cambridge, where he met and formed a close friendship with the younger John Edleston.
About his "protégé" he wrote, "He has been my almost constant associate since October, 1805, when I entered Trinity College.
His voice first attracted my attention, his countenance fixed it, and his manners attached me to him for ever."
In his memory Byron composed Thyrza, a series of elegies.
In later years, he described the affair as "a violent, though pure love and passion".
This statement, however, needs to be read in the context of hardening public attitudes toward homosexuality in England and the severe sanctions (including public hanging) against convicted or even suspected offenders.
The liaison, on the other hand, may well have been "pure" out of respect for Edleston's innocence, in contrast to the (probably) more sexually overt relations experienced at Harrow School.
The poem "The Cornelian" was written about the cornelian that Byron received from Edleston.
Byron spent three years at Trinity College, engaging in sexual escapades, boxing, horse riding and gambling.
Also while at Cambridge he formed lifelong friendships with men such as John Cam Hobhouse, who initiated him into the Cambridge Whig Club, which endorsed liberal politics, However, it was promptly recalled and burned on the advice of his friend, the Reverend J. T. Becher, on account of its more amorous verses, particularly the poem To Mary.
Hours of Idleness, which collected many of the previous poems, along with more recent compositions, was the culminating book.
The savage, anonymous criticism this received (now known to be the work of Henry Peter Brougham) in the Edinburgh Review prompted his first major satire, Alexander Dallas gave a large series of changes and alterations, as well as the reasoning for some of them.
He also stated that Byron had originally intended to prefix an argument to this poem, and Dallas quoted it.
Although the work was published anonymously, by April, R. C. Dallas wrote that "you are already pretty generally known to be the author."
The work so upset some of his critics they challenged Byron to a duel; over time, in subsequent editions, it became a mark of prestige to be the target of Byron's pen.
In his own words, "I awoke one morning and found myself famous."
He followed up his success with the poem's last two cantos, as well as four equally celebrated "Oriental Tales": The Giaour, The Bride of Abydos, The Corsair, and Lara.
About the same time, he began his intimacy with his future biographer, Thomas Moore.
First travels to the East
Byron racked up numerous debts as a young man, owing to what his mother termed a "reckless disregard for money".
Byron went on the Grand Tour, then customary for a young nobleman.
He travelled with Hobhouse for the first year and his entourage of servants included Byron's trustworthy valet, William Fletcher.
Fletcher was often the butt of Hobhouse and Byron’s humour.
The Napoleonic Wars forced him to avoid most of Europe, and he instead turned to the Mediterranean.
The journey provided the opportunity to flee creditors, as well as a former love, Mary Chaworth (the subject of his poem from this time, "To a Lady: On Being Asked My Reason for Quitting England in the Spring").
Attraction to the Levant was probably also a reason; he had read about the Ottoman and Persian lands as a child, was attracted to Islam (especially Sufi mysticism), and later wrote, "With these countries, and events connected with them, all my really poetical feelings begin and end."
Byron began his trip in Portugal from where he wrote a letter to his friend Mr. Hodgson in which he describes his mastery of the Portuguese language, consisting mainly of swearing and insults.
Byron particularly enjoyed his stay in Sintra that is described in Childe Harold's Pilgrimage as "glorious Eden".
From Lisbon he travelled overland to Seville, Jerez de la Frontera, Cádiz, and Gibraltar, and from there by sea on to Malta and Greece.
While in Athens, Byron met 14-year-old Nicolo Giraud, with whom he became quite close and who taught him Italian.
It has been suggested that the two had an intimate relationship involving a sexual affair.
Byron sent Giraud to school at a monastery in Malta and bequeathed him a sizeable sum of £7,000 pounds sterling.
The will, however, was later cancelled.
"I am tired of pl & opt Cs, the last thing I could be tired of", Byron wrote to Hobhouse from Athens , which, as an earlier letter establishes, was their shared code for homosexual experience.
In 1810 in Athens Byron wrote Maid of Athens, ere we part for a 12-year-old girl, Teresa Makri (1798-1875).
Byron made his way to Smyrna, where he and Hobhouse cadged a ride to Constantinople on HMS Salsette.
While Salsette was anchored awaiting Ottoman permission to dock at the city, on 3 May 1810 Byron and Lieutenant Ekenhead, of Salsettes Marines, swam the Hellespont.
Byron commemorated this feat in the second canto of Don Juan.
He returned to England from Malta in July 1811 aboard .
England 1811-1816
Byron became a celebrity with the publication of the first two cantos of Childe Harold's Pilgrimage (1812).
"He rapidly became the most brilliant star in the dazzling world of Regency London.
He was sought after at every society venue, elected to several exclusive clubs, and frequented the most fashionable London drawing-rooms."
Several times Byron went to see Germaine de Staël and her Coppet group, which turned out to be a valid intellectual and emotional support to Byron at the time.
Kept indoors at the Villa Diodati by the "incessant rain" of "that wet, ungenial summer" over three days in June, the five turned to reading fantastical stories, including Fantasmagoriana, and then devising their own tales.
Mary Shelley produced what would become Frankenstein, or The Modern Prometheus, and Polidori produced The Vampyre, the progenitor of the Romantic vampire genre.
The Vampyre was the inspiration for a fragmentary story of Byron's, "A Fragment".
Byron's story fragment was published as a postscript to Mazeppa; he also wrote the third canto of Childe Harold.
Byron wintered in Venice, pausing his travels when he fell in love with Marianna Segati, in whose Venice house he was lodging, and who was soon replaced by 22-year-old Margarita Cogni; both women were married.
His fascination was so great that he even considered a replacement of the Cain story of the Bible with that of the legend of Armenian patriarch Haik.
Of Byron's lifestyle in Ravenna we know more from Shelley, who documented some of its more colourful aspects in a letter: "Lord Byron gets up at two.
I get up, quite contrary to my usual custom … at 12.
After breakfast we sit talking till six.
From six to eight we gallop through the pine forest which divide Ravenna from the sea; we then come home and dine, and sit up gossiping till six in the morning.
I don’t suppose this will kill me in a week or fortnight, but I shall not try it longer.
Lord B.’s establishment consists, besides servants, of ten horses, eight enormous dogs, three monkeys, five cats, an eagle, a crow, and a falcon; and all these, except the horses, walk about the house, which every now and then resounds with their unarbitrated quarrels, as if they were the masters of it… .
P.S.
I find that my enumeration of the animals in this Circean Palace was defective … .
I have just met on the grand staircase five peacocks, two guinea hens, and an Egyptian crane.
I wonder who all these animals were before they were changed into these shapes."
In 1821 Byron left Ravenna and went to live in the Tuscan city of Pisa, to which Teresa had also relocated.
From 1821 to 1822, Byron finished Cantos 6-12 of Don Juan at Pisa, and in the same year he joined with Leigh Hunt and Shelley in starting a short-lived newspaper, The Liberal, in the first number of which appeared The Vision of Judgment.
For the first time since his arrival in Italy, Byron found himself tempted to give dinner parties; his guests included the Shelleys, Edward Ellerker Williams, Thomas Medwin, John Taaffe, and Edward John Trelawny; and "never", as Shelley said, "did he display himself to more advantage than on these occasions; being at once polite and cordial, full of social hilarity and the most perfect good humour; never diverging into ungraceful merriment, and yet keeping up the spirit of liveliness throughout the evening."
Shelley and Williams rented a house on the coast and had a schooner built.
Byron decided to have his own yacht, and engaged Trelawny's friend, Captain Daniel Roberts, to design and construct the boat.
Named the Bolivar, it was later sold to Charles John Gardiner, 1st Earl of Blessington, and Marguerite, Countess of Blessington, when Byron left for Greece in 1823.
Byron attended the funeral of Shelley, which was orchestrated by Trelawny after Williams and Shelley drowned in a boating accident on 8 July 1822.
His last Italian home was Genoa.
While living there he was accompanied by the Countess Guiccioli and the Blessingtons.
Lady Blessington based much of the material in her book, Conversations with Lord Byron, on the time spent together there.
This book became an important biographical text about Byron’s life just prior to his death.
Greece
Byron was living in Genoa when, in 1823, while growing bored with his life there, he accepted overtures for his support from representatives of the movement for Greek independence from the Ottoman Empire.
At first, Byron did not wish to leave his 22-year-old mistress, Countess Teresa Guiccioli, who had abandoned her husband to live with him; ultimately Guiccioli's father, Count Gamba was allowed to leave his exile in the Romagna under the condition that his daughter return to him, without Byron.
At the same time that the philhellene Edward Blaquiere was attempting to recruit him, Byron was confused as to what he was supposed to do in Greece, writing: "Blaquiere seemed to think that I might be of some use-even here;-though what he did not exactly specify".
On 16 July, Byron left Genoa, arriving at Kefalonia in the Ionian Islands on 4 August.
His voyage is covered in detail in Donald Prell's Sailing with Byron from Genoa to Cephalonia.
Prell also wrote of a coincidence in Byron's chartering the Hercules.
The vessel was launched only a few miles south of Seaham Hall, where in 1815 Byron married Annabella Milbanke.
Between 1815 and 1823 the vessel was in service between England and Canada.
Suddenly in 1823, the ship's Captain decided to sail to Genoa and offer the Hercules for charter.
After taking Byron to Greece, the ship returned to England, never again to venture into the Mediterranean.
The Hercules was aged 37 when, on 21 September 1852, she went aground near Hartlepool, only 25 miles south of Sunderland, where in 1815, her keel was laid; Byron's "keel was laid" nine months before his official birth date, 22 January 1788; therefore in ship-years, he was aged 37, when he died in Missolonghi.
Byron initially stayed on the island of Kephalonia, where he was besieged by agents of the rival Greek factions, all of whom wanted to recruit Byron to their own cause.
The Ionian islands, of which Kefalonia is one, were under British rule until 1864.
Byron spent £4,000 of his own money to refit the Greek fleet.
When Byron travelled to the mainland of Greece on the night of 28 December 1823, Byron's ship was surprised by an Ottoman warship, which did not attack his ship as the Ottoman captain mistook Byron's boat for a fireship.
To avoid the Ottoman Navy, which he encountered several times on his voyage, Byron was forced to take a roundabout route and only reached Missolonghi on 5 January 1824.
Byron gave the Souliotes some £6,000 pounds.
Byron was supposed to lead an attack on the Ottoman fortress of Navpaktos, whose Albanian garrison were unhappy due to pay arrears and who offered to put up only token resistance if Byron was willing to bribe them into surrendering.
However, Ottoman commander Yussuf Pasha executed the mutinous Albanian officers who were offering to surrender Navpaktos to Byron and arranged to have some of the pay arrears paid out to the rest of the garrison.
Byron never led the attack on Navpaktos because the Souliotes kept demanding that Byron pay them more and more money before they would march; Byron grew tired of their blackmail and sent them all home on 15 February 1824.
Byron wrote about his right-hand man: "Gamba - who is anything but lucky - had something to do with it - and as usual - the moment he had - matters went wrong".
In today's money Byron would have been a millionaire many times over, and the news that a fabulously wealthy British aristocrat known for his generosity in spending money had arrived in Greece made Byron the object of much solicitation in a desperately poor country like Greece.
Leadership of the Greek cause in the Roumeli region was divided between two rival leaders: a former Klepht (bandit), Odysseas Androutsos; and a wealthy Phanariot merchant, Alexandros Mavrokordatos.
Byron used his prestige to attempt to persuade the two rival leaders to come together to focus on defeating the Ottomans.
At same time, other leaders of the Greek factions like Petrobey Mavromichalis and Theodoros Kolokotronis wrote letters to Byron telling him to disregard all of the Roumeliot leaders and to come to their respective areas in the Peloponnese.
This drove Byron to distraction; he complained that the Greeks were hopelessly disunited and spent more time feuding with each other than trying to win independence.
Byron's friend Edward John Trelawny had aligned himself with Androutsos, who ruled Athens, and was now pressing for Byron to break with Mavrokordatos in favour of backing his rival Androutsos.
Byron wrote with disgust about how one of the Greek captains, former Klepht Georgios Karaiskakis, attacked Missolonghi on 3 April 1824 with some 150 men supported by the Souliotes as he was unhappy with Mavrokordatos's leadership, leading to a brief bout of inter-Greek fighting before Karaiskakis was chased away by 6 April.
Byron adopted a nine-year-old Turkish Muslim girl called Hato whose parents had been killed by the Greeks, whom he ultimately sent to safety in Kephalonia, knowing well that religious hatred between the Orthodox Greeks and Muslim Turks was running high and that any Muslim in Greece, even a child, was in serious danger.
Until 1934, most Turks did not have surnames, so Hato's lack of a surname was quite typical for a Turkish family at this time.
During this time, Byron pursued his Greek page, Lukas Chalandritsanos, with whom he had fallen madly in love, but the affections went unrequited.
He made a partial recovery, but in early April he caught a violent cold, which therapeutic bleeding, insisted on by his doctors, aggravated.
This treatment, carried out with unsterilised medical instruments, may have caused him to develop sepsis.
He contracted a violent fever and died in Missolonghi on 19 April.
Brewer went on to argue, "In another sense, though, Byron achieved everything he could have wished.
His presence in Greece, and in particular his death there, drew to the Greek cause not just the attention of sympathetic nations, but their increasing active participation...
Despite the critics, Byron is primarily remembered with admiration as a poet of genius, with something approaching veneration as a symbol of high ideals, and with great affection as a man: for his courage and his ironic slant on life, for his generosity to the grandest of causes and to the humblest of individuals, for the constant interplay of judgment and sympathy.
In Greece he is still revered as no other foreigner, and as very few Greeks are, and like a Homeric hero he is accorded an honorific standard epithet, megalos kai kalos, a great and good man".
Post mortem
Alfred Tennyson would later recall the shocked reaction in Britain when word was received of Byron's death.
The national poet of Greece, Dionysios Solomos, wrote a poem about the unexpected loss, named To the Death of Lord Byron.
Βύρων, the Greek form of "Byron", continues in popularity as a masculine name in Greece, and a suburb of Athens is called Vyronas in his honour.
Byron's body was embalmed, but the Greeks wanted some part of their hero to stay with them.
According to some sources, his heart remained at Missolonghi.
His other remains were sent to England (accompanied by his faithful manservant, "Tita") for burial in Westminster Abbey, but the Abbey refused for reason of "questionable morality".
Huge crowds viewed his coffin as he lay in state for two days in London.
A marble slab given by the King of Greece is laid directly above Byron's grave.
His daughter, Ada Lovelace, was later buried beside him.
Byron's friends raised the sum of 1,000 pounds to commission a statue of the writer; Thorvaldsen offered to sculpt it for that amount.
The memorial had been lobbied for since 1907:
The New York Times wrote, "People are beginning to ask whether this ignoring of Byron is not a thing of which England should be ashamed ... a bust or a tablet might be put in the Poets' Corner and England be relieved of ingratitude toward one of her really great sons."
Robert Ripley had drawn a picture of Boatswain's grave with the caption "Lord Byron's dog has a magnificent tomb while Lord Byron himself has none".
This came as a shock to the English, particularly schoolchildren, who, Ripley said, raised funds of their own accord to provide the poet with a suitable memorial.
Close to the centre of Athens, Greece, outside the National Garden, is a statue depicting Greece in the form of a woman crowning Byron.
The statue is by the French sculptors Henri-Michel Chapu and Alexandre Falguière.
Since 2008, the anniversary of Byron's death, 19 April, has been honoured in Greece as "Byron Day".
Upon his death, the barony passed to Byron's cousin George Anson Byron, a career naval officer.
Personal life
Relationships and scandals
File:Portrait of Lady Caroline Lamb.jpg|Lady Caroline Lamb
File:Jane elizabeth countess-of-oxford1797 john hoppner.jpg|Jane Elizabeth Scott "Lady Oxford"
File:Hon.
Augusta Leigh.jpg|Augusta Leigh
File:Annabella Byron (1792-1860).jpg|Anne Isabella Milbanke in 1812 by Charles Hayter
File:Teresa, Contessa Guiccioli.gif|Teresa, Contessa Guiccioli
Byron described his first intense feelings at age eight for his distant cousin, Mary Duff:
My mother used always to rally me about this childish amour, and at last, many years after, when I was sixteen, she told me one day, 'O Byron, I have had a letter from Edinburgh, and your old sweetheart, Mary Duff, is married to Mr. C***.'
And what was my answer?
I really cannot explain or account for my feelings at that moment, but they nearly threw me into convulsions...
How the deuce did all this occur so early?
Where could it originate?
I certainly had no sexual ideas for years afterwards; and yet my misery, my love for that girl were so violent, that I sometimes doubt if I have ever been really attached since.
Be that as it may, hearing of her marriage several years after was like a thunder-stroke - it nearly choked me - to the horror of my mother and the astonishment and almost incredulity of every body.
And it is a phenomenon in my existence (for I was not eight years old) which has puzzled, and will puzzle me to the latest hour of it; and lately, I know not why, the recollection (not the attachment) has recurred as forcibly as ever...
But, the more I reflect, the more I am bewildered to assign any cause for this precocity of affection.
This is the only reference Byron himself makes to the event, and he is ambiguous as to how old he was when it occurred.
After his death, his lawyer wrote to a mutual friend telling him a "singular fact" about Byron's life which was "scarcely fit for narration".
But he disclosed it nonetheless, thinking it might explain Byron's sexual "propensities":
When nine years old at his mother's house a Free Scotch girl May, sometimes called Mary, Gray, one of his first caretakers used to come to bed to him and play tricks with his person.
Gray later used this knowledge as a means of ensuring his silence if he were to be tempted to disclose the "low company" she kept during drinking binges.
She was later dismissed, supposedly for beating Byron when he was 11.
A few years later, while he was still a child, Lord Grey De Ruthyn (unrelated to May Gray), a suitor of his mother's, also made sexual advances on him.
Byron's personality has been characterised as exceptionally proud and sensitive, especially when it came to his deformity.
Crompton states: "What was not understood in Byron's own century (except by a tiny circle of his associates) was that Byron was bisexual".
Another biographer, Fiona MacCarthy, has posited that Byron's true sexual yearnings were for adolescent males.
(Crompton, 1985).|source=
In 1812, Byron embarked on a well-publicised affair with the married Lady Caroline Lamb that shocked the British public.
She had spurned the attention of the poet on their first meeting, subsequently giving Byron what became his lasting epitaph when she famously described him as "mad, bad and dangerous to know".
This did not prevent her from pursuing him.
Byron eventually broke off the relationship and moved swiftly on to others (such as that with Lady Oxford), but Lamb never entirely recovered, pursuing him even after he tired of her.
She was emotionally disturbed and lost so much weight that Byron sarcastically commented to her mother-in-law, his friend Lady Melbourne, that he was "haunted by a skeleton".
She began to call on him at home, sometimes dressed in disguise as a pageboy,
Children
File:ElizabethMedoraLeigh.jpg|alt=Seated woman, looking toward her left at artist, perhaps when interrupted while reading|Elizabeth Medora Leigh (1814-1849)
File:Ada Lovelace 1838.jpg|alt=Formal profile of standing woman|Ada Lovelace
File:Allegra Byron.jpg|alt=Young, smiling child|Clara Allegra Byron (1817-1822)
Byron wrote a letter to John Hanson from Newstead Abbey, dated 17 January 1809, that includes "You will discharge my Cook, & Laundry Maid, the other two I shall retain to take care of the house, more especially as the youngest is pregnant (I need not tell you by whom) and I cannot have the girl on the parish."
His reference to "The youngest" is understood to have been to a maid, Lucy, and the parenthesised remark to indicate himself as siring a son born that year.
In 2010 part of a baptismal record was uncovered which apparently said: "September 24 George illegitimate son of Lucy Monk, illegitimate son of Baron Byron, of Newstead, Nottingham, Newstead Abbey."
Augusta Leigh's child, Elizabeth Medora Leigh, born 1814, was very likely fathered by Byron, who was Augusta's half-brother.
Byron had a child, The Hon.
Augusta Ada Byron ("Ada", later Countess of Lovelace), in 1815, by his wife Annabella Byron, Lady Byron (née Anne Isabella Milbanke, or "Annabella"), later Lady Wentworth.
Ada Lovelace, notable in her own right, collaborated with Charles Babbage on the analytical engine, a predecessor to modern computers.
She is recognised as one of the world's first computer programmers.
He also had an illegitimate child in 1817, Clara Allegra Byron, with Claire Clairmont, stepsister of Mary Shelley and stepdaughter of William Godwin, writer of Political Justice and Caleb Williams.
Allegra is not entitled to the style "The Hon."
as is usually given to the daughter of barons, since she was illegitimate.
Born in Bath in 1817, Allegra lived with Byron for a few months in Venice; he refused to allow an Englishwoman caring for the girl to adopt her and objected to her being raised in the Shelleys' household.
However, the girl died aged five of a fever in Bagnacavallo, Italy, while Byron was in Pisa; he was deeply upset by the news.
This is often seen as the birth of the sport and pastime, and to commemorate it, the event is recreated every year as an open water swimming event.
Whilst sailing from Genoa to Cephalonia in 1823, every day at noon, Byron and Trelawny, in calm weather, jumped overboard for a swim without fear of sharks, which were not unknown in those waters.
Once, according to Trelawny, they let the geese and ducks loose and followed them and the dogs into the water, each with an arm in the ship Captain’s new scarlet waistcoat, to the annoyance of the Captain and the amusement of the crew.
Fondness for animals
Byron had a great love of animals, most notably for a Newfoundland dog named Boatswain.
When the animal contracted rabies, Byron nursed him, albeit unsuccessfully, without any thought or fear of becoming bitten and infected.
Although deep in debt at the time, Byron commissioned an impressive marble funerary monument for Boatswain at Newstead Abbey, larger than his own, and the only building work which he ever carried out on his estate.
In his 1811 will, Byron requested that he be buried with him.
Byron also kept a tame bear while he was a student at Trinity, out of resentment for rules forbidding pet dogs like his beloved Boatswain.
There being no mention of bears in their statutes, the college authorities had no legal basis for complaining:
Byron even suggested that he would apply for a college fellowship for the bear.
During his lifetime, in addition to numerous cats, dogs, and horses, Byron kept a fox, monkeys, an eagle, a crow, a falcon, peacocks, guinea hens, an Egyptian crane, a badger, geese, a heron, and a goat.
Except for the horses, they all resided indoors at his homes in England, Switzerland, Italy, and Greece.
Health and appearance
Character and psyche
I am such a strange mélange of good and evil that it would be difficult to describe me.
As a boy, Byron's character is described as a "mixture of affectionate sweetness and playfulness, by which it was impossible not to be attached", although he also exhibited "silent rages, moody sullenness and revenge" with a precocious bent for attachment and obsession.
Deformed foot
From birth, Byron suffered from a deformity of his right foot.
Although it has generally been referred to as a "club foot", some modern medical authors maintain that it was a consequence of infantile paralysis (poliomyelitis), and others that it was a dysplasia, a failure of the bones to form properly.
Whatever the cause, he was afflicted with a limp that caused him lifelong psychological and physical misery, aggravated by painful and pointless "medical treatment" in his childhood and the nagging suspicion that with proper care it might have been cured.
He was extremely self-conscious about this from a young age, nicknaming himself (French for "the limping devil", after the nickname given to Asmodeus by Alain-René Lesage in his 1707 novel of the same name).
Although he often wore specially-made shoes in an attempt to hide the deformed foot,
Physical appearance
Byron's adult height was , his weight fluctuating between and .
He was renowned for his personal beauty, which he enhanced by wearing curl-papers in his hair at night.
Byron and other writers, such as his friend Hobhouse, described his eating habits in detail.
At the time he entered Cambridge, he went on a strict diet to control his weight.
He also exercised a great deal, and at that time wore a great amount of clothes to cause himself to perspire.
For most of his life he was a vegetarian and often lived for days on dry biscuits and white wine.
Occasionally he would eat large helpings of meat and desserts, after which he would purge himself.
Although he is described by Galt and others as having a predilection for "violent" exercise, Hobhouse suggests that the pain in his deformed foot made physical activity difficult and that his weight problem was the result.
Political career
Byron first took his seat in the House of Lords 13 March 1809 but left London on 11 June 1809 for the Continent.
Byron's association with the Holland House Whigs provided him with a discourse of liberty rooted in the Glorious Revolution of 1688.
A strong advocate of social reform, he received particular praise as one of the few Parliamentary defenders of the .
He said later that he "spoke very violent sentences with a sort of modest impudence" and thought he came across as "a bit theatrical".
The full text of the speech, which he had previously written out, was presented to Dallas in manuscript form and he quotes it in his work.
Two months later, in conjunction with the other Whigs, Byron made another impassioned speech before the House of Lords in support of Catholic emancipation.
Byron expressed opposition to the established religion because it was unfair to people of other faiths.
These experiences inspired Byron to write political poems such as Song for the Luddites (1816) and The Landlords' Interest, Canto XIV of The Age of Bronze.
Examples of poems in which he attacked his political opponents include Wellington: The Best of the Cut-Throats (1819) and The Intellectual Eunuch Castlereagh (1818).
Poetic works
Byron wrote prolifically.
In 1832 his publisher, John Murray, released the complete works in 14 duodecimo volumes, including a life The poem, often called the epic of its time, has roots deep in literary tradition and, although regarded by early Victorians as somewhat shocking, equally involves itself with its own contemporary world at all levels - social, political, literary and ideological.
In addition to its biting satire, the poem (especially in the early cantos) is funny.
Byron published the first two cantos anonymously in 1819 after disputes with his regular publisher over the shocking nature of the poetry.
By this time, he had been a famous poet for seven years, and when he self-published the beginning cantos, they were well received in some quarters.
Parthenon marbles
Byron was a bitter opponent of Lord Elgin's removal of the Parthenon marbles from Greece and "reacted with fury" when Elgin's agent gave him a tour of the Parthenon, during which he saw the spaces left by the missing friezes and metopes.
He denounced Elgin's actions in his poem .
Legacy and influence
Byron is considered to be the first modern-style celebrity.
His image as the personification of the Byronic hero fascinated the public,
The re-founding of the Byron Society in 1971 reflected the fascination that many people had with Byron and his work.
This society became very active, publishing an annual journal.
Thirty-six Byron Societies function throughout the world, and an International Conference takes place annually.
Byron exercised a marked influence on Continental literature and art, and his reputation as a poet is higher in many European countries than in Britain or America, although not as high as in his time, when he was widely thought to be the greatest poet in the world.
Byronic hero
The figure of the Byronic hero pervades much of his work, and Byron himself is considered to epitomise many of the characteristics of this literary figure.
His philosophy was more durably influential in continental Europe than in England; Friedrich Nietzsche admired him, and the Byronic hero was echoed in Nietzsche's superman.
The Byronic hero presents an idealised, but flawed character whose attributes include: great talent; great passion; a distaste for society and social institutions; a lack of respect for rank and privilege (although possessing both); being thwarted in love by social constraint or death; rebellion; exile; an unsavory secret past; arrogance; overconfidence or lack of foresight; and, ultimately, a self-destructive manner.
These types of characters have since become ubiquitous in literature and politics.
In popular culture
Bibliography
Major works
* Don Juan (1819-1824; incomplete on Byron's death in 1824) ()
* http:/ webclient webclient webclient/DeliveryManager?pid=6418126 Letters and journals, vol. 2 (1830)
Selected shorter lyric poems
* Monody on the Death of the Right Hon.
R. B. Sheridan (1816) ()
* Bridge of Sighs, a Venice landmark Byron denominated
Notes
Bibliography
* Volume 1 of Poetic drama & poetic theory in "Salzburg studies in English literature"
Further reading
* Accardo, Peter X. https:/ web http:/ libraries exhibits introduction.cfm Let Satire Be My Song: Byron’s English Bards and Scotch Reviewers.
Web exhibit, Houghton Library, Harvard University, 2011.
* Drucker, Peter. '
Byron and Ottoman love: Orientalism, Europeanization and same sex sexualities in the early nineteenth-century Levant' (Journal of European Studies vol.
42 no. 2, June 2012, 140-57).
* Garrett, Martin: George Gordon, Lord Byron.
(British Library Writers' Lives).
London: British Library, 2000. .
* Garrett, Martin.
Palgrave Literary Dictionary of Byron.
Palgrave, 2010. .
Guiccioli, Teresa, contessa di, Lord Byron's Life in Italy, transl.
Michael Rees, ed.
Peter Cochran, 2005, .
* Grosskurth, Phyllis: Byron: The Flawed Angel.
Hodder, 1997. .
* Marchand, Leslie A., editor, Byron's Letters and Journals, Harvard University Press:
** http:/ catalog.php?isbn=9780674089402 Volume I, 'In my hot youth', 1798-1810, (1973)
** http:/ catalog.php?isbn=9780674089419 Volume II, 'Famous in my time', 1810-1812, (1973)
** http:/ catalog.php?isbn=9780674089426 Volume III, 'Alas!
the love of women', 1813-1814, (1974)
** http:/ catalog.php?isbn=9780674089440 Volume IV, 'Wedlock's the devil', 1814-1815, (1975)
** http:/ catalog.php?isbn=9780674089457 Volume V, 'So late into the night', 1816-1817, (1976)
** http:/ catalog.php?isbn=9780674089464 Volume VI, 'The flesh is frail', 1818-1819, (1976)
** http:/ catalog.php?isbn=9780674089471 Volume VII, 'Between two worlds', 1820, (1978)
** http:/ catalog.php?isbn=9780674089488 Volume VIII, 'Born for opposition', 1821, (1978)
** http:/ catalog.php?isbn=9780674089495 Volume IX, 'In the wind's eye', 1821-1822, (1978)
** http:/ catalog.php?isbn=9780674089525 Volume X, 'A heart for every fate', 1822-1823, (1980)
** http:/ catalog.php?isbn=9780674089532 Volume XI, 'For freedom's battle', 1823-1824, (1981)
** http:/ catalog.php?isbn=9780674089549 Volume XII, 'The trouble of an index', index, (1982)
** http:/ catalog.php?isbn=9780674539150 Lord Byron: Selected Letters and Journals, (1982)
* McGann, Jerome: Byron and Romanticism.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2002. .
* Oueijan, Naji B. A Compendium of Eastern Elements in Byron's Oriental Tales.
New York: Peter Lang Publishing, 1999.
* Patanè, Vincenzo: L'estate di un ghiro.
Il mito di Lord Byron attraverso la vita, i viaggi, gli amori e le opere.
Venezia, Cicero, 2013. .
* Patanè, Vincenzo: I frutti acerbi.
Lord Byron, gli amori & il sesso.
Venezia, Cicero, 2016. .
* Patanè, Vincenzo: The Sour Fruit.
Lord Byron, Love & Sex. Lanham (MD), Rowman & Littlefield, Lanham (MD), 2019, copublished by John Cabot University Press, Rome, 2019. .
* Rosen, Fred: Bentham, Byron and Greece.
Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1992. .
* Thiollet, Jean-Pierre: Carré d'Art: Barbey d'Aurevilly, lord Byron, Salvador Dalí, Jean-Edern Hallier, with texts by Anne-Élisabeth Blateau and , Anagramme éditions, 2008. .
