One Hundred Years of Solitude (, ) is a landmark 1967 novel by Colombian author Gabriel García Márquez that tells the multi-generational story of the Buendía family, whose patriarch, José Arcadio Buendía, founded the town of Macondo, a fictitious town in the country of Colombia.
The magical realist style and thematic substance of One Hundred Years of Solitude established it as an important representative novel of the literary Latin American Boom of the 1960s and 1970s, which was stylistically influenced by Modernism (European and North American) and the Cuban Vanguardia (Avant-Garde) literary movement.
Since it was first published in May 1967 in Buenos Aires by Editorial Sudamericana, One Hundred Years of Solitude has been translated into 37 languages and sold more than 30 million copies.
Biography and publication
Gabriel García Márquez was one of the four Latin American novelists first included in the literary Latin American Boom of the 1960s and 1970s; the other three were the Peruvian Mario Vargas Llosa, the Argentine Julio Cortázar, and the Mexican Carlos Fuentes.
One Hundred Years of Solitude (1967) earned García Márquez international fame as a novelist of the magical realism movement within Latin American literature.
As a metaphoric, critical interpretation of Colombian history, from foundation to contemporary nation, One Hundred Years of Solitude presents different national myths through the story of the Buendía family, whose spirit of adventure places them amidst the important actions of Colombian historical events, such as the Liberal political reformation of a colonial way of life, and the 19th-century arguments for and against it; the arrival of the railway to a mountainous country; the Thousand Days' War (Guerra de los Mil Días, 1899-1902); the corporate hegemony of the United Fruit Company ("American Fruit Company" in the story); the cinema; the automobile; and the military massacre of striking workers as government-labour relations policy.
Plot
One Hundred Years of Solitude is the story of seven generations of the Buendía Family in the town of Macondo.
The founding patriarch of Macondo, José Arcadio Buendía, and Úrsula Iguarán, his wife (and first cousin), leave Riohacha, Colombia, after José Arcadio kills Prudencio Aguilar after a cockfight for suggesting José Arcadio was impotent.
One night of their emigration journey, while camping on a riverbank, José Arcadio dreams of "Macondo", a city of mirrors that reflected the world in and about it.
Upon awakening, he decides to establish Macondo at the riverside; after days of wandering the jungle, his founding of Macondo is utopic.
"Ideological transfiguration ensured that Macondo and the Buendías always were ghosts to some extent, alienated and estranged from their own history, not only victims of the harsh reality of dependence and underdevelopment but also of the ideological illusions that haunt and reinforce such social conditions."
The glass city is an image that comes to José Arcadio Buendía in a dream.
It is the reason for Macondo's location, but also a symbol of its fate.
Higgins writes, "By the final page, however, the city of mirrors has become a city of mirages.
Macondo thus represents the dream of a brave new world that America seemed to promise and that was cruelly proved illusory by the subsequent course of history."
In this sense, the novel can be conceived as a linear archive that narrates the story of a Latin America discovered by European explorers, which had its historical entity developed by the printing press.
The Archive is a symbol of the literature that is the foundation of Latin American history and also a decoding instrument.
Melquíades, the keeper of the archive, represents both the whimsical and the literary.
Buendía leaves Riohacha, Colombia, along with his wife Úrsula Iguarán after being haunted by the corpse of Prudencio Aguilar (a man Buendía killed in a duel), who constantly bleeds from his wound and tries to wash it.
The novel presents a fictional story in a fictional setting.
The extraordinary events and characters are fabricated.
However, the message that García Márquez intends to deliver explains a true history.
García Márquez uses his fantastic story as an expression of reality.
"In One Hundred Years of Solitude myth and history overlap.
The myth acts as a vehicle to transmit history to the reader.
García Márquez's novel can furthermore be referred to as anthropology, where truth is found in language and myth.
What is real and what is fiction are indistinguishable.
There are three main mythical elements of the novel: classical stories alluding to foundations and origins, characters resembling mythical heroes, and supernatural elements."
García Márquez blends the real with the magical through the use of tone and narration.
By maintaining the same tone throughout the novel, García Márquez makes the extraordinary blend with the ordinary.
His condensation of and lackadaisical manner in describing events causes the extraordinary to seem less remarkable than it actually is, thereby perfectly blending the real with the magical.
Reinforcing this effect is the unastonished tone in which the book is written.
This tone restricts the ability of the reader to question the events of the novel.
However, it also causes the reader to call into question the limits of reality.
Over six generations, all the José Arcadios possess inquisitive and rational dispositions as well as enormous physical strength.
The Aurelianos, meanwhile, lean towards insularity and quietude.
This repetition of traits reproduces the history of the individual characters and, ultimately, a history of the town as a succession of the same mistakes ad infinitum due to some endogenous hubris in our nature.
The novel explores the issue of timelessness or eternity even within the framework of mortal existence.
A major trope with which it accomplishes this task is the alchemist's laboratory in the Buendía family home.
The laboratory was first designed by Melquíades near the start of the story and remains essentially unchanged throughout its course.
It is a place where the male Buendía characters can indulge their will to solitude, whether through attempts to deconstruct the world with reason as in the case of José Arcadio Buendía, or by the endless creation and destruction of golden fish as in the case of his son Colonel Aureliano Buendía.
Furthermore, a sense of inevitability prevails throughout the text.
This is a feeling that regardless of what way one looks at time, its encompassing nature is the one truthful admission.
* On the other hand, it is important to keep in mind that One Hundred Years of Solitude, while basically chronological and "linear" enough in its broad outlines, also shows abundant zigzags in time, both flashbacks of matters past and long leaps towards future events.
One example of this is the youthful amour between Meme and Mauricio Babilonia, which is already in full swing before we are informed about the origins of the affair.
Although we are faced with a very convoluted narrative, García Márquez is able to define clear themes while maintaining individual character identities, and using different narrative techniques such as third-person narrators, specific point of view narrators, and streams of consciousness.
Cinematographic techniques are also employed in the novel, with the idea of the montage and the close-up, which effectively combine the comic and grotesque with the dramatic and tragic.
Furthermore, political and historical realities are combined with the mythical and magical Latin American world.
Lastly, through human comedy the problems of a family, a town, and a country are unveiled.
This is all presented through García Márquez's unique form of narration, which causes the novel to never cease being at its most interesting point.
The superlatives from reviewers and readers alike display the resounding praise which the novel has received.
Chilean poet and Nobel Laureate Pablo Neruda called it "the greatest revelation in the Spanish language since Don Quixote of Cervantes", while John Leonard in The New York Times wrote that "with a single bound, Gabriel García Márquez leaps onto the stage with Günter Grass and Vladimir Nabokov."
In his Nobel Prize acceptance speech, García Márquez addressed the significance of his writing and proposed its role to be more than just literary expression:
QTEMPLATE |I dare to think that it is this outsized reality, and not just its literary expression, that has deserved the attention of the Swedish Academy of Letters.
A reality not of paper, but one that lives within us and determines each instant of our countless daily deaths, and that nourishes a source of insatiable creativity, full of sorrow and beauty, of which this roving and nostalgic Colombian is but one cipher more, singled out by fortune.
Poets and beggars, musicians and prophets, warriors and scoundrels, all creatures of that unbridled reality, we have had to ask but little of imagination, for our crucial problem has been a lack of conventional means to render our lives believable.
This, my friends, is the crux of our solitude.
Critiques
Although One Hundred Years of Solitude has come to be considered one of, if not the, most influential Latin American texts of all time, the novel and Gabriel García Márquez have both received occasional criticisms.
Stylistically, Harold Bloom remarked that "My primary impression, in the act of rereading One Hundred Years of Solitude, is a kind of aesthetic battle fatigue, since every page is rammed full of life beyond the capacity of any single reader to absorb...
There are no wasted sentences, no mere transitions, in this novel, and you must notice everything at the moment you read it."
Additionally, David Haberly alleges that García Márquez may have borrowed themes from several works, such as William Faulkner's Yoknapatawpha County, Virginia Woolf's .
Internal references
In the novel's account of the civil war and subsequent peace, there are numerous mentions of the pensions not arriving for the veterans, a reference to one of García Márquez's earlier works, El coronel no tiene quien le escriba.
In the novel's final chapter, García Márquez refers to the novel Hopscotch (Spanish: Rayuela) by Julio Cortázar in the following line: "...in the room that smelled of boiled cauliflower where Rocamadour was to die" (p. 412).
Rocamadour is a fictional character in Hopscotch who indeed dies in the room described.
He also refers to two other major works by Latin American writers in the novel: The Death of Artemio Cruz by Carlos Fuentes and Explosion in a Cathedral (Spanish: El siglo de las luces) by Alejo Carpentier.
Adaptations
While One Hundred Years of Solitude has had a large effect on the literary world and is the author's best-selling and most translated work, there have been no movies produced of it as García Márquez never agreed to sell the rights to produce such a film.
On March 6, 2019, García Márquez's son Rodrigo García Barcha, announced that Netflix was developing a series based upon the book with a set release in 2020.
Shuji Terayama's play One Hundred Years of Solitude (百年の孤独, originally performed by the Tenjo Sajiki theater troupe) and his film Farewell to the Ark (さらば箱舟) are loose (and not officially authorized) adaptations of the novel by García Márquez transplanted into the realm of Japanese culture and history.
Notes
Further reading
* https:/ books 06 reviews/marque-solitude.html "Memory and Prophecy, Illusion and Reality Are Mixed and Made to Look the Same" by The New York Times, March 8, 1970
