Michelangelo di Lodovico Buonarroti Simoni (; 6 March 1475 - 18 February 1564), known best as simply Michelangelo (), was an Italian sculptor, painter, architect and poet of the High Renaissance born in the Republic of Florence, who exerted an unparalleled influence on the development of Western art.
Considered by many the greatest artist of his lifetime, and by some the greatest artist of all time, his artistic versatility was of such a high order that he is often considered a contender for the title of the archetypal Renaissance man, along with his rival, the fellow Florentine and client of the Medici, Leonardo da Vinci.
A number of Michelangelo's works of painting, sculpture and architecture rank among the most famous in existence.
At the age of 74, he succeeded Antonio da Sangallo the Younger as the architect of St. Peter's Basilica.
He transformed the plan so that the western end was finished to his design, as was the dome, with some modification, after his death.
Michelangelo was the first Western artist whose biography was published while he was alive.
In his lifetime, Michelangelo was often called Il Divino ("the divine one").
His contemporaries often admired his terribilità-his ability to instil a sense of awe.
Attempts by subsequent artists to imitate Michelangelo's impassioned, highly personal style resulted in Mannerism, the next major movement in Western art after the High Renaissance.
Life
Early life, 1475-1488
Michelangelo was born on 6 March 1475 in Caprese, known today as Caprese Michelangelo, a small town situated in Valtiberina, near Arezzo, Tuscany.
For several generations, his family had been small-scale bankers in Florence; but the bank failed, and his father, Ludovico di Leonardo Buonarroti Simoni, briefly took a government post in Caprese, where Michelangelo was born.
The Buonarrotis claimed to descend from the Countess Mathilde of Canossa-a claim that remains unproven, but which Michelangelo believed.
Several months after Michelangelo's birth, the family returned to Florence, where he was raised.
During his mother's later prolonged illness, and after her death in 1481 (when he was six years old), Michelangelo lived with a nanny and her husband, a stonecutter, in the town of Settignano, where his father owned a marble quarry and a small farm.
However, he showed no interest in his schooling, preferring to copy paintings from churches and seek the company of other painters.
Art was sponsored by the Signoria (the town council), the merchant guilds, and wealthy patrons such as the Medici and their banking associates.
The Renaissance, a renewal of Classical scholarship and the arts, had its first flowering in Florence.
The sculptor Lorenzo Ghiberti had laboured for fifty years to create the bronze doors of the Baptistry, which Michelangelo was to describe as "The Gates of Paradise".
The exterior niches of the Church of Orsanmichele contained a gallery of works by the most acclaimed sculptors of Florence: Donatello, Ghiberti, Andrea del Verrocchio, and Nanni di Banco.
During Michelangelo's childhood, a team of painters had been called from Florence to the Vatican to decorate the walls of the Sistine Chapel.
Among them was Domenico Ghirlandaio, a master in fresco painting, perspective, figure drawing and portraiture who had the largest workshop in Florence.
The next year, his father persuaded Ghirlandaio to pay Michelangelo as an artist, which was rare for someone of fourteen.
When in 1489, Lorenzo de' Medici, de facto ruler of Florence, asked Ghirlandaio for his two best pupils, Ghirlandaio sent Michelangelo and Francesco Granacci.
From 1490 to 1492, Michelangelo attended the Humanist academy the Medici had founded along Neo-Platonic lines.
There his work and outlook were influenced by many of the most prominent philosophers and writers of the day, including Marsilio Ficino, Pico della Mirandola and Poliziano.
At this time, Michelangelo sculpted the reliefs Madonna of the Steps (1490-1492) and Battle of the Centaurs (1491-1492), Michelangelo worked for a time with the sculptor Bertoldo di Giovanni.
When he was seventeen, another pupil, Pietro Torrigiano, struck him on the nose, causing the disfigurement that is conspicuous in the portraits of Michelangelo.
Bologna, Florence and Rome, 1492-1499
Lorenzo de' Medici's death on 8 April 1492 brought a reversal of Michelangelo's circumstances.
Michelangelo left the security of the Medici court and returned to his father's house.
In the following months he carved a polychrome wooden Crucifix (1493), as a gift to the prior of the Florentine church of Santo Spirito, which had allowed him to do some anatomical studies of the corpses from the church's hospital.
This was the first of several instances during his career that Michelangelo studied anatomy by dissecting cadavers.
Between 1493 and 1494 he bought a block of marble, and carved a larger-than-life statue of Hercules, which was sent to France and subsequently disappeared sometime in the 18th century.
In the same year, the Medici were expelled from Florence as the result of the rise of Savonarola.
Michelangelo left the city before the end of the political upheaval, moving to Venice and then to Bologna.
Towards the end of 1494, the political situation in Florence was calmer.
The city, previously under threat from the French, was no longer in danger as Charles VIII had suffered defeats.
Michelangelo returned to Florence but received no commissions from the new city government under Savonarola.
He returned to the employment of the Medici.
During the half year he spent in Florence, he worked on two small statues, a child St. John the Baptist and a sleeping Cupid.
According to Condivi, Lorenzo di Pierfrancesco de' Medici, for whom Michelangelo had sculpted St. John the Baptist, asked that Michelangelo "fix it so that it looked as if it had been buried" so he could "send it to Rome ... pass it off as an ancient work and ... sell it much better."
Both Lorenzo and Michelangelo were unwittingly cheated out of the real value of the piece by a middleman.
Cardinal Raffaele Riario, to whom Lorenzo had sold it, discovered that it was a fraud, but was so impressed by the quality of the sculpture that he invited the artist to Rome.
This apparent success in selling his sculpture abroad as well as the conservative Florentine situation may have encouraged Michelangelo to accept the prelate's invitation.
at the age of 21.
On 4 July of the same year, he began work on a commission for Cardinal Raffaele Riario, an over-life-size statue of the Roman wine god Bacchus.
Upon completion, the work was rejected by the cardinal, and subsequently entered the collection of the banker Jacopo Galli, for his garden.
In November 1497, the French ambassador to the Holy See, Cardinal Jean de Bilhères-Lagraulas, commissioned him to carve a Pietà, a sculpture showing the Virgin Mary grieving over the body of Jesus.
The subject, which is not part of the Biblical narrative of the Crucifixion, was common in religious sculpture of Medieval Northern Europe and would have been very familiar to the Cardinal.
It was soon to be regarded as one of the world's great masterpieces of sculpture, "a revelation of all the potentialities and force of the art of sculpture".
Contemporary opinion was summarised by Vasari: "It is certainly a miracle that a formless block of stone could ever have been reduced to a perfection that nature is scarcely able to create in the flesh."
It is now located in St Peter's Basilica.
Florence, 1499-1505
Michelangelo returned to Florence in 1499.
The republic was changing after the fall of its leader, anti-Renaissance priest Girolamo Savonarola, who was executed in 1498, and the rise of the gonfaloniere Piero Soderini.
Michelangelo was asked by the consuls of the Guild of Wool to complete an unfinished project begun 40 years earlier by Agostino di Duccio: a colossal statue of Carrara marble portraying David as a symbol of Florentine freedom to be placed on the gable of Florence Cathedral.
Michelangelo responded by completing his most famous work, the statue of David, in 1504.
The masterwork definitively established his prominence as a sculptor of extraordinary technical skill and strength of symbolic imagination.
A team of consultants, including Botticelli and Leonardo da Vinci, was called together to decide upon its placement, ultimately the Piazza della Signoria, in front of the Palazzo Vecchio.
It now stands in the Academia while a replica occupies its place in the square.
With the completion of the David came another commission.
In early 1504 Leonardo da Vinci had been commissioned to paint The Battle of Anghiara in the council chamber of the Palazzo Vecchio, depicting the battle between Florence and Milan in 1440.
Michelangelo was then commissioned to paint the Battle of Cascina.
The two paintings are very different: Leonardo depicts soldiers fighting on horseback, while Michelangelo has soldiers being ambushed as they bathe in the river.
Neither work was completed and both were lost forever when the chamber was refurbished.
Both works were much admired, and copies remain of them, Leonardo's work having been copied by Rubens and Michelangelo's by Bastiano da Sangallo.
Also during this period, Michelangelo was commissioned by Angelo Doni to paint a "Holy Family" as a present for his wife, Maddalena Strozzi.
It is known as the Doni Tondo and hangs in the Uffizi Gallery in its original magnificent frame, which Michelangelo may have designed.
He also may have painted the Madonna and Child with John the Baptist, known as the Manchester Madonna and now in the National Gallery, London.
Sistine Chapel ceiling, 1505-1512
In 1505 Michelangelo was invited back to Rome by the newly elected Pope Julius II and commissioned to build the Pope's tomb, which was to include forty statues and be finished in five years.
Under the patronage of the pope, Michelangelo experienced constant interruptions to his work on the tomb in order to accomplish numerous other tasks.
Although Michelangelo worked on the tomb for 40 years, it was never finished to his satisfaction.
According to Condivi's account, Bramante, who was working on the building of St. Peter's Basilica, resented Michelangelo's commission for the pope's tomb and convinced the pope to commission him in a medium with which he was unfamiliar, in order that he might fail at the task.
Michelangelo was originally commissioned to paint the Twelve Apostles on the triangular pendentives that supported the ceiling, and to cover the central part of the ceiling with ornament.
Michelangelo persuaded Pope Julius to give him a free hand and proposed a different and more complex scheme, representing the Creation, the Fall of Man, the Promise of Salvation through the prophets, and the genealogy of Christ.
The work is part of a larger scheme of decoration within the chapel that represents much of the doctrine of the Catholic Church.
and contains over 300 figures.
In 1520 the Medici came back to Michelangelo with another grand proposal, this time for a family funerary chapel in the Basilica of San Lorenzo.
In 1976 a concealed corridor was discovered with drawings on the walls that related to the chapel itself.
Pope Leo X died in 1521 and was succeeded briefly by the austere Adrian VI, and then by his cousin Giulio Medici as Pope Clement VII.
In 1524 Michelangelo received an architectural commission from the Medici pope for the Laurentian Library at San Lorenzo's Church.
In 1527, Florentine citizens, encouraged by the sack of Rome, threw out the Medici and restored the republic.
A siege of the city ensued, and Michelangelo went to the aid of his beloved Florence by working on the city's fortifications from 1528 to 1529.
The city fell in 1530, and the Medici were restored to power.
Rome, 1534-1546
In Rome, Michelangelo lived near the church of Santa Maria di Loreto.
It was at this time that he met the poet Vittoria Colonna, marchioness of Pescara, who was to become one of his closest friends until her death in 1547.
Shortly before his death in 1534 Pope Clement VII commissioned Michelangelo to paint a fresco of The Last Judgement on the altar wall of the Sistine Chapel.
His successor, Paul III, was instrumental in seeing that Michelangelo began and completed the project, which he laboured on from 1534 to October 1541.
Once completed, the depiction of Christ and the Virgin Mary naked was considered sacrilegious, and Cardinal Carafa and Monsignor Sernini (Mantua's ambassador) campaigned to have the fresco removed or censored, but the Pope resisted.
At the Council of Trent, shortly before Michelangelo's death in 1564, it was decided to obscure the genitals and Daniele da Volterra, an apprentice of Michelangelo, was commissioned to make the alterations.
An uncensored copy of the original, by Marcello Venusti, is in the Capodimonte Museum of Naples.
Michelangelo worked on a number of architectural projects at this time.
They included a design for the Capitoline Hill with its trapezoid piazza displaying the ancient bronze statue of Marcus Aurelius.
He designed the upper floor of the Palazzo Farnese and the interior of the Church of Santa Maria degli Angeli, in which he transformed the vaulted interior of an Ancient Roman bathhouse.
Other architectural works include San Giovanni dei Fiorentini, the Sforza Chapel (Capella Sforza) in the Basilica di Santa Maria Maggiore and the Porta Pia.
St Peter's Basilica, 1546-1564
While still working on the Last Judgement, Michelangelo received yet another commission for the Vatican.
This was for the painting of two large frescos in the Cappella Paolina depicting significant events in the lives of the two most important saints of Rome, the Conversion of Saint Paul and the Crucifixion of Saint Peter.
Like the Last Judgement, these two works are complex compositions containing a great number of figures.
They were completed in 1550.
In the same year, Giorgio Vasari published his Vita, including a biography of Michelangelo.
In 1546, Michelangelo was appointed architect of St. Peter's Basilica, Rome.
The dome, not completed until after his death, has been called by Banister Fletcher, "the greatest creation of the Renaissance".
As construction was progressing on St Peter's, there was concern that Michelangelo would pass away before the dome was finished.
However, once building commenced on the lower part of the dome, the supporting ring, the completion of the design was inevitable.
On 7 December 2007, a red chalk sketch for the dome of St Peter's Basilica, possibly the last made by Michelangelo before his death, was discovered in the Vatican archives.
It is extremely rare, since he destroyed his designs later in life.
The sketch is a partial plan for one of the radial columns of the cupola drum of Saint Peter's.
Personal life
Faith
Michelangelo was a devout Catholic whose faith deepened at the end of his life.
His poetry includes the following closing lines from what is known as poem 285 (written in 1554);
"Neither painting nor sculpture will be able any longer to calm my soul, now turned toward that divine love that opened his arms on the cross to take us in."
Personal habits
Michelangelo was abstemious in his personal life, and once told his apprentice, Ascanio Condivi: "However rich I may have been, I have always lived like a poor man."
Condivi said he was indifferent to food and drink, eating "more out of necessity than of pleasure" He may not have minded, since he was by nature a solitary and melancholy person, bizzarro e fantastico, a man who "withdrew himself from the company of men."
Relationships and poetry
It is impossible to know for certain whether Michelangelo had physical relationships (Condivi ascribed to him a "monk-like chastity"), but the nature of his sexuality is made apparent in his poetry.
He wrote over three hundred sonnets and to the fair youth:
Cavalieri replied: "I swear to return your love.
Never have I loved a man more than I love you, never have I wished for a friendship more than I wish for yours."
Cavalieri remained devoted to Michelangelo until his death.
In 1542, Michelangelo met Cecchino dei Bracci who died only a year later, inspiring Michelangelo to write forty-eight funeral , stole from him shamelessly.
and it was not until John Addington Symonds translated them into English in 1893 that the original genders were restored.
Even in modern times some scholars continue to insist that, despite the restoration of the pronouns, they represent "an emotionless and elegant re-imagining of Platonic dialogue, whereby erotic poetry was seen as an expression of refined sensibilities".
Condivi recalls Michelangelo's saying that his sole regret in life was that he did not kiss the widow's face in the same manner that he had her hand.
While the Madonna is in profile, the easiest aspect for a shallow relief, the child displays a twisting motion that was to become characteristic of Michelangelo's work.
The Taddeo Tondo of 1502 shows the Christ Child frightened by a Bullfinch, a symbol of the Crucifixion.
The Doni Tondo, depicting the Holy Family, has elements of all three previous works: the frieze of figures in the background has the appearance of a low-relief, while the circular shape and dynamic forms echo the Taddeo Tondo.
The twisting motion present in the Bruges Madonna is accentuated in the painting.
The painting heralds the forms, movement and colour that Michelangelo was to employ on the ceiling of the Sistine Chapel.
Although the two angels form a pair, there is a great contrast between the two works, the one depicting a delicate child with flowing hair clothed in Gothic robes with deep folds, and Michelangelo's depicting a robust and muscular youth with eagle's wings, clad in a garment of Classical style.
Everything about Michelangelo's angel is dynamic.
Michelangelo's Bacchus was a commission with a specified subject, the youthful God of Wine.
The sculpture has all the traditional attributes, a vine wreath, a cup of wine and a fawn, but Michelangelo ingested an air of reality into the subject, depicting him with bleary eyes, a swollen bladder and a stance that suggests he is unsteady on his feet.
In the so-called Dying Slave, Michelangelo has again utilised the figure with marked contraposto to suggest a particular human state, in this case waking from sleep.
With the Rebellious Slave, it is one of two such earlier figures for the Tomb of Pope Julius II, now in the Louvre, that the sculptor brought to an almost finished state.
These two works were to have a profound influence on later sculpture, through Rodin who studied them at the Louvre.
The Bound Slave is one of the later figures for Pope Julius' tomb.
The works, known collectively as The Captives, each show the figure struggling to free itself, as if from the bonds of the rock in which it is lodged.
The works give a unique insight into the sculptural methods that Michelangelo employed and his way of revealing what he perceived within the rock.
File:Angel by Michelangelo - 3.JPG|Angel by Michelangelo, early work (1494-95)
File:Michelangelo Bacchus.jpg|Bacchus by Michelangelo, early work (1496-97)
File:Dying slave Louvre MR 1590.jpg|Dying slave, Louvre (1513)
File:Michelangelo - Atlas.jpg|Bound slave, known as Atlas (1530-34)
Sistine Chapel ceiling
The Sistine Chapel ceiling was painted between 1508 and 1512.
Michelangelo, who was reluctant to take the job, persuaded the Pope to give him a free hand in the composition.
The scheme is of nine panels illustrating episodes from the Book of Genesis, set in an architectonic frame.
On the pendentives, Michelangelo replaced the proposed Apostles with Prophets and Sibyls who heralded the coming of the Messiah.
Michelangelo began painting with the later episodes in the narrative, the pictures including locational details and groups of figures, the Drunkenness of Noah being the first of this group.
The figure reproduced may be seen in context in the above image of the Separation of Light from Darkness.
In the process of painting the ceiling, Michelangelo made studies for different figures, of which some, such as that for The Libyan Sibyl have survived, demonstrating the care taken by Michelangelo in details such as the hands and feet.
The Prophet Jeremiah, contemplating the downfall of Jerusalem, is an image of the artist himself.
File:Michelangelo libyan.jpg|Studies for The Libyan Sibyl
File:Michelangelo the libyan.jpg|
The Libyan Sibyl (1511)
File:'Cumaean Sibyl Sistine Chapel ceiling' by Michelangelo JBU35.jpg|
The Cumaean Sibyl
File:Michelangelo Buonarroti 027.jpg|The Prophet Jeremiah (1511)
File:'Ignudo' by Michelangelo JBU33.jpg|Ignudo
Figure compositions
Michelangelo's relief of the Battle of the Centaurs, created while he was still a youth associated with the Medici Academy, is an unusually complex relief in that it shows a great number of figures involved in a vigorous struggle.
Such a complex disarray of figures was rare in Florentine art, where it would usually only be found in images showing either the Massacre of the Innocents or the Torments of Hell.
The relief treatment, in which some of the figures are boldly projecting, may indicate Michelangelo's familiarity with Roman sarcophagus reliefs from the collection of Lorenzo Medici, and similar marble panels created by Nicola and Giovanni Pisano, and with the figurative compositions on Ghiberti's Baptistry Doors.
The composition of the Battle of Cascina is known in its entirety only from copies, as the original cartoon, according to Vasari, was so admired that it deteriorated and was eventually in pieces.
It reflects the earlier relief in the energy and diversity of the figures, with many different postures, and many being viewed from the back, as they turn towards the approaching enemy and prepare for battle.
In The Last Judgment it is said that Michelangelo drew inspiration from a fresco by Melozzo da Forlì in Rome's Santi Apostoli.
Melozzo had depicted figures from different angles, as if they were floating in the Heaven and seen from below.
Melozzo's majestic figure of Christ, with windblown cloak, demonstrates a degree of foreshortening of the figure that had also been employed by Andrea Mantegna, but was not usual in the frescos of Florentine painters.
In The Last Judgement Michelangelo had the opportunity to depict, on an unprecedented scale, figures in the action of either rising heavenward or falling and being dragged down.
In the two frescos of the Pauline Chapel, The Crucifixion of St. Peter and The Conversion of Saul, Michelangelo has used the various groups of figures to convey a complex narrative.
In the Crucifixion of Peter soldiers busy themselves about their assigned duty of digging a post hole and raising the cross while various people look on and discuss the events.
A group of horrified women cluster in the foreground, while another group of Christians is led by a tall man to witness the events.
In the right foreground, Michelangelo walks out of the painting with an expression of disillusionment.
File:Michelangelo, centauromachia, 1492 ca. 01 crop.
JPG|Battle of the Centaurs (1492)
File:La batalla de Cascina - Sangallo.jpg|Copy of the lost Battle of Cascina by Bastiano da Sangallo
File:Michelangelo, giudizio universale, dettagli 33.jpg|The Last Judgment, detail of the Redeemed.
File:Michelangelo, paolina, martirio di san pietro 01.jpg|The Crucifixion of St. Peter
Architecture
Michelangelo's architectural commissions included a number that were not realised, notably the façade for Brunelleschi's Church of San Lorenzo in Florence, for which Michelangelo had a wooden model constructed, but which remains to this day unfinished rough brick.
At the same church, Giulio de' Medici (later Pope Clement VII) commissioned him to design the Medici Chapel and the tombs of Giuliano and Lorenzo Medici.
Pope Clement also commissioned the Laurentian Library, for which Michelangelo also designed the extraordinary vestibule with columns recessed into niches, and a staircase that appears to spill out of the library like a flow of lava, according to Nikolaus Pevsner, "... revealing Mannerism in its most sublime architectural form."
In 1546 Michelangelo produced the highly complex ovoid design for the pavement of the Campidoglio and began designing an upper storey for the Farnese Palace.
In 1547 he took on the job of completing St Peter's Basilica, begun to a design by Bramante, and with several intermediate designs by several architects.
Michelangelo returned to Bramante's design, retaining the basic form and concepts by simplifying and strengthening the design to create a more dynamic and unified whole.
Although the late 16th-century engraving depicts the dome as having a hemispherical profile, the dome of Michelangelo's model is somewhat ovoid and the final product, as completed by Giacomo della Porta is more so.
The last sculpture that Michelangelo worked on (six days before his death), the Rondanini Pietà could never be completed because Michelangelo carved it away until there was insufficient stone.
The legs and a detached arm remain from a previous stage of the work.
As it remains, the sculpture has an abstract quality, in keeping with 20th-century concepts of sculpture.
Michelangelo died in Rome in 1564, at the age of 88 (three weeks before his 89th birthday).
His body was taken from Rome for interment at the Basilica of Santa Croce, fulfilling the maestro's last request to be buried in his beloved Florence.
File:Firenze.
Palvecchio.500.Michelangelo2.JPG|Statue of Victory (1534), Palazzo Vecchio, Florence
File:Pietà per Vittoria Colonna.jpg|The Pietà of Vittoria Colonna (c. 1540)
File:Michelangelo pietà rondanini.jpg|The Rondanini Pietà (1552-64)
Legacy
Michelangelo, with Leonardo da Vinci and Raphael, is one of the three giants of the Florentine High Renaissance.
Although their names are often cited together, Michelangelo was younger than Leonardo by 23 years, and older than Raphael by eight.
Because of his reclusive nature, he had little to do with either artist and outlived both of them by more than forty years.
Michelangelo took few sculpture students.
He employed Francesco Granacci, who was his fellow pupil at the Medici Academy, and became one of several assistants on the Sistine Chapel ceiling.
Other artists, such as Pontormo, drew on the writhing forms of the Last Judgement and the frescoes of the Capella Paolina.
The Sistine Chapel ceiling was a work of unprecedented grandeur, both for its architectonic forms, to be imitated by many Baroque ceiling painters, and also for the wealth of its inventiveness in the study of figures.
Vasari wrote:
QTEMPLATE |The work has proved a veritable beacon to our art, of inestimable benefit to all painters, restoring light to a world that for centuries had been plunged into darkness.
Indeed, painters no longer need to seek for new inventions, novel attitudes, clothed figures, fresh ways of expression, different arrangements, or sublime subjects, for this work contains every perfection possible under those headings.
The Titan: Story of Michelangelo (1950 documentary)
Footnotes
:a. Michelangelo's father marks the date as 6 March 1474 in the Florentine manner ab Incarnatione.
However, in the Roman manner, ab Nativitate, it is 1475.
:b. Sources disagree as to how old Michelangelo was when he departed for school.
De Tolnay writes that it was at ten years old while Sedgwick notes in her translation of Condivi that Michelangelo was seven.
:c.
The Strozzi family acquired the sculpture Hercules.
Filippo Strozzi sold it to Francis I in 1529.
In 1594, Henry IV installed it in the Jardin d'Estang at Fontainebleau where it disappeared in 1713 when the Jardin d'Estange was destroyed.
:d. Vasari makes no mention of this episode and Paolo Giovio's Life of Michelangelo indicates that Michelangelo tried to pass the statue off as an antique himself.
Further reading
* Barenboim, Peter (with Shiyan, Sergey).
Michelangelo in the Medici Chapel: Genius in details (in English & Russian), LOOM, Moscow, 2011.
* http:/ pdf/Peter_Barenboim_-_The_British_Museum_Madonna.pdf Barenboim, Peter .
Michelangelo’s Moment: The British Museum Madonna, LOOM, Moscow, 2018.
* http:/ pdf/Michelangelo_and_500_years_of_the_New_Sacristy.pdf Barenboim, Peter .
500 years of the New Sacristy: Michelangelo in the Medici Chapel, LOOM, Moscow, 2019.
* Einem, Herbert von (1973).
Michelangelo.
Trans.
Ronald Taylor.
London: Methuen.
* Robert W. Garden.
Michelangelo - A record of his life as told in his own letters and papers.
Constable & company Ltd, London 1913.
* Gardner, Helen; Fred S. Kleiner, Christin J. Mamiya, Gardner's Art through the Ages.
Thomson Wadsworth, (2004) .
* Gilbert, Creighton (1994).
Michelangelo On and Off the Sistine Ceiling.
New York: George Braziller.
* Hartt, Frederick (1987).
David by the Hand of Michelangelo-the Original Model Discovered, Abbeville,
* Hibbard, Howard (1974).
Michelangelo.
New York: Harper & Row.
* Hirst, Michael and Jill Dunkerton.
The Young Michelangelo: The Artist in Rome 1496-1501.
London: National Gallery Publications,
* Paoletti, John T. and Radke, Gary M., (2005)
Art in Renaissance Italy, Laurence King,
* Pietrangeli, Carlo, et al. (1994).
The Sistine Chapel: A Glorious Restoration.
New York: Harry N. Abrams
* Saslow, James M. (1991).
The Poetry of Michelangelo: An Annotated Translation.
New Haven and London: Yale University Press.
* Seymour, Charles, Jr. (1972).
Michelangelo: The Sistine Chapel Ceiling.
New York: W.W. Norton.
* Summers, David (1981).
Michelangelo and the Language of Art. Princeton University Press.
* Tolnay, Charles de. (1964).
The Art and Thought of Michelangelo.
5 vols.
New York: Pantheon Books.
* Wilde, Johannes (1978).
Michelangelo: Six Lectures.
Oxford: Clarendon Press.
