The giraffe (Giraffa) is an African even-toed ungulate mammal, the tallest living terrestrial animal and the largest ruminant.
It is traditionally considered to be one species, Giraffa camelopardalis, with nine subspecies.
However the existence of up to eight extant giraffe species have been described, based upon research into the mitochondrial and nuclear DNA, as well as morphological measurements of Giraffa.
Seven other species are extinct, prehistoric species known from fossils.
The giraffe's chief distinguishing characteristics are its extremely long neck and legs, its horn-like ossicones, and its distinctive coat patterns.
It is classified under the family Giraffidae, along with its closest extant relative, the okapi.
Its scattered range extends from Chad in the north to South Africa in the south, and from Niger in the west to Somalia in the east.
Giraffes usually inhabit savannahs and woodlands.
Their food source is leaves, fruits and flowers of woody plants, primarily acacia species, which they browse at heights most other herbivores cannot reach.
They may be preyed on by lions, leopards, spotted hyenas and African wild dogs.
Giraffes live in herds of related females and their offspring, or bachelor herds of unrelated adult males, but are gregarious and may gather in large aggregations.
Males establish social hierarchies through "necking", which are combat bouts where the neck is used as a weapon.
Dominant males gain mating access to females, which bear the sole responsibility for raising the young.
The giraffe has intrigued various cultures, both ancient and modern, for its peculiar appearance, and has often been featured in paintings, books, and cartoons.
It is classified by the International Union for Conservation of Nature as Vulnerable to extinction, and has been extirpated from many parts of its former range.
Giraffes are still found in numerous national parks and game reserves but estimations as of 2016 indicate that there are approximately 97,500 members of Giraffa in the wild.
More than 1,600 were kept in zoos in 2010.
Etymology
The name "giraffe" has its earliest known origins in the Arabic word (), The Arab name is translated as "fast-walker".
"Camelopard" is an archaic English name for the giraffe deriving from the Ancient Greek for camel and leopard, referring to its camel-like shape and its leopard-like colouring.
Taxonomy
Living giraffes were originally classified as one species by Carl Linnaeus in 1758.
He gave it the binomial name Cervus camelopardalis.
Morten Thrane Brünnich classified the genus Giraffa in 1772.
The species name camelopardalis is from Latin.
Evolution
The giraffe is one of only two living genera of the family Giraffidae in the order Artiodactyla, the other being the okapi.
The family was once much more extensive, with over 10 fossil genera described.
Their closest known relatives may have been the extinct deer-like climacocerids.
They, together with the family Antilocapridae (whose only extant species is the pronghorn), have been placed in the superfamily Giraffoidea.
These animals may have evolved from the extinct family Palaeomerycidae which might also have been the ancestor of deer.
The elongation of the neck appears to have started early in the giraffe lineage.
Comparisons between giraffes and their ancient relatives suggest that vertebrae close to the skull lengthened earlier, followed by lengthening of vertebrae further down.
One early giraffid ancestor was Canthumeryx which has been dated variously to have lived 25-20 million years ago (mya), 17-15 mya or 18-14.3 mya and whose deposits have been found in Libya.
This animal was medium-sized, slender and antelope-like.
Giraffokeryx appeared 15 mya in the Indian subcontinent and resembled an okapi or a small giraffe, and had a longer neck and similar ossicones.
Bohlinia, which first appeared in southeastern Europe and lived 9-7 mya was likely a direct ancestor of the giraffe.
Bohlinia closely resembled modern giraffes, having a long neck and legs and similar ossicones and dentition.
Further climate changes caused the extinction of the Asian giraffes, while the African giraffes survived and radiated into several new species.
Living giraffes appear to have arisen around 1 mya in eastern Africa during the Pleistocene.
Some researchers have hypothesised that this new habitat coupled with a different diet, including acacia species, may have exposed giraffe ancestors to toxins that caused higher mutation rates and a higher rate of evolution.
that better enabled them to survive and reproduce to pass on their genes.
Species and subspecies
The IUCN currently recognises only one species of giraffe with nine subspecies.
In 2001, a two-species taxonomy was proposed.
A 2007 study on the genetics of Giraffa, suggested they were six species: the West African, Rothschild's, reticulated, Masai, Angolan, and South African giraffe.
A 2011 study using detailed analyses of the morphology of giraffes, and application of the phylogenetic species concept, described eight species of living giraffes.
The eight species are: G. angolensis, G. antiquorum, G. camelopardalis, G. giraffa, G. peralta, G. reticulata, G. thornicrofti, and G. tippelskirchi.
A 2016 study also concluded that living giraffes consist of multiple species.
Since then, a response to this publication has been published, highlighting seven problems in data interpretation, and concludes "the conclusions should not be accepted unconditionally".
In 2016 there were an estimated 90,000 individuals of Giraffa in the wild.
also known as Kilimanjaro giraffe ||
The Masai giraffe (G. c. tippelskirchi) can be found in central and southern Kenya and in Tanzania.
The average weight is for an adult male and for an adult female with maximum weights of and having been recorded for males and females, respectively.
Despite its long neck and legs, the giraffe's body is relatively short.
The coat pattern has been claimed to serve as camouflage in the light and shade patterns of savannah woodlands.
The skin underneath the dark areas may serve as windows for thermoregulation, being sites for complex blood vessel systems and large sweat glands.
Each individual giraffe has a unique coat pattern.
Along the animal's neck is a mane made of short, erect hairs.
It appears that a suspensory ligament allows the lanky legs to support the animal's great weight.
The foot of the giraffe reaches a diameter of , and the hoof is high in males and in females.
and can sustain for several kilometres.
A giraffe rests by lying with its body on top of its folded legs.
If the giraffe wants to bend down to drink, it either spreads its front legs or bends its knees.
although they could possibly float.
When swimming, the thorax would be weighed down by the front legs, making it difficult for the animal to move its neck and legs in harmony The long neck results from a disproportionate lengthening of the cervical vertebrae, not from the addition of more vertebrae.
Each cervical vertebra is over long.
They comprise 52-54 per cent of the length of the giraffe's vertebral column, compared with the 27-33 percent typical of similar large ungulates, including the giraffe's closest living relative, the okapi.
This elongation largely takes place after birth, perhaps because giraffe mothers would have a difficult time giving birth to young with the same neck proportions as adults.
The giraffe's head and neck are held up by large muscles and a strengthened nuchal ligament, which are anchored by long dorsal spines on the anterior thoracic vertebrae, giving the animal a hump.
However, this proposition is not generally accepted, as T1 has other morphological features, such as an articulating rib, deemed diagnostic of thoracic vertebrae, and because exceptions to the mammalian limit of seven cervical vertebrae are generally characterised by increased neurological anomalies and maladies.
The "competing browsers hypothesis" was originally suggested by Charles Darwin and challenged only recently.
It suggests that competitive pressure from smaller browsers, such as kudu, steenbok and impala, encouraged the elongation of the neck, as it enabled giraffes to reach food that competitors could not.
This advantage is real, as giraffes can and do feed up to high, while even quite large competitors, such as kudu, can feed up to only about high.
There is also research suggesting that browsing competition is intense at lower levels, and giraffes feed more efficiently (gaining more leaf biomass with each mouthful) high in the canopy.
However, scientists disagree about just how much time giraffes spend feeding at levels beyond the reach of other browsers,
and a 2010 study found that adult giraffes with longer necks actually suffered higher mortality rates under drought conditions than their shorter-necked counterparts.
This study suggests that maintaining a longer neck requires more nutrients, which puts longer-necked giraffes at risk during a food shortage.
Another theory, the sexual selection hypothesis, proposes that the long necks evolved as a secondary sexual characteristic, giving males an advantage in "necking" contests (see below) to establish dominance and obtain access to sexually receptive females.
In support of this theory, necks are longer and heavier for males than females of the same age, It has also been proposed that the neck serves to give the animal greater vigilance.
Internal systems
In mammals, the left recurrent laryngeal nerve is longer than the right; in the giraffe it is over longer.
These nerves are longer in the giraffe than in any other living animal; the left nerve is over long.
Each nerve cell in this path begins in the brainstem and passes down the neck along the vagus nerve, then branches off into the recurrent laryngeal nerve which passes back up the neck to the larynx.
Thus, these nerve cells have a length of nearly in the largest giraffes.
The circulatory system of the giraffe has several adaptations for its great height.
Its heart, which can weigh more than and measures about long, must generate approximately double the blood pressure required for a human to maintain blood flow to the brain.
As such, the wall of the heart can be as thick as .
The jugular veins contain several (most commonly seven) valves to prevent blood flowing back into the head from the inferior vena cava and right atrium while the head is lowered.
Conversely, the blood vessels in the lower legs are under great pressure because of the weight of fluid pressing down on them.
To solve this problem, the skin of the lower legs is thick and tight; preventing too much blood from pouring into them.
The liver of the giraffe is small and compact.
Behaviour and ecology
Habitat and feeding
Giraffes usually inhabit savannahs and open woodlands.
They prefer Acacieae, Commiphora, Combretum and open Terminalia woodlands over denser environments like Brachystegia woodlands.
Giraffes browse on the twigs of trees, preferring trees of the subfamily Acacieae and the genera Commiphora and Terminalia, which are important sources of calcium and protein to sustain the giraffe's growth rate.
Traditionally, the composition of these groups had been described as open and ever-changing.
For research purposes, a "group" has been defined as "a collection of individuals that are less than a kilometre apart and moving in the same general direction."
More recent studies have found that giraffes have long-term social associations and may form groups or pairs based on kinship, sex or other factors.
These groups may regularly associate with one another in larger communities or sub-communities within a fission-fusion society.
The number of giraffes in a group can range up to 66 individuals.
Male giraffes occasionally wander far from areas that they normally frequent.
Reproduction and parental care
Reproduction in giraffes is broadly .
Males prefer young adult females over juveniles and older adults.
The mother gives birth standing up.
The calf emerges head and front legs first, having broken through the fetal membranes, and falls to the ground, severing the umbilical cord.
its coat pattern providing camouflage.
The ossicones, which have lain flat while it was in the womb, become erect within a few days.
Males must wait until they are at least seven years old to gain the opportunity to mate.
In one study, up to 94 percent of observed mounting incidents took place between males.
The proportion of same-sex activities varied from 30-75 percent.
Only one percent of same-sex mounting incidents occurred between females.
Mortality and health
Giraffes have high adult survival probability, and an unusually long lifespan compared to other ruminants, up to 38 years.
Because of their size, eyesight and powerful kicks, adult giraffes are usually not subject to predation, Giraffes are the most common food source for the big cats in Kruger National Park, comprising nearly a third of the meat consumed, although only a small portion of the giraffes were provably killed by predators, as a majority of the consumed giraffes appeared to be scavenged.
Nile crocodiles can also be a threat to giraffes when they bend down to drink.
Calf survival varies according to the season of birth, with calves born during the dry season having higher survival rates.
The local, seasonal presence of large herds of migratory wildebeests and zebras reduces predation pressure on giraffe calves and increases their survival probability.
In turn, it has been suggested that other ungulates may benefit from associating with giraffes as their height allows them to spot predators from further away.
Zebras were found to glean information on predation risk from giraffe body language and spend less time scanning the environment when giraffes are present.
Some parasites feed on giraffes.
They are often hosts for ticks, especially in the area around the genitals, which has thinner skin than other areas.
Tick species that commonly feed on giraffes are those of genera Hyalomma, Amblyomma and Rhipicephalus.
Giraffes may rely on red-billed and yellow-billed oxpeckers to clean them of ticks and alert them to danger.
Giraffes host numerous species of internal parasite and are susceptible to various diseases.
They were victims of the (now eradicated) viral illness rinderpest.
Relationship with humans
Humans have interacted with giraffes for millennia.
The San people of southern Africa have medicine dances named after some animals; the giraffe dance is performed to treat head ailments.
How the giraffe got its height has been the subject of various African folktales, Giraffes were depicted in art throughout the African continent, including that of the Kiffians, Egyptians and Kushites.
The Kiffians were responsible for a life-size rock engraving of two giraffes that has been called the "world's largest rock art petroglyph".
The Egyptians gave the giraffe its own hieroglyph, named 'sr' in Old Egyptian and 'mmy' in later periods.
Individual captive giraffes were given celebrity status throughout history.
In 1414, a giraffe was shipped from Malindi to Bengal.
It was then taken to China by explorer Zheng He and placed in a Ming dynasty zoo.
The animal was a source of fascination for the Chinese people, who associated it with the mythical Qilin.
Zarafa, another famous giraffe, was brought from Egypt to Paris in the early 19th century as a gift from Muhammad Ali of Egypt to Charles X of France.
A sensation, the giraffe was the subject of numerous memorabilia or "giraffanalia".
The constellation of Camelopardalis, introduced in the seventeenth century, depicts a giraffe.
Exploitation and conservation status
In 2010, giraffes were assessed as Least Concern from a conservation perspective by the International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN), but the 2016 assessment categorized giraffes as Vulnerable.
and the Rothschild subspecies is near threatened.
The drink is said to cause hallucinations of giraffes, believed to be the giraffes' ghosts by the Humr.
In the 19th century, European explorers began to hunt them for sport.
Aerial survey is the most common method of monitoring giraffe population trends in the vast roadless tracts of African landscapes, but aerial methods are known to undercount giraffes.
Ground-based survey methods are more accurate and should be used in conjunction with aerial surveys to make accurate estimates of population sizes and trends.
Private game reserves have contributed to the preservation of giraffe populations in southern Africa.
The giraffe is a protected species in most of its range.
It is the national animal of Tanzania, and is protected by law.
Unauthorised killing can result in imprisonment.
The UN backed Convention of Migratory Species selected giraffes for protection in 2017.
In 1999, it was estimated that over 140,000 giraffes existed in the wild, , there were more than 1,600 in captivity at Species360-registered zoos (not including non-Species360 zoos or any kept by private people).
