Roald Dahl (; 13 September 1916 - 23 November 1990) was a British novelist, short story writer, poet, screenwriter, and fighter pilot.
His books have sold more than 250 million copies worldwide.
Born in Wales to Norwegian immigrant parents, Dahl served in the Royal Air Force during the Second World War.
He became a flying ace and intelligence officer, rising to the rank of acting wing commander.
He rose to prominence as a writer in the 1940s with works for both children and adults, and he became one of the world's best-selling authors.
Dahl's short stories are known for their unexpected endings, and his children's books for their unsentimental, macabre, often darkly comic mood, featuring villainous adult enemies of the child characters.
His books champion the kindhearted, and feature an underlying warm sentiment.
Dahl's father had emigrated to the UK from Sarpsborg in Norway, and settled in Cardiff in the 1880s with his first wife, a Frenchwoman named Marie Beaurin-Gresser.
They had two children together, Ellen Marguerite and Louis, before her death in 1907.
In 1920, when Dahl was three years old, his seven-year-old sister, Astri, died from appendicitis.
Weeks later, his father died of pneumonia at the age of 57.
With the option of returning to Norway to live with relatives, Dahl's mother decided to remain in Wales.
Her husband Harald had wanted their children to be educated in English schools, which he considered the world's best.
Dahl first attended the Cathedral School, Llandaff.
At the age of eight, he and four of his friends (one named Thwaites) were caned by the headmaster after putting a dead mouse in a jar of gobstoppers at the local sweet shop, Gobstoppers were a favourite sweet among British schoolboys between the two World Wars, and Dahl would refer to them in his creation, Everlasting Gobstopper, which was featured in Charlie and the Chocolate Factory.
Dahl transferred to a boarding school in England: St. Peter's in Weston-super-Mare.
His parents had wanted him to be educated at an English public school and, because of the regular ferry link across the Bristol Channel, this proved to be the nearest.
Dahl's time at St. Peter's was unpleasant; he was very homesick and wrote to his mother every week but never revealed his unhappiness to her.
After her death in 1967, he learned that she had saved every one of his letters, in small bundles held together with green tape.
In 2016, to mark the centenary of Dahl's birth, his letters to his mother were abridged and broadcast as BBC Radio 4's Book of the Week.
Dahl wrote about his time at St. Peter's in his autobiography Boy: Tales of Childhood.
Repton School
From 1929, when he was 13, Dahl attended Repton School in Derbyshire.
Dahl disliked the hazing and described an environment of ritual cruelty and status domination, with younger boys having to act as personal servants for older boys, frequently subject to terrible beatings.
His biographer Donald Sturrock described these violent experiences in Dahl's early life.
Dahl expresses some of these darker experiences in his writings, which is also marked by his hatred of cruelty and corporal punishment.
According to Dahl's autobiography, Boy: Tales of Childhood, a friend named Michael was viciously caned by headmaster Geoffrey Fisher.
Writing in that same book, Dahl reflected: “All through my school life I was appalled by the fact that masters and senior boys were allowed literally to wound other boys, and sometimes quite severely...
I couldn’t get over it.
I never have got over it.”
Fisher was later selected as the Archbishop of Canterbury and crowned Queen Elizabeth II in 1953.
However, according to Dahl's biographer Jeremy Treglown, the caning took place in May 1933, a year after Fisher had left Repton; the headmaster was in fact J. T. Christie, Fisher's successor as headmaster.
Dahl said the incident caused him to "have doubts about religion and even about God".
He was never seen as a particularly talented writer in his school years, with one of his English teachers writing in his school report "I have never met anybody who so persistently writes words meaning the exact opposite of what is intended."
Dahl was exceptionally tall, reaching in adult life.
He played sports including cricket, football and golf, and was made captain of the squash team.
As well as having a passion for literature, he developed an interest in photography and often carried a camera with him.
During his years at Repton, the Cadbury chocolate company would occasionally send boxes of new chocolates to the school to be tested by the pupils.
Dahl would dream of inventing a new chocolate bar that would win the praise of Mr Cadbury himself; this inspired him in writing his third children's book, Charlie and the Chocolate Factory (1964), and to refer to chocolate in other children's books.
Throughout his childhood and adolescent years, Dahl spent the majority of his summer holidays with his mother's family in Norway.
He wrote about many happy memories from those visits in Boy: Tales of Childhood, such as when he replaced the tobacco in his half-sister's fiancé's pipe with goat droppings.
He noted only one unhappy memory of his holidays in Norway: at around the age of eight, he had to have his adenoids removed by a doctor.
His childhood and first job selling kerosene in Midsomer Norton and surrounding villages in Somerset are subjects in Boy: Tales of Childhood.
After school
After finishing his schooling, in August 1934 Dahl crossed the Atlantic on the and hiked through Newfoundland with the Public Schools Exploring Society.
In July 1934, Dahl joined the Shell Petroleum Company.
Following two years of training in the United Kingdom, he was assigned first to Mombasa, Kenya, then to Dar-es-Salaam, Tanganyika (now Tanzania).
Along with the only two other Shell employees in the entire territory, he lived in luxury in the Shell House outside Dar es Salaam, with a cook and personal servants.
While out on assignments supplying oil to customers across Tanganyika, he encountered black mambas and lions, among other wildlife.
In November 1939, Dahl joined the Royal Air Force as an aircraftman with service number 774022.
After a car journey from Dar es Salaam to Nairobi, he was accepted for flight training with sixteen other men, among whom only three survived the war.
With seven hours and 40 minutes experience in a De Havilland Tiger Moth, he flew solo; Dahl enjoyed watching the wildlife of Kenya during his flights.
He continued to advanced flying training in Iraq, at RAF Habbaniya, west of Baghdad.
Following six months' training on Hawker Harts, Dahl was commissioned as a pilot officer on 24 August 1940, and was judged ready to join a squadron and face the enemy.
He was assigned to No. 80 Squadron RAF, flying obsolete Gloster Gladiators, the last biplane fighter aircraft used by the RAF.
Dahl was surprised to find that he would not receive any specialised training in aerial combat, or in flying Gladiators.
On 19 September 1940, Dahl was ordered to fly his Gladiator by stages from Abu Sueir (near Ismailia, in Egypt) to 80 Squadron's forward airstrip south of Mersa Matruh.
On the final leg he could not find the airstrip and, running low on fuel and with night approaching, he was forced to attempt a landing in the desert.
The undercarriage hit a boulder and the aircraft crashed.
Dahl's skull was fractured and his nose was smashed; he was temporarily blinded.
He managed to drag himself away from the blazing wreckage and passed out.
He wrote about the crash in his first published work.
In February 1941, Dahl was discharged from hospital and passed fully fit for flying duties.
By this time, 80 Squadron had been transferred to the Greek campaign and based at Eleusina, near Athens.
The squadron was now equipped with Hawker Hurricanes.
Dahl flew a replacement Hurricane across the Mediterranean Sea in April 1941, after seven hours' experience flying Hurricanes.
By this stage in the Greek campaign, the RAF had only 18 combat aircraft in Greece: 14 Hurricanes and four Bristol Blenheim light bombers.
Dahl flew in his first aerial combat on 15 April 1941, while flying alone over the city of Chalcis.
He attacked six Junkers Ju 88s that were bombing ships and shot one down.
On 16 April in another air battle, he shot down another Ju 88.
On 20 April 1941, Dahl took part in the Battle of Athens, alongside the highest-scoring British Commonwealth ace of World War II, Pat Pattle, and Dahl's friend David Coke.
Of 12 Hurricanes involved, five were shot down and four of their pilots killed, including Pattle.
Greek observers on the ground counted 22 German aircraft downed, but because of the confusion of the aerial engagement, none of the pilots knew which aircraft they had shot down.
Dahl described it as "an endless blur of enemy fighters whizzing towards me from every side".
In May, as the Germans were pressing on Athens, Dahl was evacuated to Egypt.
His squadron was reassembled in Haifa.
From there, Dahl flew sorties every day for a period of four weeks, shooting down a Vichy French Air Force Potez 63 on 8 June and another Ju 88 on 15 June, but he began to get severe headaches that caused him to black out.
He was invalided home to Britain.
Though at this time Dahl was only a pilot officer on probation, in September 1941 he was simultaneously confirmed as a pilot officer and promoted to war substantive flying officer.
Diplomat, writer and intelligence officer
After being invalided home, Dahl was posted to an RAF training camp in Uxbridge.
He attempted to recover his health enough to become an instructor.
In late March 1942, while in London, he met the Under-Secretary of State for Air, Major Harold Balfour, at his club.
Impressed by Dahl's war record and conversational abilities, Balfour appointed the young man as assistant air attaché at the British Embassy in Washington, D.C.
Initially resistant, Dahl was finally persuaded by Balfour to accept, and took passage on the SS Batori from Glasgow a few days later.
He arrived in Halifax, Canada, on 14 April, after which he took a sleeper train to Montreal.
Coming from war-starved Britain , Dahl was amazed by the wealth of food and amenities to be had in North America.
Arriving in Washington a week later, Dahl found he liked the atmosphere of the US capital.
He shared a house with another attaché at 1610 34th Street, NW, in Georgetown.
But after ten days in his new posting, Dahl strongly disliked it, feeling he had taken on "a most ungodly unimportant job".
He later explained, "I'd just come from the war.
People were getting killed.
I had been flying around, seeing horrible things.
Now, almost instantly, I found myself in the middle of a pre-war cocktail party in America."
Dahl was unimpressed by his office in the British Air Mission, attached to the embassy.
He was also unimpressed by the ambassador, Lord Halifax, with whom he sometimes played tennis and whom he described as "a courtly English gentleman".
Dahl socialized with Charles E. Marsh, a Texas publisher and oilman, at his house at 2136 R Street, NW, and the Marsh country estate in Virginia.
As part of his duties as assistant air attaché, Dahl was to help neutralise the isolationist views still held by many Americans by giving pro-British speeches and discussing his war service; the United States had entered the war only the previous December, following the attack on Pearl Harbor.
The Saturday Evening Post had asked Forester to write a story based on Dahl's flying experiences; Forester asked Dahl to write down some RAF anecdotes so that he could shape them into a story.
After Forester read what Dahl had given him, he decided to publish the story exactly as Dahl had written it.
Later he worked with such other well-known British officers as Ian Fleming (who later published the popular James Bond series) and David Ogilvy, promoting Britain's interests and message in the US and combating the "America First" movement.
This work introduced Dahl to espionage and the activities of the Canadian spymaster William Stephenson, known by the codename "Intrepid".
During the war, Dahl supplied intelligence from Washington to Prime Minister Winston Churchill.
As Dahl later said: "My job was to try to help Winston to get on with FDR, and tell Winston what was in the old boy's mind."
Dahl also supplied intelligence to Stephenson and his organisation, known as British Security Coordination, which was part of MI6.
Toward the end of the war, Dahl wrote some of the history of the secret organisation; he and Stephenson remained friends for decades after the war.
Upon the war's conclusion, Dahl held the rank of a temporary wing commander (substantive flight lieutenant).
Owing to the severity of his injuries from the 1940 accident, he was pronounced unfit for further service and was invalided out of the RAF in August 1946.
He left the service with the substantive rank of squadron leader.
His record of five aerial victories, qualifying him as a flying ace, has been confirmed by post-war research and cross-referenced in Axis records.
It is most likely that he scored more than those victories during 20 April 1941, when 22 German aircraft were shot down.
Post-war life
Dahl married American actress Patricia Neal on 2 July 1953 at Trinity Church in New York City.
Their marriage lasted for 30 years and they had five children:
* Olivia Twenty (20 April 1955 - 17 November 1962);
* Chantal Sophia "Tessa" (born 1957), who became an author, and mother of author, cookbook writer and former model Sophie Dahl (after whom Sophie in The BFG is named).;
On 5 December 1960, four-month-old Theo Dahl was severely injured when his baby carriage was struck by a taxicab in New York City.
For a time, he suffered from hydrocephalus.
As a result, his father became involved in the development of what became known as the "Wade-Dahl-Till" (or WDT) valve, a device to improve the shunt used to alleviate the condition.
The valve was a collaboration between Dahl, hydraulic engineer Stanley Wade, and London's Great Ormond Street Hospital neurosurgeon Kenneth Till, and was used successfully on almost 3,000 children around the world.
In November 1962, Dahl's daughter Olivia died of measles encephalitis, age seven.
Her death left Dahl "limp with despair", and feeling guilty about not having been able to do anything for her.
After Olivia's death and a meeting with a Church official, Dahl came to view Christianity as a sham.
In 1965, his wife Patricia Neal suffered three burst cerebral aneurysms while pregnant with their fifth child, Lucy.
Dahl took control of her rehabilitation over the next months; Neal had to re-learn to talk and walk, but she managed to return to her acting career.
This period of their lives was dramatised in the film The Patricia Neal Story (1981), in which the couple were played by Glenda Jackson and Dirk Bogarde.
Neal and Dahl divorced in 1983.
He married Felicity d'Abreu Crosland, niece of Francis D'Abreu who was married to Margaret Ann Bowes Lyon - 1st cousin of the late Queen Mother, at Brixton Town Hall, South London.
Dahl and Crosland had previously been in a relationship.
Felicity (known as Liccy) gave up her job and moved into "Gipsy House", Great Missenden in Buckinghamshire, which had been Dahl's home since 1954.
In 1983 Dahl reviewed Tony Clifton's God Cried, a picture book about the siege of West Beirut by the Israeli army during the 1982 Lebanon War.
He wrote that the book would make readers "violently anti-Israeli", stating: "I am not anti-Semitic.
I am anti-Israel."
In 1990, during an interview with The Independent, Dahl explained that his issue with Israel began when they invaded Lebanon in 1982: “they killed 22,000 civilians when they bombed Beirut.
It was very much hushed up in the newspapers because they are primarily Jewish-owned.
I’m certainly anti-Israeli and I’ve become antisemitic in as much as that you get a Jewish person in another country like England strongly supporting Zionism.”
As a result of these views, in 2014 the Royal Mint decided not to produce a coin to commemorate the centenary of Dahl's birth because he was considered to be "associated with antisemitism and not regarded as an author of the highest reputation".
In the 1986 New Years Honours List, Dahl was offered an appointment to Officer of the Order of the British Empire (OBE), but turned it down.
He reportedly wanted a knighthood so that his wife would be Lady Dahl.
In 2012, Dahl was featured in the list of The New Elizabethans to mark the diamond Jubilee of Queen Elizabeth II.
A panel of seven academics, journalists and historians named Dahl among the group of people in the UK "whose actions during the reign of Elizabeth II have had a significant impact on lives in these islands and given the age its character".
In September 2016, his daughter Lucy received the BBC's Blue Peter Gold badge in his honour, the first time it has ever been awarded posthumously.
Writing
Dahl's first published work, inspired by a meeting with C. S. Forester, was "A Piece of Cake", on 1 August 1942.
The story, about his wartime adventures, was bought by The Saturday Evening Post for US$1,000 (a substantial sum in 1942) and published under the title "Shot Down Over Libya".
His first children's book was The Gremlins, published in 1943, about mischievous little creatures that were part of Royal Air Force folklore.
The RAF pilots blamed the gremlins for all the problems with the aircraft.
While at the British Embassy in Washington, Dahl sent a copy to the First Lady Eleanor Roosevelt who read it to her grandchildren, Dahl went on to create some of the best-loved children's stories of the 20th century, such as Charlie and the Chocolate Factory, Matilda, James and the Giant Peach, The Witches, Fantastic Mr Fox, The BFG, The Twits and George's Marvellous Medicine.
Works such as Kiss Kiss subsequently collected Dahl's stories into anthologies, and gained significant popularity.
Dahl wrote more than 60 short stories; they have appeared in numerous collections, some only being published in book form after his death (see List of Roald Dahl short stories).
His three Edgar Awards were given for: in 1954, the collection Someone Like You; in 1959, the story "The Landlady"; and in 1980, the episode of Tales of the Unexpected based on "Skin".
One of his more famous adult stories, "The Smoker", also known as "Man from the South", was filmed twice as both 1960 and 1985 episodes of Alfred Hitchcock Presents, and also adapted into Quentin Tarantino's segment of the 1995 film Four Rooms.
Five additional Dahl stories were used in the Hitchcock series.
Dahl was credited with teleplay for two episodes, and four of his episodes were directed by Hitchcock himself, an example of which was the acclaimed "Lamb to the Slaughter" in 1958.
Dahl acquired a traditional Romanichal vardo in the 1960s, and the family used it as a playhouse for his children at home in Great Missenden, Buckinghamshire.
He later used the vardo as a writing room, where he wrote Danny, the Champion of the World in 1975.
Dahl incorporated a Gypsy wagon into the main plot of the book, where the young English boy, Danny, and his father, William (played by Jeremy Irons in the film adaptation) live in a vardo.
Many other scenes and characters from Great Missenden are reflected in his work.
For example, the village library was the inspiration for Mrs Phelps' library in Matilda, where the title character devours classic literature by the age of four.
His short story collection Tales of the Unexpected was adapted to a successful TV series of the same name, beginning with Man From the South.
When the stock of Dahl's own original stories was exhausted, the series continued by adapting stories by authors that were written in Dahl's style, including the writers John Collier and Stanley Ellin.
Some of his short stories are supposed to be extracts from the diary of his (fictional) Uncle Oswald, a rich gentleman whose sexual exploits form the subject of these stories.
Memories with Food at Gipsy House, written with his wife Felicity and published posthumously in 1991, was a mixture of recipes, family reminiscences and Dahl's musings on favourite subjects such as chocolate, onions and claret.
The last book published in his lifetime, Esio Trot, released in January 1990, marked a change in style for the author.
Unlike other Dahl works (which often feature tyrannical adults and heroic/magical children), it is the story of an old, lonely man trying to make a connection with a woman he has loved from afar.
In 1994, the English language audiobook recording of the book was provided by Monty Python member Michael Palin.
In 2015 it was adapted by screenwriter Richard Curtis into an acclaimed BBC comedy television film, Roald Dahl's Esio Trot, featuring Dustin Hoffman and Judi Dench as the couple.
Children's fiction
QTEMPLATE box|width
28%|align
right|quote
"He Dahl was mischievous.
A grown-up being mischievous.
He addresses you, a child, as somebody who knows about the world.
He was a grown-up - and he was bigger than most - who is on your side.
That must have something to do with it.
"|source
-Illustrator Quentin Blake on the lasting appeal of Dahl's children's books.
Anna Leskiewicz in The Telegraph writes, “It’s often suggested that Dahl’s lasting appeal is a result of his exceptional talent for wriggling his way into children’s fantasies and fears, and laying them out on the page with anarchic delight.
Adult villains are drawn in terrifying detail, before they are exposed as liars and hypocrites, and brought tumbling down with retributive justice, either by a sudden magic or the superior acuity of the children they mistreat.“
The Witches, George's Marvellous Medicine and Matilda are examples of this formula.
The BFG follows it in a more analogous way with the good giant (the BFG or "Big Friendly Giant") representing the "good adult" archetype and the other giants being the "bad adults".
This formula is also somewhat evident in Dahl's film script for Chitty Chitty Bang Bang.
Class-conscious themes also surface in works such as Fantastic Mr Fox and Danny, the Champion of the World where the unpleasant wealthy neighbours are outwitted.
Dahl also features characters who are very fat, usually children.
Augustus Gloop, Bruce Bogtrotter and Bruno Jenkins are a few of these characters, although an enormous woman named Aunt Sponge features in James and the Giant Peach and the nasty farmer Boggis in Fantastic Mr Fox is an enormously fat character.
All of these characters (with the possible exception of Bruce Bogtrotter) are either villains or simply unpleasant gluttons.
They are usually punished for this: Augustus Gloop drinks from Willy Wonka's chocolate river, disregarding the adults who tell him not to, and falls in, getting sucked up a pipe and nearly being turned into fudge.
In Matilda, Bruce Bogtrotter steals cake from the evil headmistress, Miss Trunchbull, and is forced to eat a gigantic chocolate cake in front of the school.
In The Witches, Bruno Jenkins is lured by the witches (whose leader is the Grand High Witch) into their convention with the promise of chocolate, before they turn him into a mouse.
Aunt Sponge is flattened by a giant peach.
When Dahl was a boy his mother used to tell him and his sisters tales about trolls and other mythical Norwegian creatures and some of his children's books contain references or elements inspired by these stories, such as the giants in The BFG, the fox family in Fantastic Mr Fox and the trolls in The Minpins.
Receiving the 1983 World Fantasy Award for Life Achievement, Dahl encouraged his children and his readers to let their imagination run free.
His daughter Lucy stated "his spirit was so large and so big he taught us to believe in magic."
Rennie commented that some of Dahl's words have already escaped his world, for example, Scrumdiddlyumptious: "Food that is utterly delicious".
Screenplays
For a brief period in the 1960s, Dahl wrote screenplays.
Two, the James Bond film You Only Live Twice and Chitty Chitty Bang Bang, were adaptations of novels by Ian Fleming.
Dahl also began adapting his own novel Charlie and the Chocolate Factory, which was completed and rewritten by David Seltzer after Dahl failed to meet deadlines, and produced as the film Willy Wonka & the Chocolate Factory (1971).
Dahl later disowned the film, saying he was "disappointed" because "he thought it placed too much emphasis on Willy Wonka and not enough on Charlie".
He was also "infuriated" by the deviations in the plot devised by David Seltzer in his draft of the screenplay.
This resulted in his refusal for any more versions of the book to be made in his lifetime, as well as an adaptation for the sequel Charlie and the Great Glass Elevator.
Influences
A major part of Dahl's literary influences stemmed from his childhood.
In his younger days, he was an avid reader, especially awed by fantastic tales of heroism and triumph.
Amongst his favourite authors were Rudyard Kipling, Charles Dickens, William Makepeace Thackeray and Frederick Marryat, and their works went on to make a lasting mark on his life and writing.
Finding too many distractions in his house, Dahl remembered the poet Dylan Thomas had found a peaceful shed to write in close to home.
Dahl travelled to visit Thomas's hut in Carmarthenshire, Wales in the 1950s and, after taking a look inside, decided to make a replica of it to write in.
Dahl liked ghost stories, and claimed that Trolls by Jonas Lie was one of the finest ghost stories ever written.
While he was still a youngster, his mother, Sofie Dahl, would relate traditional Norwegian myths and legends from her native homeland to Dahl and his sisters.
Dahl always maintained that his mother and her stories had a strong influence on his writing.
In one interview, he mentioned: "She was a great teller of tales.
Her memory was prodigious and nothing that ever happened to her in her life was forgotten."
When Dahl started writing and publishing his famous books for children, he created a grandmother character in The Witches and later stated that she was based directly on his own mother as a tribute.
Television
In 1961, Dahl hosted and wrote for a science fiction and horror television anthology series called Way Out, which preceded the Twilight Zone series on the CBS network for 14 episodes from March to July.
One of the last dramatic network shows shot in New York City, the entire series is available for viewing at The Paley Center for Media in New York City and Los Angeles.
He also wrote for the satirical BBC comedy programme That Was the Week That Was, which was hosted by David Frost.
The British television series, Tales of the Unexpected, originally aired on ITV between 1979 and 1988.
The series was released to tie in with Dahl's short story anthology of the same name, which had introduced readers to many motifs that were common in his writing.
Death and legacy
Roald Dahl died on 23 November 1990, at the age of 74 of a rare cancer of the blood, myelodysplastic syndrome, in Oxford, and was buried in the cemetery at the Church of St Peter and St Paul, Great Missenden, Buckinghamshire, England.
According to his granddaughter, the family gave him a "sort of Viking funeral".
He was buried with his snooker cues, some very good burgundy, chocolates, HB pencils and a power saw.
Today, children continue to leave toys and flowers by his grave.
In November 1996, the Roald Dahl Children's Gallery was opened at the Buckinghamshire County Museum in nearby Aylesbury.
The main-belt asteroid 6223 Dahl, discovered by Czech astronomer Antonín Mrkos, was named in his memory in 1996.
In 2016, the city celebrated the centenary of Dahl's birth in Llandaff.
Welsh Arts organisations, including National Theatre Wales, Wales Millennium Centre and Literature Wales, came together for a series of events, titled Roald Dahl 100, including a Cardiff-wide City of the Unexpected, which marked his legacy.
In June 2005, the Roald Dahl Museum and Story Centre in the author's home village Great Missenden was officially opened by Cherie Blair, wife of UK Prime Minister Tony Blair, to celebrate the work of Roald Dahl and advance his work in literacy education.
Over 50,000 visitors from abroad, mainly from Australia, Japan, the United States and Germany, travel to the village museum every year.
In 2008, the UK charity Booktrust and Children's Laureate Michael Rosen inaugurated The Roald Dahl Funny Prize, an annual award to authors of humorous children's fiction.
On 14 September 2009 (the day after what would have been Dahl's 93rd birthday) the first blue plaque in his honour was unveiled in Llandaff.
In 2018, Weston-super-Mare, the town described by Dahl as a "seedy seaside resort", unveiled a blue plaque dedicated to him, on the site of the since-demolished boarding school Dahl attended, St Peter's.
The anniversary of Dahl's birthday on 13 September is celebrated as "Roald Dahl Day" in Africa, the United Kingdom and Latin America.
In honour of Dahl, the Royal Gibraltar Post Office issued a set of four stamps in 2010 featuring Quentin Blake's original illustrations for four of the children's books written by Dahl during his long career; The BFG, The Twits, Charlie and the Chocolate Factory, and Matilda.
A set of six stamps was issued by Royal Mail in 2012, featuring Blake's illustrations for Charlie and the Chocolate Factory, The Twits, The Witches, Matilda, Fantastic Mr Fox, and James and the Giant Peach.
Dahl's influence has extended beyond literary figures.
For instance film director Tim Burton recalled from childhood "the second layer after Dr. Seuss of connecting to a writer who gets the idea of the modern fable - and the mixture of light and darkness, and not speaking down to kids, and the kind of politically incorrect humour that kids get.
I've always like that, and it's shaped everything I've felt that I've done."
Steven Spielberg read The BFG to his children when they were young, stating the book celebrates the fact that it's OK to be different as well as to have an active imagination: "It's very important that we preserve the tradition of allowing young children to run free with their imaginations and magic and imagination are the same thing."
Actress Scarlett Johansson named Fantastic Mr Fox one of the five books that made a difference to her.
QTEMPLATE |Dahl has an incredibly distinctive style: his subversive, unpredictable plots, musical prose and caustic wit are impossible to imitate.
And yet his stories have proved astonishingly malleable.
Often adapted by equally idiosyncratic writers and directors, when translated onto stage and screen, his works seamlessly take on the impression of their new maker.
Like in many of his stories, Dahl offers a narrative where troublemaking is rewarded, and games and tricks are more successful than following rules.
Perhaps this, more than anything, is the reason why Dahl’s stories excite the imagination of so many adults and children, and why so many storytellers across stage and screen can’t resist remaking his tales in their own individual style.
Right across his body of work, playfulness and inventiveness are always prized over boring qualities like obedience and deference.
In Dahl's world, creative disruption is presented in such an appealing, delicious light, that you can't help but join in the fun.|Anna Leskiewicz in The Telegraph, “Why we love the mischievous spirit of Roald Dahl”.
Regarded as "one of the greatest storytellers for children of the 20th century", Dahl was named by The Times one of the 50 greatest British writers since 1945.
and his books have been published in almost 60 languages.
In 2003 four books by Dahl, led by Charlie and the Chocolate Factory at number 35, ranked among the Top 100 in The Big Read, a survey of the British public by the BBC to determine the "nation's best-loved novel" of all time.
In surveys of UK teachers, parents and students, Dahl is frequently ranked the best children's writer.
In a 2006 list for the Royal Society of Literature, Harry Potter creator J. K. Rowling named Charlie and the Chocolate Factory one of her top ten books every child should read.
In 2012, Matilda was ranked number 30 among all-time best children's novels in a survey published by School Library Journal, a monthly with primarily US audience.
The Top 100 included four books by Dahl, more than any other writer: Matilda, Charlie and the Chocolate Factory, The Witches, and The BFG.
US magazine Time named three Dahl books in its list of the 100 Best Young-Adult Books of All Time, more than any other author.
In 2012, Dahl was among the British cultural icons selected by artist Sir Peter Blake to appear in a new version of his most famous artwork - the Beatles' Sgt.
Pepper's Lonely Hearts Club Band album cover - to celebrate the British cultural figures of his life he most admires.
In a 2017 UK poll of the greatest authors, songwriters, artists and photographers, Dahl was named the greatest storyteller of all time, ranking ahead of Dickens, Shakespeare, Rowling and Spielberg.
In 2017, the airline Norwegian announced Dahl's image would appear on the tail fin one of their Boeing 737-800 aircraft.
He is one of the company's six "British tail fin heroes", joining Queen frontman Freddie Mercury, England World Cup winner Bobby Moore, novelist Jane Austen, pioneering pilot Amy Johnson and aviation entrepreneur Freddie Laker.
Filmography
Writing roles
Presenting roles
Non-presenting appearances
Publications
Further reading
*Philip Howard, "http:/ view 39827 Dahl, Roald (1916-1990)", Oxford Dictionary of National Biography, Oxford University Press, 2004; online edn, May 2006.
Retrieved 24 May 2006
*Donald Sturrock, Storyteller: The Authorized Biography of Roald Dahl, Simon & Schuster, 2010.
*Andrea Shavick, Roald Dahl: The Champion Storyteller. Oxford University Press, 1997
*Jeremy Treglown, Roald Dahl: A Biography, Farrar Straus & Giroux, 1994.
*Jason Hook, Roald Dahl: The Storyteller, Raintree, 2004
*Jacob M. Held, Roald Dahl and Philosophy: A Little Nonsense Now and Then.
Rowman & Littlefield, 2014
*Jennifer Boothroyd, Roald Dahl: A Life of Imagination.
Lerner Publications, 2008
