Earth is the third planet from the Sun and the only astronomical object known to harbor life.
According to radiometric dating and other sources of evidence, Earth formed over 4.5 billion years ago.
Earth's gravity interacts with other objects in space, especially the Sun and the Moon, which is Earth's only natural satellite.
Earth orbits around the Sun in 365.26 days, a period known as an Earth year.
During this time, Earth rotates about its axis about 366.26 times.
Earth's lithosphere is divided into several rigid tectonic plates that migrate across the surface over many millions of years.
About 71% of Earth's surface is covered with water, mostly by oceans.
The remaining 29% is land consisting of continents and islands that together contain many lakes, rivers and other sources of water that contribute to the hydrosphere.
The majority of Earth's polar regions are covered in ice, including the Antarctic ice sheet and the sea ice of the Arctic ice pack.
Earth's interior remains active with a solid iron inner core, a liquid outer core that generates the Earth's magnetic field and a convecting mantle that drives plate tectonics.
Within the first billion years of Earth's history, life appeared in the oceans and began to affect the Earth's atmosphere and surface, leading to the proliferation of anaerobic and, later, aerobic organisms.
Some geological evidence indicates that life may have arisen as early as 4.1 billion years ago.
Since then, the combination of Earth's distance from the Sun, physical properties and geological history have allowed life to evolve and thrive.
In the history of life on Earth, biodiversity has gone through long periods of expansion, occasionally punctuated by mass extinction events.
Over 99% of all species that ever lived on Earth are extinct.
Estimates of the number of species on Earth today vary widely; most species have not been described.
Over 7.6 billion humans live on Earth and depend on its biosphere and natural resources for their survival.
Humans have developed diverse societies and cultures; politically, the world has around 200 sovereign states.
Name and etymology
The modern English word Earth developed from a wide variety of Middle English forms, which derived from an Old English noun most often spelled .
It has cognates in every Germanic language, and their proto-Germanic root has been reconstructed as , 2007. .
Originally, earth was written in lowercase, and from early Middle English, its definite sense as "the globe" was expressed as the earth.
By Early Modern English, many nouns were capitalized, and the earth became (and often remained) the Earth, particularly when referenced along with other heavenly bodies.
More recently, the name is sometimes simply given as Earth, by analogy with the names of the other planets.
Chronology
Formation
The oldest material found in the Solar System is dated to (Bya).
Water vapor from these sources condensed into the oceans, augmented by water and ice from asteroids, protoplanets, and comets.
and then intensified during the Pleistocene about .
High-latitude regions have since undergone repeated cycles of glaciation and thaw, repeating about every .
The last continental glaciation ended ago.
The incorporation of smaller cells within larger ones resulted in the development of complex cells called eukaryotes.
biogenic graphite found in 3.7 billion-year-old metasedimentary rocks in Western Greenland, and remains of biotic material found in 4.1 billion-year-old rocks in Western Australia.
During the Neoproterozoic, , much of Earth might have been covered in ice.
This hypothesis has been termed "Snowball Earth", and it is of particular interest because it preceded the Cambrian explosion, when multicellular life forms significantly increased in complexity.
Even if the Sun were eternal and stable, 27% of the water in the modern oceans will descend to the mantle in one billion years, due to reduced steam venting from mid-ocean ridges.
The average diameter of the reference spheroid is .
Local topography deviates from this idealized spheroid, although on a global scale these deviations are small compared to Earth's radius: The maximum deviation of only 0.17% is at the Mariana Trench ( below local sea level), whereas Mount Everest ( above local sea level) represents a deviation of 0.14%.
In geodesy, the exact shape that Earth's oceans would adopt in the absence of land and perturbations such as tides and winds is called the geoid.
More precisely, the geoid is the surface of gravitational equipotential at mean sea level.
Chemical composition
Earth's mass is approximately (5,970 Yg).
It is composed mostly of iron (32.1%), oxygen (30.1%), silicon (15.1%), magnesium (13.9%), sulphur (2.9%), nickel (1.8%), calcium (1.5%), and aluminum (1.4%), with the remaining 1.2% consisting of trace amounts of other elements.
Due to mass segregation, the core region is estimated to be primarily composed of iron (88.8%), with smaller amounts of nickel (5.8%), sulphur (4.5%), and less than 1% trace elements.
Internal structure
Earth's interior, like that of the other terrestrial planets, is divided into layers by their chemical or physical (rheological) properties.
The outer layer is a chemically distinct silicate solid crust, which is underlain by a highly viscous solid mantle.
The crust is separated from the mantle by the Mohorovičić discontinuity.
The thickness of the crust varies from about under the oceans to for the continents.
The crust and the cold, rigid, top of the upper mantle are collectively known as the lithosphere, and it is of the lithosphere that the tectonic plates are composed.
Beneath the lithosphere is the asthenosphere, a relatively low-viscosity layer on which the lithosphere rides.
Important changes in crystal structure within the mantle occur at below the surface, spanning a transition zone that separates the upper and lower mantle.
Beneath the mantle, an extremely low viscosity liquid outer core lies above a solid inner core.
and the pressure could reach .
Below the ocean's surface are much of the continental shelf, mountains, volcanoes,
The continental crust consists of lower density material such as the igneous rocks granite and andesite.
Less common is basalt, a denser volcanic rock that is the primary constituent of the ocean floors.
The pedosphere is the outermost layer of Earth's continental surface and is composed of soil and subject to soil formation processes.
The total arable land is 10.9% of the land surface, with 1.3% being permanent cropland.
Close to 40% of Earth's land surface is used for agriculture, or an estimated of cropland and of pastureland.
Hydrosphere
The abundance of water on Earth's surface is a unique feature that distinguishes the "Blue Planet" from other planets in the Solar System.
Earth's hydrosphere consists chiefly of the oceans, but technically includes all water surfaces in the world, including inland seas, lakes, rivers, and underground waters down to a depth of .
The deepest underwater location is Challenger Deep of the Mariana Trench in the Pacific Ocean with a depth of .
About 97.5% of the water is saline; the remaining 2.5% is fresh water.
Most fresh water, about 68.7%, is present as ice in ice caps and glaciers.
The average salinity of Earth's oceans is about 35 grams of salt per kilogram of sea water (3.5% salt).
with a scale height of about .
Weather and climate
Earth's atmosphere has no definite boundary, slowly becoming thinner and fading into outer space.
Three-quarters of the atmosphere's mass is contained within the first of the surface.
This lowest layer is called the troposphere.
Energy from the Sun heats this layer, and the surface below, causing expansion of the air.
This lower-density air then rises and is replaced by cooler, higher-density air.
The result is atmospheric circulation that drives the weather and climate through redistribution of thermal energy.
In the Southern Hemisphere, the prevailing wind is east-to-west, and the eastern coasts are milder.
The distance from the Earth to the Sun varies.
The Earth is closest to the Sun (at perihelion) in January, which is summer in the Southern Hemisphere.
It is furthest away (at aphelion) in July, which is summer in the Northern Hemisphere, and only 93.55% of the solar radiation from the Sun falls on a given square area of land than at perihelion.
Despite this, there are larger land masses in the Northern Hemisphere, which are easier to heat than the seas.
Consequently, summers are warmer in the Northern Hemisphere than in the Southern Hemisphere under similar conditions.
The climate is colder at high altitudes than at sea level because of the decreased air density.
The commonly used Köppen climate classification system has five broad groups (humid tropics, arid, humid middle latitudes, continental and cold polar), which are further divided into more specific subtypes.
The lowest air temperature ever directly measured on Earth was at Vostok Station in 1983, but satellites have used remote sensing to measure temperatures as low as in East Antarctica.
These temperature records are only measurements made with modern instruments from the 20th century onwards and likely do not reflect the full range of temperature on Earth.
Upper atmosphere
Above the troposphere, the atmosphere is usually divided into the stratosphere, mesosphere, and thermosphere.
Magnetic field
The main part of Earth's magnetic field is generated in the core, the site of a dynamo process that converts the kinetic energy of thermally and compositionally driven convection into electrical and magnetic field energy.
The field extends outwards from the core, through the mantle, and up to Earth's surface, where it is, approximately, a dipole.
The poles of the dipole are located close to Earth's geographic poles.
At the equator of the magnetic field, the magnetic-field strength at the surface is , with a magnetic dipole moment of at epoch 2000, decreasing nearly 6% per century.
The convection movements in the core are chaotic; the magnetic poles drift and periodically change alignment.
This causes secular variation of the main field and field reversals at irregular intervals averaging a few times every million years.
The most recent reversal occurred approximately 700,000 years ago.
Charged particles are contained within the magnetosphere; the plasmasphere is defined by low-energy particles that essentially follow magnetic field lines as Earth rotates; the ring current is defined by medium-energy particles that drift relative to the geomagnetic field, but with paths that are still dominated by the magnetic field, and the Van Allen radiation belt are formed by high-energy particles whose motion is essentially random, but otherwise contained by the magnetosphere.
During magnetic storms and substorms, charged particles can be deflected from the outer magnetosphere and especially the magnetotail, directed along field lines into Earth's ionosphere, where atmospheric atoms can be excited and ionized, causing the aurora.
Earth's rotation period relative to the fixed stars, called its stellar day by the International Earth Rotation and Reference Systems Service (IERS), is of mean solar time (UT1), or
Habitability
A planet that can sustain life is termed habitable, even if life did not originate there.
Earth provides liquid water-an environment where complex organic molecules can assemble and interact, and sufficient energy to sustain metabolism.
Earth's biosphere is thought to have begun evolving about .
On land, biomes are separated primarily by differences in latitude, height above sea level and humidity.
Terrestrial biomes lying within the Arctic or Antarctic Circles, at high altitudes or in extremely arid areas are relatively barren of plant and animal life; species diversity reaches a peak in humid lowlands at equatorial latitudes.
Natural resources and land use
Earth has resources that have been exploited by humans.
Those termed non-renewable resources, such as fossil fuels, only renew over geological timescales.
Large deposits of fossil fuels are obtained from Earth's crust, consisting of coal, petroleum, and natural gas.
These deposits are used by humans both for energy production and as feedstock for chemical production.
Mineral ore bodies have also been formed within the crust through a process of ore genesis, resulting from actions of magmatism, erosion, and plate tectonics.
Projections indicate that the world's human population will reach 9.2 billion in 2050.
Partly due to the predominance of land mass, 90% of humans live in the northern hemisphere.
It is estimated that one-eighth of Earth's surface is suitable for humans to live on - three-quarters of Earth's surface is covered by oceans, leaving one-quarter as land.
Half of that land area is desert (14%),
The Moon may have dramatically affected the development of life by moderating the planet's climate.
Paleontological evidence and computer simulations show that Earth's axial tilt is stabilized by tidal interactions with the Moon.
, there are 1,886 operational, human-made satellites orbiting Earth.
Earth is sometimes personified as a deity.
In many cultures it is a mother goddess that is also the primary fertility deity, and by the mid-20th century, the Gaia Principle compared Earth's environments and life as a single self-regulating organism leading to broad stabilization of the conditions of habitability.
Creation myths in many religions involve the creation of Earth by a supernatural deity or deities.
which was attributed to both the philosophers Pythagoras and Parmenides.
Earth was generally believed to be the center of the universe until the 16th century, when scientists first conclusively demonstrated that it was a moving object, comparable to the other planets in the Solar System.
Lord Kelvin used thermodynamics to estimate the age of Earth to be between 20 million and 400 million years in 1864, sparking a vigorous debate on the subject; it was only when radioactivity and radioactive dating were discovered in the late 19th and early 20th centuries that a reliable mechanism for determining Earth's age was established, proving the planet to be billions of years old.
The perception of Earth shifted again in the 20th century when humans first viewed it from orbit, and especially with photographs of Earth returned by the Apollo program.
* List of gravitationally rounded objects of the Solar System
Notes
List alphabetized.
Keep it that way!
-->
Further reading
