Richard III is a historical play by William Shakespeare believed to have been written around 1593.
It depicts the Machiavellian rise to power and subsequent short reign of King Richard III of England.
The play is grouped among the histories in the First Folio and is most often classified as such.
Occasionally, however, as in the quarto edition, it is termed a tragedy.
Richard III concludes Shakespeare's first tetralogy .
It is the second longest play in the Shakespearean canon after Hamlet and is the longest of the First Folio, whose version of Hamlet is shorter than its Quarto counterpart.
The play is often abridged; for example, certain peripheral characters are removed entirely.
In such instances, extra lines are often invented or added from elsewhere in the sequence to establish the nature of characters' relationships.
A further reason for abridgment is that Shakespeare assumed that his audiences would be familiar with his Henry VI plays and frequently made indirect references to events in them, such as Richard's murder of Henry VI or the defeat of Henry's wife, Margaret.
Characters
House of York
* Richard, Duke of Gloucester - Edward IV's brother; later King Richard III
* Duchess of York - Edward, Richard and George's mother
* Edward, Prince of Wales - Edward IV's eldest son; later King Edward V (never crowned)
House of Lancaster
* Ghost of Edward of Westminster, Prince of Wales - Henry VI's son
* Lady Anne Neville - widow of Edward of Westminster; later wife of
* Tressel and Berkeley - Lady Anne's attendants (non-speaking roles)
Woodville family
* Marquis of Dorset - Elizabeth's son (from a previous marriage)
* Lord Richard Grey - Elizabeth's son (from a previous marriage)
Richard III's group
Earl of Richmond's group
* Henry Tudor, Earl of Richmond - Henry VI's nephew; later King Henry VII
* Lord Stanley, Earl of Derby - Richmond's stepfather
* Sir William Brandon - Richmond's standard-bearer (non-speaking role)
Clergy
Other characters
* Ghosts of Clarence, Rivers, Grey, Vaughan, Edward (Prince of Wales), Richard (Duke of York), Hastings, Lady Anne and Buckingham
Other
Although they do not appear in the text of the play, many productions include as on-stage characters Jane Shore (Edward IV's mistress), Elizabeth of York (Edward IV's daughter, later queen consort to Richmond Henry VII), and George Stanley (Lord Stanley's son, who is held hostage by Richard prior to the Battle of Bosworth Field)
Synopsis
The play begins with Richard (called "Gloucester" in the text) standing in "a street", describing the re-accession to the throne of his brother, King Edward IV of England, eldest son of the late Richard, Duke of York, implying the year is 1471.
Richard is an ugly hunchback who is "rudely stamp'd", "deformed, unfinish'd", and cannot "strut before a wanton ambling nymph."
He responds to the anguish of his condition with an outcast's over a prophecy he bribed a soothsayer to finagle the suspicious King with; that "G of Edward's heirs the murderer shall be", which the king interprets as referring to George of Clarence (without realising it actually refers to Gloucester).
Richard now schemes to woo "the Lady Anne" - Anne Neville, widow of the Lancastrian Edward of Westminster, Prince of Wales.
He confides to the audience:
The scene then changes to reveal Lady Anne accompanying the corpse of the late king Henry VI, along with Trestle and Berkeley, on its way from St Paul's cathedral to interment.
She asks them to set down the "honourable load - if honour may be shrouded in a hearse", and then laments the fate of the house of Lancaster.
Richard suddenly appears and demands that the "unmanner'd dog" carrying the hearse set it down, at which point a brief verbal wrangling takes place.
Despite initially hating him, Anne is won over by his pleas of love and repentance, agreeing to marry him.
When she leaves, Richard exults in having won her over despite all he has done to her, and tells the audience that he will discard her once she has served her purpose.
The atmosphere at court is poisonous: The established nobles are at odds with the upwardly mobile relatives of Queen Elizabeth, a hostility fueled by Richard's machinations.
Queen Margaret, Henry VI's widow, returns in defiance of her banishment and warns the squabbling nobles about Richard.
Queen Margaret curses Richard and the rest who were present.
The nobles, all Yorkists, reflexively unite against this last Lancastrian, and the warning falls on deaf ears.
Richard orders two murderers to kill Clarence in the tower.
Clarence, meanwhile, relates a dream to his keeper.
The dream includes vivid language describing Clarence falling from an imaginary ship as a result of Gloucester, who had fallen from the hatches, striking him.
Under the water Clarence sees the skeletons of thousands of men "that fishes gnawed upon".
He also sees "wedges of gold, great anchors, heaps of pearl, inestimable stones, unvalued jewels".
All of these are "scattered in the bottom of the sea".
Clarence adds that some of the jewels were in the skulls of the dead.
He then imagines dying and being tormented by the ghosts of Warwick (Anne's father), and Edward of Westminster (Anne's deceased husband).
After Clarence falls asleep, Brakenbury, Lieutenant of the Tower of London, enters and observes that between the titles of princes and the low names of commoners, there is nothing different but the "outward fame", meaning that they both have "inward toil" whether rich or poor.
When the murderers arrive, he reads their warrant (issued in the name of the King), and exits with the Keeper, who disobeys Clarence's request to stand by him, and leaves the two murderers the keys.
Clarence wakes and pleads with the murderers, saying that men have no right to obey other men's requests for murder, because all men are under the rule of God not to commit murder.
The murderers imply Clarence is a hypocrite because, as one says, "thou ... unripped'st the bowels of thy sovereign's son Edward whom thou wast sworn to cherish and defend."
Trying to win them over by tactics, he tells them to go to his brother Gloucester, who will reward them better for his life than Edward will for his death.
One murderer insists Gloucester himself sent them to perform the bloody act, but Clarence does not believe him.
He recalls the unity of Richard Duke of York blessing his three sons with his victorious arm, bidding his brother Gloucester to "think on this and he will weep".
Sardonically, a murderer says Gloucester weeps millstones - echoing Richard's earlier comment about the murderers' own eyes weeping millstones rather than "foolish tears" (Act I, Sc. 3).
Next, one of the murderers explains that his brother Gloucester hates him, and sent them to the Tower to kill him.
Eventually, one murderer gives in to his conscience and does not participate, but the other killer stabs Clarence and drowns him in "the Malmsey butt within".
The first act closes with the perpetrator needing to find a hole to bury Clarence.
Richard uses the news of Clarence's unexpected death to send Edward IV, already ill, to his deathbed, all the while insinuating that the Queen is behind the execution of Clarence.
Edward IV soon dies, leaving as Protector his brother Richard, who sets about removing the final obstacles to his accession.
He meets his nephew, the young Edward V, who is en route to London for his coronation accompanied by relatives of Edward's widow (Lord Rivers, Lord Grey, and Sir Thomas Vaughan).
These Richard arrests, and eventually beheads, and then has a conversation with the Prince and his younger brother, the Duke of York.
The two princes outsmart Richard and match his wordplay and use of language easily.
Richard is nervous about them, and the potential threat they represent.
The young prince and his brother are coaxed (by Richard) into an extended stay at the Tower of London.
The prince and his brother the Duke of York prove themselves to be extremely intelligent and charismatic characters, boldly defying and outsmarting Richard and openly mocking him.
Assisted by his cousin Buckingham, Richard mounts a campaign to present himself as the true heir to the throne, pretending to be a modest, devout man with no pretensions to greatness.
Lord Hastings, who objects to Richard's accession, is arrested and executed on a trumped-up charge of treason.
Together, Richard and Buckingham spread the rumour that Edward's two sons are illegitimate, and therefore have no rightful claim to the throne; they are assisted by Catesby, Ratcliffe, and Lovell.
The other lords are cajoled into accepting Richard as king, in spite of the continued survival of his nephews (the Princes in the Tower).
Richard asks Buckingham to secure the death of the princes, but Buckingham hesitates.
Richard then recruits Sir James Tyrrell, who kills both children.
When Richard denies Buckingham a promised land grant, Buckingham turns against Richard and defects to the side of Henry, Earl of Richmond, who is currently in exile.
Richard has his eye on his niece, Elizabeth of York, Edward IV's next remaining heir, and poisons Lady Anne
so he can be free to woo the princess.
The Duchess of York and Queen Elizabeth mourn the princes' deaths, when Queen Margaret arrives.
Queen Elizabeth, as predicted, asks Queen Margaret's help in cursing.
Later, the Duchess applies this lesson and curses her only surviving son before leaving.
Richard asks Queen Elizabeth to help him win her daughter's hand in marriage, but she is not taken in by his eloquence, and eventually manages to trick and stall him by saying she will let him know her daughter's answer in due course.
The increasingly paranoid Richard loses what popularity he had.
He soon faces rebellions led first by Buckingham and subsequently by the invading Richmond.
Buckingham is captured and executed.
Both sides arrive for a final battle at Bosworth Field.
Prior to the battle, Richard is visited by the ghosts of his victims, all of whom tell him to "Despair and die!"
after which they wish victory upon Richmond.
He awakes screaming for "Jesus" to help him, slowly realising that he is all alone in the world, and cannot even pity himself.
At the Battle of Bosworth Field, Lord Stanley (who is also Richmond's stepfather) and his followers desert Richard's side, whereupon Richard calls for the execution of George Stanley, Lord Stanley's son.
This does not happen, as the battle is in full swing, and Richard is left at a disadvantage.
Richard is soon unhorsed on the field at the climax of the battle, and cries out, "A horse, a horse, my kingdom for a horse!"
Richmond kills Richard in the final duel.
Subsequently, Richmond succeeds to the throne as Henry VII, and marries Princess Elizabeth from the House of York.
Date and text
Richard III is believed to be one of Shakespeare's earlier plays, preceded only by the three parts of Henry VI and perhaps Titus Andronicus and a handful of comedies.
It is believed to have been written c. 1592-1594.
Although Richard III was entered into the Register of the Stationers' Company on 20 October 1597 by the bookseller Andrew Wise, who published the first Quarto (Q1) later that year (with printing done by Valentine Simmes), Christopher Marlowe's Edward II, which cannot have been written much later than 1592 (Marlowe died in 1593), is thought to have been influenced by it.
A second Quarto (Q2) followed in 1598, printed by Thomas Creede for Andrew Wise, containing an attribution to Shakespeare on its title page.
Q3 appeared in 1602, Q4 in 1605, Q5 in 1612, and Q6 in 1622, the frequency attesting to its popularity.
The First Folio version followed in 1623.
The Folio is longer than the Quarto and contains some fifty additional passages amounting to more than two hundred lines.
However, the Quarto contains some twenty-seven passages amounting to about thirty-seven lines that are absent from the Folio.
while being appalled by his actions.
Richard shows off his wit in Act I, as seen in the interchanges with Lady Anne (Act I, Scene II) and his brother Clarence (Act I, Scene I).
In his dialogues in Act I, Richard knowingly refers to thoughts he has only previously shared with the audience to keep the audience attuned to him and his objectives.
In 1.1, Richard tells the audience in a soliloquy how he plans to claw his way to the throne-killing his brother Clarence as a necessary step to get there.
However, Richard pretends to be Clarence's friend, falsely reassuring him by saying, "I will deliver you, or else lie for you" (1.1.115); which the audience knows-and Richard tells the audience after Clarence's exit-is the exact opposite of what he plans to do.
In addition, the character of Richmond enters into the play in Act V to overthrow Richard and save the state from his tyranny, effectively being the instantaneous new protagonist.
Richmond is a clear contrast to Richard's evil character, which makes the audience see him as such.
In 2017, Italian director Roberta Torre realized a musical drama film, inspired on Shakespeare's play, named Bloody Richard.
Television
The BBC Television Shakespeare version, first broadcast in 1983, starred Ron Cook as Richard.
BBC Two aired a new adaptation of Richard III in 2016 as part of The Hollow Crown series, with Benedict Cumberbatch playing the king.
Executive producer Pippa Harris commented, "By filming the Henry VI plays as well as Richard III, we will allow viewers to fully appreciate how such a monstrous tyrant could find his way to power, bringing even more weight and depth to this iconic character."
References in popular culture
Lincoln's assassination
Abraham Lincoln was renowned for his love of Shakespeare, and of Richard III in particular.
This fed Confederate propaganda, especially in Virginia, where residents of Richmond saw Lincoln as a Richard-like tyrant and identified their capital city with the Earl of Richmond, the hero of Shakespeare's play.
Some interpreted Richard's Act IV speech as an omen favorable to the South:
The connection between Lincoln and the play was indelibly printed on history when on 14 April 1865, within a fortnight of the president's visit to the defeated city, he was assassinated by John Wilkes Booth, a Shakespearean actor known for playing both Richard and Richmond.
Booth's notorious, final words from the stage were "Sic semper tyrannis".
"Winter of our discontent" quote
The 2010 film, The King's Speech, features a scene where the king's speech therapist Lionel Logue, as played by Geoffrey Rush, auditions for the role by reciting the lines, "Now is the winter of our discontent / Made glorious summer by this sun or son of York".
Shakespeare critic Keith Jones believes that the film in general sets up its main character as a kind of antithesis to Richard III.
The same antithesis was noted by conservative commentator Noah Millman.
In the Red Dwarf episode "Marooned", Rimmer objects to Lister's burning of the Complete Works of Shakespeare in an attempt to maintain enough heat to keep him alive.
When challenged, Rimmer claims he can quote from it and embarks upon the soliloquy: "Now! ...
That's all I can remember.
You know!
That famous speech from Richard III - 'now, something something something something'."
John Steinbeck used the opening line for the title of his novel The Winter of Our Discontent.
The phrase "Winter of Discontent" is an expression, popularised by the British media, referring to the winter of 1978-79 in the United Kingdom, during which there were widespread strikes by local authority trade unions demanding larger pay rises for their members.
"My kingdom for a horse" quote
In the 1949 Looney Tunes cartoon A Ham in a Role, the dog actor says the Catesby and Richard III's lines, "Rescue, fair lord, or else the day is lost!
A horse, A horse, My kingdom for a horse!"
before being kicked out of the window by a Goofy Gophers-hauled horse.
In the 1993 Mel Brooks film Robin Hood: Men in Tights, the character Robin of Locksley, played by Cary Elwes, says "A horse, my kingdom for a horse!"
as he arrives in England in the opening scene.
Other
The film Being John Malkovich has many Shakespeare allusions, including a scene in which Malkovich is shown rehearsing Richard III lines "Was ever woman in this humour woo'd? /
Was ever woman in this humour won?" where Richard is boasting about using power, lies, and crime to seduce Lady Anne.
As Visual Cultures professor Lynn Turner notes, this scene anticipates a parallel scene in which Craig uses deceit to seduce Maxine through Malkovich.
Mariangela Tempera has noted that the subservience of Lady Anne in the scene contrasts with the self-assertiveness of the actress playing Lady Anne as she seduces Malkovich offstage.
Adam Sandler's 2011 film Jack and Jill features Al Pacino reprising his role of Richard III, although the movie scenes are modified as Pacino interacts with the audience in a heavily comedic way.
Multiple reviewers who panned the film regarded Pacino as the best element of the film.
In V for Vendetta when V confronts Father Lilliman, he quotes the line "And thus I clothe my naked villany in old odd ends stol'n forth of holy writ, and seem a saint when most I play the devil."
In Freaked, an arrogant movie star who has been transformed into a "hideous mutant freak" makes use of his deformity by performing the opening soliloquy, condensed by a local professor in subtitles for the "culturally illiterate" to the more succinct "I'm ugly.
I never get laid."
One reviewer mentioned this as the best example of how the film seamlessly moves between highbrow and lowbrow culture.
In The Goodbye Girl, an ambitious actor played by Richard Dreyfuss is forced by his off-Broadway producer to play Richard III as a caricature of a homosexual.
Elliot Garfield (Dreyfuss) describes his performance as "putrid".
In the 1975 film L'important c'est d'aimer, directed by Andrzej Żuławski, a production of Richard III in French is a mise en abyme for the drama enveloping the characters in the film.
The manga Requiem of the Rose King by Aya Kanno, which began in 2013, is a loose adaptation of the first Shakespearean historical tetralogy.
It depicts Richard III as intersex instead of hunchbacked.
Historical inaccuracy
Shakespeare, and the Tudor chroniclers who influenced him, had an interest in portraying the defeat of the Plantagenet House of York by the House of Tudor as good conquering evil.
Loyalty to the new regime required that the last Plantagenet king, Richard III, be depicted as a villain.
The historical inaccuracies in the play can be attributed partly to Shakespeare's sources, such as Holinshed's Chronicles, and partly to artistic licence.
Some of these inaccuracies are listed below in the order in which they either appear or are referred to in the play.
Richard was not personally responsible for the death of his wife's first husband, Edward of Westminster (the son of Henry VI), nor that of her father, the Earl of Warwick .
Edward of Westminster and Warwick were both killed in the battles of Tewkesbury and Barnet, respectively.
Richard, then eighteen, took part in both battles, but no contemporary records indicate him as being involved directly in either death.
Shakespeare's sources do not identify Richard as being involved in the death of Henry VI, who was probably murdered on the orders of Edward IV.
Richard and his wife, Anne Neville, had known each other for a long time before they married, having spent much of their childhood in the same household.
Richard's elder brother, Clarence (George, Duke of Clarence), was executed by Edward IV for treason in 1478, when Richard was in the North of England, where he continued to live until Edward IV died five years later.
It was the Plantagenet tradition that a future king (in this case Edward V, the elder of the "princes in the tower"), would stay in the royal apartments of the Tower of London while awaiting his coronation.
No one knows why the "princes in the tower" disappeared or what happened to them.
Richard took the throne by an Act of Parliament, on the basis of testimony claiming that Edward IV's marriage to Queen Elizabeth (Elizabeth Woodville) had been bigamous.
Contemporary rumours that Richard had murdered his own wife appear baseless; However, at the time he was also negotiating a marriage for Elizabeth with a Portuguese prince, Manuel, Duke of Beja (later Manuel I of Portugal).
At the Battle of Bosworth there was no single combat between Richard and Richmond (Henry Tudor), although it has been suggested that Richard had hoped for one.
Richard spotted Richmond in his rearguard surrounded by French pikemen and led a cavalry charge against him.
The Stanleys (Thomas, Lord Stanley and his younger brother, Sir William Stanley) only entered the fray in support of Richmond when they saw that Richard was vulnerable; when he saw the Stanleys, Richard cried "Treason".
Notes
Editions of Richard III
* Bate, Jonathan and Rasmussen, Eric (eds.)
Richard III (The RSC Shakespeare; London: Macmillan, 2008)
* Davison, Peter (ed.)
The First Quarto of King Richard III (The New Cambridge Shakespeare; Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1996)
* de Somogyi, Nick (ed.)
Richard III: The Tragedy of Richard the Third (The Shakespeare Folios; London: Nick Hern Books, 2002)
* Dover Wilson, John (ed.)
Richard III (The New Shakespeare; Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1954; revised edition 1961)
* Eccles, Mark (ed.)
The Tragedy of King Richard III (Signet Classic Shakespeare; New York: Signet, 1964; revised edition, 1988; 2nd revised edition 1998)
* Evans, G. Blakemore (ed.)
Richard III (The Pelican Shakespeare; London: Penguin, 1959; revised edition 1969)
* ---.
The Riverside Shakespeare (Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1974; 2nd edn., 1997)
* Greenblatt, Stephen; Cohen, Walter; Howard, Jean E. and Maus, Katharine Eisaman (eds.)
The Norton Shakespeare: Based on the Oxford Shakespeare (London: Norton, 1997)
Greg, W.W. (ed.)
Richard III, 1597 (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1959)
* Hammond, Anthony (ed.)
King Richard III (The Arden Shakespeare, 2nd Series; London: Arden, 1981)
* Holland, Peter (ed.)
Richard III (The Pelican Shakespeare, 2nd edition; London: Penguin, 2000)
* Honigmann, E.A.J. (ed.)
Richard III (The New Penguin Shakespeare; London: Penguin, 1968; revised edition, 1995)
* Jowett, John (ed.)
Richard III (The Oxford Shakespeare; Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2000)
* Lull, Janis (ed.)
King Richard III (The New Cambridge Shakespeare; Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1999; 2nd edition 2009)
* Siemon, James R. (ed.)
King Richard III (The Arden Shakespeare, 3rd Series; London: Arden, 2009)
* Taylor, Michael (ed.)
Richard III (The New Penguin Shakespeare, 2nd edition; London: Penguin, 2005)
* Thompson, A. Hamilton (ed.)
The Tragedy of King Richard the Third (The Arden Shakespeare, 1st Series; London: Arden, 1907)
* Wells, Stanley; Taylor, Gary; Jowett, John and Montgomery, William (eds.)
The Oxford Shakespeare: The Complete Works (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1986; 2nd edn., 2005)
* Werstine, Paul and Mowat, Barbara A. (eds.)
Richard III (Folger Shakespeare Library; Washington: Simon & Schuster, 2004)
