The Azores ( , also ; ), officially the Autonomous Region of the Azores (), is one of the two autonomous regions of Portugal (along with Madeira).
It is an archipelago composed of nine volcanic islands in the North Atlantic Ocean about west of continental Portugal, about west of Lisbon, in continental Portugal, about northwest of Morocco, and about southeast of Newfoundland, Canada.
Its main industries are agriculture, dairy farming, livestock, fishing, and tourism, which is becoming the major service activity in the region.
In addition, the government of the Azores employs a large percentage of the population directly or indirectly in the service and tertiary sectors.
The main city of the Azores is Ponta Delgada.
There are nine major Azorean islands and an islet cluster, in three main groups.
These are Flores and Corvo, to the west; Graciosa, Terceira, São Jorge, Pico, and Faial in the centre; and São Miguel, Santa Maria, and the Formigas Reef to the east.
They extend for more than and lie in a northwest-southeast direction.
All the islands have volcanic origins, although some, such as Santa Maria, have had no recorded activity since the islands were settled.
Mount Pico, on the island of Pico, is the highest point in Portugal, at .
If measured from their base at the bottom of the ocean to their peaks, which thrust high above the surface of the Atlantic, the Azores are actually some of the tallest mountains on the planet.
The climate of the Azores is very mild for such a northerly location, being influenced by its distance from the continents and by the passing Gulf Stream.
Due to the marine influence, temperatures remain mild year-round.
Daytime temperatures normally fluctuate between and depending on season.
Temperatures above or below are unknown in the major population centres.
It is also generally wet and cloudy.
The culture, dialect, cuisine, and traditions of the Azorean islands vary considerably, because these once-uninhabited and remote islands were settled sporadically over a span of two centuries.
History
A small number of alleged hypogea, earthen structures carved into rocks that were used for burials, have been identified on the islands of Corvo, Santa Maria and Terceira by Portuguese archaeologist Nuno Ribeiro, who speculated that they might date back 2000 years, implying a human presence on the island before the Portuguese.
These kinds of structures have been used in the Azores to store cereals, however, and suggestions by Ribeiro that they might be burial sites are unconfirmed.
Detailed examination and dating to authenticate the validity of these speculations is lacking.
It is unclear whether these structures are natural or man-made and whether they predate the 15th-century Portuguese colonization of the Azores.
Therefore, clear confirmation of a pre-Portuguese human presence in the archipelago has not yet been published.
European discovery
The islands were known in the fourteenth century, and parts of them appear in the Catalan Atlas.
In 1427, a captain sailing for Prince Henry the Navigator, possibly Gonçalo Velho, may have rediscovered the Azores, but this is not certain.
In Thomas Ashe's 1813 work, A History of the Azores, the author identified a Fleming, Joshua Vander Berg of Bruges, who made landfall in the archipelago during a storm on his way to Lisbon.
Iberian Union
Following the death of Henry, the Cardinal-King of Portugal the nation fell into a dynastic crisis with various pretenders to the Crown of Portugal.
Following his proclamation in Santarém, António, Prior of Crato was acclaimed in the Azores in 1580 (through his envoy António da Costa), but was expelled from the continent following the Battle of Alcântara.
It was Figueiredo and Violante do Canto who helped organize a resistance on Terceira that influenced some of the response of the other islands, even as internal politics and support for Philip's faction increased on the other islands (including specifically on São Miguel, where the Gonçalvez da Câmara family supported the Spanish pretender).
In 1943, during World War II, the Portuguese ruler António de Oliveira Salazar leased air and naval bases in the Azores to Great Britain.
The occupation of these facilities in October 1943 was codenamed Operation Alacrity by the British.
This was a key turning point in the Battle of the Atlantic, enabling the Royal Air Force, the U.S. Army Air Forces, and the U.S. Navy to provide aerial coverage in the Mid-Atlantic gap.
This helped them to protect convoys and to hunt hostile German U-boats.
In 1944, the U.S. constructed a small and short-lived air base on the island of Santa Maria.
In 1945, a new base was constructed on the island of Terceira, and it is named Lajes Field.
This air base is in an area called Lajes, a broad, flat sea terrace that had been a large farm.
Lajes Field is a plateau rising out of the sea on the northeast corner of the island.
This air base is a joint American and Portuguese venture.
Lajes Field continues to support the American and Portuguese Armed Forces.
During the Cold War, U.S. Navy P-3 Orion antisubmarine warfare squadrons patrolled the North Atlantic Ocean for Soviet Navy submarines and surface warships.
Since its opening, Lajes Field has been used for refuelling American cargo planes bound for Europe, Africa, and the Middle East.
The U.S. Navy keeps a small squadron of its ships at the harbor of Praia da Vitória, southeast of Lajes Field.
The airfield also has a small commercial terminal handling scheduled and chartered passenger flights from the other islands in the Azores, Europe, Africa, and North America.
In 1976, the Azores became the Autonomous Region of the Azores (), one of the autonomous regions of Portugal, and the subdistricts of the Azores were eliminated.
In 2003, the Azores saw international attention when United States president George W. Bush, British prime minister Tony Blair and Spanish prime minister José María Aznar and Portuguese prime minister José Manuel Durão Barroso held a summit there days before the commencement of the Iraq War.
Geography
Physical geography
The archipelago of the Azores is located in the middle of the northern hemisphere of the Atlantic Ocean and extends along a west-northwest to east-southeast orientation (between 36.5°-40°
North latitudes and 24.5°-31.5° West longitudes) in an area approximately wide.
The islands of the Azores emerged from what is called the Azores Plateau, a 5.8 million km2 region that is morphologically accented by a depth of .
From a geostructural perspective the Azores is located above an active triple junction between three of the world's large tectonic plates (the North American Plate, the Eurasian Plate and the African Plate), The westernmost islands of the archipelago (Corvo and Flores) are located in the North American Plate, while the remaining islands are located within the boundary that divides the Eurasian and African Plates.
The principal tectonic structures that exist in the region of the Azores are the Mid-Atlantic Ridge, the Terceira Rift, the Azores Fracture Zone and the Glória Fault.
The island's volcanism is associated with the rifting along the Azores Triple Junction; the spread of the crust along the existing faults and fractures has produced many of the active volcanic and seismic events, while supported by buoyant upwelling in the deeper mantle, some associate with an Azores hotspot.
Most of the volcanic activity has centered, primarily, along the Terceira Rift.
From the beginning of the island's settlement, around the 15th century, there have been 28 registered volcanic eruptions (15 terrestrial and 13 submarine).
The last significant volcanic eruption, the Capelinhos volcano (), occurred off the coast of the island of Faial in 1957; the most recent volcanic activity occurred in the seamounts and submarine volcanoes off the coast of Serreta and in the Pico-São Jorge Channel.
The islands have many examples of volcano-built geomorphology including many of the caves and subterranean lava tubes (such as the Gruta das Torres, Algar do Carvão, Gruta do Natal, Gruta das Cinco Ribeiras), the coastal lava fields (like the coast of Feteiras, Faial, the Mistério of Prainha or São João on Pico Island) in addition to the currently inactive cones in central São Miguel Island, the aforementioned Capelinhos on Faial, the volcanic complexes of Terceira or Plinian caldeira of Corvo Island.
The islands of the archipelago were formed through volcanic and seismic activity during the Neogene Period; the first embryonic surfaces started to appear in the waters of Santa Maria during the Miocene epoch (from circa 8 million years ago).
The sequence of the island formation has been generally characterized as: Santa Maria (8.12 Ma), São Miguel (4.1 Ma), Terceira (3.52 Ma), Graciosa (2.5 Ma), Flores (2.16 Ma), Faial (0.7 Ma), São Jorge (0.55 Ma), Corvo (0.7 Ma) and the youngest, Pico (0.27 Ma).
Although all islands have experienced volcanism during their geological history, within recorded "human settlement" history the islands of Santa Maria, Graciosa, Flores, and Corvo have not experienced any volcanic eruptions; in addition to active fumaroles and hot-springs, the remaining islands have had sporadic eruptions since the 14th century.
Apart from the Capelinhos volcano in 1957-58, the last recorded instance of "island formation" occurred off the coast of São Miguel, when the island of Sabrina was briefly formed.
Owing to its geodynamic environment, the region has been center of intense seismic activity, particularly along its tectonic boundaries on the Mid-Atlantic Ridge and Terceira Rift.
Seismic events although frequent, are usually tectonic or vulco-tectonic in nature, but in general are of low to medium intensities, occasionally punctuated by events of level 5 or greater on the Richter magnitude scale.
The most severe earthquake was registered in 1757, near Calheta on the island of São Jorge, which exceeded 7 on the Richter magnitude scale.
In comparison, the 1522 earthquake that was mentioned by historian Gaspar Frutuoso measured 6.8, but its effects were judged to be X (Extreme) on the Mercalli intensity scale, and was responsible for the destruction of Vila Franca do Campo and landslides that may have killed more than 5,000 of the inhabitants.
The nine islands that compose the archipelago occupy a surface area of , that includes both the main islands and many islets located in their vicinities.
Each of the islands has its own distinct geomorphological characteristics that make them unique: Corvo (the smallest island) is a crater of a major Plinian eruption; Flores (its neighbor on the North American Plate) is a rugged island carved by many valleys and escarpments; Faial characterized for its shield volcano and caldera (Cabeço Gordo); Pico, is the highest point, at , in the Azores and continental Portugal; Graciosa is known for its active Furnas do Enxofre and mixture of volcanic cones and plains; São Jorge is a long slender island, formed from fissural eruptions over thousands of years; Terceira, almost circular, is the location of one of the largest craters in the region; São Miguel is the largest island, and is pitted with many large craters and fields of spatter cones; and Santa Maria, the oldest island, is heavily eroded, being one of the few places to encounter brown sandy beaches in the archipelago.
They range in surface area from the largest, São Miguel, at to the smallest, Corvo, at approximately .
These islands can be divided into three recognizable groups located on the Azores Plateau:
The Eastern Group () of São Miguel, Santa Maria and Formigas Islets
* The Central Group () of Terceira, Graciosa, São Jorge, Pico and Faial
In addition, several sub-surface reefs , banks (specifically the Princess Alice Bank and D. João de Castro Bank, as well as many hydrothermal vents and sea-mounts are monitored by the regional authorities, owing to the complex geotectonic and socioeconomic significance within the economic exclusion zone of the archipelago.
Biome
The archipelago lies in the Palearctic ecozone, forming a unique biome that includes the macaronesian subtropical laurissilva, with many endemic species of plants and animals.
In total, there are at least 6112 terrestrial species, of which about 411 are endemic.
The majority (75%) of these endemics are animals, mostly arthropods and mollusks.
New species are found regularly in the Azores (e.g., 30 different new species of land snails were discovered circa 2013).
Even though the Azores look very green and sometimes wild, the vegetation has been extremely altered.
A great part of it has been wiped out in the past 600 years for its valuable wood (for tools, buildings, boats, fire wood, and so on) and to clear land for agriculture.
As a result, it is estimated that more than half of insects on the Graciosa island have disappeared or will become extinct.
Many cultivated places (which are traditionally dedicated to pasture or to growing colocasia, potatoes, maize and other crops) have now been abandoned, especially as a result of emigration.
Consequently, some invasive plants have filled these deserted and disturbed lands.
Hydrangeas are another potential pest, but their threat is less serious.
Notwithstanding the fact that hydrangeas were introduced from America or Asia, some locals consider them a symbol of the archipelago and propagate them along roadsides, helping the plants to escape into the wild.
Cryptomeria, the Japanese cedar, is a conifer extensively grown for its timber.
The two most common of these alien species are Pittosporum undulatum and Acacia melanoxylon.
They are usually restricted to ancient agricultural land and only rarely penetrate into undisturbed native vegetation.
Reforestation efforts with native laurissilva vegetation have been done successfully in many parts of the Azores.
The Azores has at least two endemic bird species.
The Azores bullfinch, or Priolo, is restricted to remnant laurisilva forest in the mountains at the eastern end of São Miguel and is classified by BirdLife International as endangered.
Monteiro's storm-petrel, described to science as recently as 2008, is known to breed in just two locations in the islands, but may occur more widely.
An extinct species of owl, the São Miguel scops owl, has also recently been described, which probably became extinct after human settlement due to habitat destruction and the introduction of alien species.
The Azores also has an endemic bat, the Azores noctule, which is unusual in regularly feeding during the day.
The islets of the Formigas (the Portuguese word for "ants"), including the area known as the Dollabarat Reef, have a rich environment of maritime species, such as black coral and manta rays, different species of sharks, whales, and sea turtles.
On São Miguel there are notable micro-habitats formed by hot springs that host extremophile microorganisms.
17 new marine reserves (with special conservation status) were added to the Azorean Marine Park (which covers currently around 900.000 km2)
Climate
The archipelago is spread out in the area between 37° N and the parallels of latitude that pass through the Lisbon area (38° 43' / 38° 55' N), giving it a generally tepid, oceanic, subtropical climate, with mild annual oscillations.
Daily maximum temperatures usually range between .
The average annual rainfall increases from east to west, ranging from 700 to 1600 millimetres (27.6-63 in) in the east and reaching on Mount Pico, the highest Portuguese mountain at .
The Azores High, an area of high atmospheric pressure, is named after the islands.
Under the Köppen climate classification, there are different local climates, one of which is "dry-summer subtropical", often referred to as "Mediterranean".
Salvador Rivas-Martínez data presents several different bioclimatic zones for the Azores.
Seasonal lag is extreme in the low-sun half of the year, with December being milder than April in terms of mean temperatures.
Azores have the warmest winters in Europe (still within the European continental plate).
During summer the lag is somewhat lower, with August being the warmest month.
There has never been a frost, snowfall or freeze recorded at sea level on any of the islands.
The coldest weather in winter usually comes from northwesterly air masses originating from Labrador in Canada.
But because those air masses are modified as they pass across the warmer Atlantic Ocean, temperatures by day even then exceed .
In addition, the Instituto de Meteorologia has identified the following weather extremes:
* Highest minimum air temperature: , in Angra do Heroísmo, Terceira (30 June 1996)
* Lowest minimum air temperature: , in Chã das Lagoinhas, São Miguel (2 January 1973)
* Highest maximum air temperature: , in July (Exact date and location unknown)
* Lowest maximum air temperature: , Chã das Lagoinhas, São Miguel (20 February 1972)
* Maximum precipitation in 24 hours: , Furnas, São Miguel (3 October 1974)
* Maximum wind speed: >168 km/hour, Angra do Heroísmo, (Terceira 2 November 1995)
Hurricanes
The Azores are known for small hurricanes.
A total of 14 tropical or subtropical cyclones have affected the region in history.
Most of them were either extratropical or tropical storms when they affected the region, although several Category 1 hurricanes have reached the Azores.
Only one major hurricane has ever impacted the Azores; Hurricane Ophelia in 2017, at Category 3 intensity.
The following storms have impacted the region while at Category 1 strength: Hurricane Fran in 1973, Hurricane Emmy in 1976, Hurricane Gordon in 2006, Hurricane Gordon in 2012 and Hurricane Alex in 2016.
Several tropical storms have hit the region, including Tropical Storm Irma in 1978, Hurricane Bonnie in 1992, Hurricane Charley in 1992, Hurricane Erika in 1997, and Hurricane Gaston in 2016.
Storms that were extratropical when they impacted the region include Hurricane Tanya in 1995, Tropical Storm Ana in 2003 and Tropical Storm Grace in 2009.
In addition, the 2005 Azores subtropical storm affected the region in October 2005.
Demographics
The Azores are divided into 19 municipalities (); each municipality is further divided into parishes (), of which there is a total of 156 in all of the Azores.
The municipalities, by island, are:
There are six cities (Portuguese: cidades) in the Azores: Ponta Delgada, Lagoa and Ribeira Grande on the island of São Miguel; Angra do Heroísmo and Praia da Vitória on the island of Terceira, and Horta on Faial.
Three of these, Ponta Delgada, Angra and Horta are considered capital/administrative cities to the regional government: homes to the President (Ponta Delgada), the Judiciary (Angra) and the Regional Assembly (Horta).
Angra also serves as the ecclesiastical centre of the Roman Catholic Diocese of Angra, the episcopal see of the Azores.
Population
According to the 2011 Census, population in the Azores was 246,746 at a density of .
The Azores were uninhabited when Portuguese navigators arrived in the early 15th century; settlement began in 1439 with migrants from several regions of mainland Portugal and from Madeira.
The islands were populated mainly by Portuguese immigrants from the Algarve, Alentejo, and Minho; in an effort to escape the dangers of the Portuguese inquisition on mainland Portugal, however, many Portuguese Sephardic Jews settled on the islands in large numbers.
Azorean Jews had surnames such as: Rodrigues, Pacheco, Oliveira, Pereira, Pimentel, Nunes, Mendes, Pinto, Álvares, Henriques, Cardozo, Teixeira, Vasconcelos etc.
The islands were also settled by Moorish prisoners, and African slaves from Guinea, Cape Verde and São Tomé; Flemish, French and Galicians also contributed to the initial settlement.
Thus the Azorean population received a significant contribution from people with genetic backgrounds other than Portuguese.
The nature of the economy dictated that African slavery never became common in the Azores because they were sent to Brazil and the Caribbean.
Only a few remained in the Azores for forced labor such as domestic chores, although the islands sometimes served as a waypoint for ships carrying African slaves.
Africans, Moors, Jews, Scots, Germans, Italians, French, Spanish, Flemish and Portuguese all migrated to the Azores.
Genetics
As in continental Portugal, the most frequent mtDNA haplogroup in the Azores is H (45.2%), followed by U (16.7%), T (10.1%), K (6.5%), pre-HV clades (5.6%) and a smaller African L haplogroups frequency (3.4%) than in Madeira.
Inhabitants of the various islands have DNA of various origins.
A minority on the islands has non-European ancestry.
Emigration
Since the 17th century, many Azoreans have emigrated, mainly to Brazil, Uruguay, the United States and Canada.
Rhode Island and Southeastern Massachusetts, especially the cities of New Bedford, Bristol, Barrington, Pawtucket, Central Falls, West Warwick, Hudson, Marlborough, East Providence, River Point, Somerset, Taunton and Fall River have been, and remain, the primary destination for Azorean emigrants.
Emigrants from the East coast returned to their homeland and taught the American dory fishing technique to the Portuguese who began catching cod again on the Grand Bank in the 19th century.
Northern California was the final destination for many of the Massachusetts immigrants who then moved on to the San Joaquin Valley, especially the city of Turlock, just south of Modesto.
In the late 1800s many Azoreans emigrated to the Hawaiian islands.
The tuna fishing industry drew a significant number of Azoreans to the Point Loma neighborhood of San Diego, in Southern California.
From 1921 to 1977, about 250,000 Azoreans immigrated to Rhode Island and Massachusetts.
Many Azoreans also moved to Bermuda and Hawaii (Portuguese immigration to Hawaii).
As late as 1960 mass immigration currents were registered to Brazil, and many were from the Azores.
Politics
Since 1976, the Azores is an autonomous region integrated within the framework of the Portuguese Republic.
It has its own government and autonomous legislature within its own political-administrative statute and organic law.
Its governmental organs include: the Legislative Assembly, a unicameral parliament composed of 52 elected deputies, elected by universal suffrage for a four-year term; the regional government and presidency, with parliamentary legitimacy, composed of a president, a vice-president and seven regional secretaries responsible for day-to-day operations.
It is represented in the Council of Ministers by a representative appointed by the president of the Republic, which was created during the revision of the constitution of 2004 (which, among other things, removed the older Portuguese representative that was appointed by the president of the Republic, beholden to the Council of State and coincident with the president).
Since becoming a Portuguese autonomous region, the executive branch of the regional authority has been located in Ponta Delgada, the legislative branch in Horta, and the judicial branch in Angra do Heroísmo.
The islands of the archipelago do not have independent status in law, except in electoral law and are governed by 19 municipalities that subdivide the islands.
In addition, until the administrative reform of the 19th century, the following civil parishes had municipal standing: Topo (today integrated into the municipality of Calheta, São Jorge); Praia (today integrated into municipality of Santa Cruz da Graciosa); São Sebastião ; Capelas ; and Água de Pau (now a civil parish in the municipality of Lagoa).
These civil parishes still retain their titles of "vila" in name only; the populations of Capelas and neighbouring parish still protest the change and promote the restoration of their status.
The municipalities are further subdivided into several civil parishes, with the exception of Corvo (the only municipality by law without a civil parish, owing to its size).
Azorean politics is dominated by the two largest Portuguese political parties, the Socialist Party (PS) and Social Democratic Party (PSD), the former holding a majority in the Legislative Assembly.
The Democratic and Social Center PP), the Left Bloc (BE), the Unitarian Democratic Coalition (CDU) and the People's Monarchist Party (PPM) are also represented.
Currently, , the President of the Azores is Socialist Party (PS) leader Vasco Cordeiro.
Although the PS dominates the regional politics, the PSD is traditionally popular in city and town council elections.
European Union
As part of Portugal, the Azores are in the European Union and Schengen Area.
They are also in the European Union Customs Union and VAT area, but levy a lower rate of VAT than applies on the mainland.
The Azores, like Madeira and the Canary Islands, are among member state territories with special status, as one of the designated "Outermost Regions".
Transport
Aviation
Each of the nine islands has an airport, although the majority are airfields rather than airports.
The commercial terminals in Ponta Delgada, Horta, Vila do Porto and Santa Cruz das Flores are operated by ANA - Aeroportos de Portugal, a public entity that oversees the operations of airports across Portugal.
The remaining, except for Lajes Field, are operated by the Regional Government.
Lajes is a military airbase, as well as a commercial airport, and is operated by the Portuguese Armed Forces in conjunction with the United States.
The airports are:
*Terceira: Lajes Field (LPLA) Lajes Air Base (Portuguese Airforce and United States Air Force)
Marine transport
The Azores has had a long history of water transport to overcome distances and establish inter-community contacts and trade.
Consequently, the shipbuilding industry developed in many islands, from small fishing boats, to whaling sloops to larger passenger services.
Passenger traffic to the main islands (São Miguel, Santa Maria, Terceira and Faial) began in the 17th century, and between the 18th-19th century, the Pico Yacht controlled the lucrative summer traffic season.
In the Central Group, the shipping company operates four to six time daily connections between Horta and Madalena throughout the year, using its small fleet of ships (Cruzeiro das Ilhas, Cruzeiro do Canal, Expresso das Ilhas and Expresso do Triângulo), in addition to inter-island connections between Faial, Pico, São Jorge and Terceira during the summer months.
The Atlantida, a 50 million Euro cruiser was rejected in 2009 by Atlanticoline for the under-performance of the power-plant.
With this transaction the Autonomous government of the Azores ceded control, of which it once had 88% of the capital.
Culture
Azoreans have developed their own distinct regional identity and cultural traits, from a combination of continental Portuguese customs brought by various waves of immigration and local political and environmental factors.
Religious festivals, patron saints and traditional holidays mark the Azorean calendar.
The most important religious events are tied with the festivals associated with the cult of the Holy Spirit, commonly referred to as the festivals of the Holy Spirit (or Espírito Santo), rooted in millenarian dogma and held on all islands from May to September.
These festivals are very important to the Azorean people, who are primarily Roman Catholic, and combine religious rituals with processions celebrating the benevolence and egalitarianism of neighbours.
These events are centred around treatros or impérios, small buildings that host the meals, adoration and charity of the participants, and used to store the artefacts associated with the events.
On Terceira, for example, these impérios have grown into ornate buildings painted and cared for by the local brotherhoods in their respective parishes.
The events focus on the members of local parishes, not tourists, but all are welcome, as sharing is one of the main principles of the festivals.
Some limited events focus on tourists, including a public event that the city government of Ponta Delgada on the island of São Miguel holds, which attracts visitors and locals.
Another event, the Festival of the Lord Holy Christ of the Miracles (or Senhor Santo Cristo dos Milagres) in Ponta Delgada on the island of São Miguel, is the largest individual religious event in the Azores, and takes place on Rogation Sunday.
Pilgrims from within the Portuguese diaspora normally travel to Ponta Delgada to participate in an afternoon procession behind the image of Christ along the flower-decorated streets of the city.
Although the solemn procession is only held on one day, the events of the Festival of Senhor Santo Cristo occur over a period of a week and involve a ritual of moving the image between the main church and convent nightly, ultimately culminating in the procession, which is televised within the Azores and to the Portuguese diaspora.
The Sanjoaninas Festivities in Angra do Heroísmo on Terceira are held in June honoring Saint Anthony, Saint Peter and Saint John the Baptist, in a large religious celebration.
The festival of Our Lady of Lourdes (or Nossa Senhora de Lourdes), patron saint of whalers, begins in Lajes on Pico Island on the last Sunday of August and runs through the week-Whalers Week.
It is marked by social and cultural events connected to the tradition of whale hunting.
The Wine Harvest Festival (or Festa das Vindimas), takes place during the first week of September and is a century-old custom of the people of Pico.
On Corvo the people celebrate their patron saint Nossa Senhora dos Milagres (Our Lady of Miracles) on 15 August every year in addition to the festivals of the Divine Holy Spirit.
The Festival da Maré de Agosto (August Sea Festival), takes place every year beginning on 15 August in Praia Formosa on Santa Maria.
Also, the Semana do Mar (Sea Week), dedicated almost exclusively to water sports, takes place in August in the city of Horta, on Faial.
Carnaval is also celebrated in the Azores.
Parades and pageants are the heart of the Carnaval festivities.
There is lively music, colorful costumes, hand-made masks, and floats.
The traditional bullfights in the bullring are ongoing as is the running of bulls in the streets.
References
Notes
Sources
