Vorticella is a genus of bell-shaped ciliates that have stalks to attach themselves to substrates.
The stalks have contractile myonemes, allowing them to pull the cell body against substrates.
The formation of the stalk happens after the free-swimming stage.
Etymology
The organism is aptly named “Vorticella” due to the beating cilia creating whirlpools, or vortices.
It is also known as the “Bell Animalcule” due to its bell-shaped body.
History
Vorticella was first described by Antonie van Leeuwenhoek in a letter dated October 9, 1676.
Leeuwenhoek thought that Vorticella had two horns moving like horse ears near the oral part, which turned out to be oral cilia beating to create water flow.
In 1755, German miniature painter August Johann Rösel described Vorticella, which was named Hydra convallaria by Linnaeus in 1758.
However, in 1767, it was renamed Vorticella convallaria.
Otto Friedrich Müller listed 127 species of Vorticella in 1786, but many are now known to actually be other protozoans or rotifers.
The definition of Vorticella that is still used today was first given by Ehrenberg in 1838.
Since then, 80 more species have been described, although many may be synonyms of earlier species.
Habitat and ecology
Habitats may include moist soil, mud and plant roots.
This protozoan is ciliated and is mainly found in fresh water environments.
They are known to feed on bacteria and can also form extracellular associations with mosquitoes, nematodes, prawns and tadpoles.
Rotifers have been observed to feed on Vorticella.
Bacteria found on the bodies of Vorticella may be parasites.
Vorticella as pest control
The growth, development and emergence of mosquito larvae are inhibited by Vorticella, resulting in death.
The biopolymer glue used for attachment to surfaces may damage sensory systems or pore formation of larvae.
Another possibility is that the larvae die by being unable to remain on the surface of the water, thus drowning.
Vorticella has for this reason, been explored as a method of biocontrol for mosquitoes, which are vectors of pathogenic, tropical diseases.
Molecular phylogenetics shows that some species that were previously considered to be Vorticella because of their morphology actually belong to another group, forming a clade with the swimming peritrichs Astylozoon and Opisthonecta.
Common species
*Vorticella microstoma (not a true Vorticella, according to molecular phylogeny )
Further reading
* http:/ applications protozoans vorticella.htm
* https:/ index.php specbiol cili/peri0100.htm
* (1885, January 22).
“The Vorticella”.
h9de7b9aav0rma8p6uyl3tsv0thr4wg
