Michael Joseph Jackson (August 29, 1958 - June 25, 2009) was an American singer, songwriter, and dancer.
Life and career
Michael Joseph Jackson
Joe acknowledged that he regularly whipped Michael; Michael said his father told him he had a "fat nose," and regularly physically and emotionally abused him during rehearsals.
He recalled that Joe often sat in a chair with a belt in his hand as he and his siblings rehearsed, ready to physically punish any mistakes.
Jackie, Tito, Jermaine and Marlon have said that their father was not abusive and that the whippings, which were harder on Michael because he was younger, kept them disciplined and out of trouble.
In an interview with Oprah Winfrey in 1993, Jackson said that his youth had been lonely and isolated.
In 1964, Michael and Marlon joined the Jackson Brothers-a band formed by their father which included Jackie, Tito, and Jermaine-as backup musicians playing congas and tambourine.
In 1965, Michael began sharing lead vocals with Jermaine, and the group's name was changed to the Jackson 5.
The following year, the group won a talent show; Michael performed the dance to Robert Parker's 1965 song "Barefootin'" and singing lead to The Temptations' "My Girl."
From 1966 to 1968 they toured the Midwest; they frequently played at a string of black clubs known as the "Chitlin' Circuit" as the opening act for artists such as Sam & Dave, the O'Jays, Gladys Knight, and Etta James.
The Jackson 5 also performed at clubs and cocktail lounges, where striptease shows were featured, and at local auditoriums and high school dances.
In August 1967, while touring the East Coast, they won a weekly amateur night concert at the Apollo Theater in Harlem.
The Jackson 5 recorded several songs for a Gary record label, Steeltown Records; their first single, "Big Boy", was released in 1968.
Bobby Taylor of Bobby Taylor & the Vancouvers brought the Jackson 5 to Motown after the group opened for Taylor at Chicago's Regal Theater in 1968.
Taylor also produced some of their early recordings for the label, including a version of "Who's Lovin' You."
After signing with Motown, the Jackson family relocated from Gary to Los Angeles.
In 1969, executives at Motown decided Diana Ross should introduce the Jackson 5 to the public-partly to bolster her career in television-sending off what was considered Motown's last product of its "production line".
The Jackson 5 made their first television appearance in 1969 in the Miss Black America Pageant where they performed a cover of "It's Your Thing."
Rolling Stone later described the young Michael as "a prodigy" with "overwhelming musical gifts" who "quickly emerged as the main draw and lead singer".
In January 1970, "I Want You Back" became the first Jackson 5 song to reach number one the US Billboard Hot 100; it stayed there for four weeks.
Three more singles with Motown-"ABC", "The Love You Save", and "I'll Be There"-also topped the chart.
In May 1971, the Jackson family moved into a large house on a two-acre estate in Encino, California.
During this period, Michael developed from a child performer into a teen idol.
As he emerged as a solo performer in the early 1970s, he maintained ties to the Jackson 5.
Between 1972 and 1975, Michael released four solo studio albums with Motown: Got to Be There (1972), Ben (1972), Music & Me (1973), and Forever, Michael (1975).
"Got to Be There" and "Ben," the title tracks from his first two solo albums, sold well as singles, as did a cover of Bobby Day's "Rockin' Robin."
The Jackson 5 were later described as "a cutting-edge example of black crossover artists."
They were frustrated by Motown's refusal to allow them creative input.
Jackson's performance of their top five single "Dancing Machine" on Soul Train popularized the robot dance.
1975-1981: Move to Epic and Off the Wall
In 1975, the Jackson 5 left Motown.
They signed with Epic Records, a subsidiary of CBS Records, and renamed themselves the Jacksons.
Their younger brother Randy joined the band around this time; Jermaine stayed with Motown and pursued a solo career.
The Jacksons continued to tour internationally, and released six more albums between 1976 and 1984.
Michael, the group's main songwriter during this time, wrote songs such as "Shake Your Body (Down to the Ground)" (1979), "This Place Hotel" (1980), and "Can You Feel It" (1980).
The film was a box-office failure.
Its score was arranged by Quincy Jones, who later produced three of Jackson's solo albums.
During his time in New York, Jackson frequented the Studio 54 nightclub, where he heard early hip hop; this influenced his beatboxing on future tracks such as "Working Day and Night".
In 1979, Jackson broke his nose during a dance routine.
A rhinoplasty led to breathing difficulties that later affected his career.
He was referred to Steven Hoefflin, who performed Jackson's subsequent operations.
Jackson's fifth solo album, Off the Wall (1979), established him as a solo performer and helped him move from the bubblegum pop of his youth to more complex sounds.
It produced four top 10 entries in the US: "Off the Wall", "She's Out of My Life", and the chart-topping singles "Don't Stop 'Til You Get Enough" and "Rock with You".
The album reached number three on the US Billboard 200 and sold over 20 million copies worldwide.
In 1980, Jackson won three American Music Awards for his solo work: Favorite Soul R&B Male Artist, and Favorite Soul/R&B Single for "Don't Stop 'Til You Get Enough".
He also won a Grammy Award for Best Male R&B Vocal Performance for 1979 with "Don't Stop 'Til You Get Enough".
In 1981 Jackson was the American Music Awards winner for Favorite Soul R&B Male Artist.
Jackson felt Off the Wall should have made a bigger impact, and was determined to exceed expectations with his next release.
In 1980, he secured the highest royalty rate in the music industry: 37 percent of wholesale album profit.
1982-1983: Thriller and Motown 25: Yesterday, Today, Forever
Jackson recorded with Queen singer Freddie Mercury from 1981 to 1983, recording demos of "State of Shock", "Victory" and "There Must Be More to Life Than This".
The recordings were intended for an album of duets but, according to Queen's manager Jim Beach, the relationship soured when Jackson brought a llama into the recording studio, and Jackson was upset by Mercury's drug use.
The songs were released in 2014.
Jackson went on to record "State of Shock" with Mick Jagger for the Jacksons' album Victory (1984).
In 1982, Jackson contributed "Someone in the Dark" to the storybook for the film E.T. the Extra-Terrestrial.
Jackson's sixth album, Thriller, was released in late 1982.
It was the best-selling album worldwide in 1983, and became the best-selling album of all time in the US and the best-selling album of all time worldwide, selling an estimated copies.
It topped the Billboard 200 chart for 37 weeks and was in the top 10 of the 200 for 80 consecutive weeks.
It was the first album to have seven Billboard Hot 100 top 10 singles, including "Billie Jean", "Beat It", and "Wanna Be Startin' Somethin' ".
On March 25, 1983, Jackson reunited with his brothers for Motown 25: Yesterday, Today, Forever, an NBC television special.
The show aired on May 16, 1983, to an estimated audience of , and featured the Jacksons and other Motown stars.
Jackson's solo performance of "Billie Jean" earned him his first Emmy Award nomination.
Wearing a glove decorated with rhinestones, he debuted his moonwalk dance, which Jeffrey Daniel had taught him three years earlier, and it became his signature dance in his repertoire.
Jackson had originally turned down the invitation to the show, believing he had been doing too much television.
But at the request of Motown founder Berry Gordy, he performed in exchange for an opportunity to do a solo performance.
Rolling Stone reporter Mikal Gilmore called the performance "extraordinary."
Jackson's performance drew comparisons to Elvis Presley's and the Beatles' appearances on The Ed Sullivan Show.
Anna Kisselgoff of The New York Times praised the perfect timing and technique involved in the dance.
Gordy described being "mesmerized" by the performance.
At the 26th Annual Grammy Awards, Thriller won eight awards, while Jackson also won an award for the E.T. the Extra-Terrestial storybook.
Winning eight Grammys in one ceremony is a record he holds with the band Santana.
At the 11th Annual American Music Awards, Jackson won another eight awards and became the youngest artist to win the Award of Merit.
He also won Favorite Male Artist, Favorite Soul Rock Artist.
"Beat It" won Favorite Soul Rock Video and Favorite Pop R&B Album and Favorite Pop/Rock Album.
Jackson had the highest royalty rate in the music industry at that point, with about $2 for every album sold, and was making record-breaking profits.
Dolls modeled after Jackson appeared in stores in May 1984 for $12 each.
In the same year, The Making of Michael Jackson's Thriller, a music documentary, won a Grammy for Best Music Video (Longform).
1984-1985: Pepsi, "We Are the World", and business career
In November 1983, Jackson and his brothers partnered with PepsiCo in a $5 million promotional deal that broke records for a celebrity endorsement.
The first Pepsi campaign, which ran in the US from 1983 to 1984 and launched its "New Generation" theme, included tour sponsorship, public relations events, and in-store displays.
Jackson helped to create the advertisement, and suggested using his song "Billie Jean", with revised lyrics, as its jingle.
On January 27, 1984, Michael and other members of the Jacksons filmed a Pepsi commercial overseen by Phil Dusenberry, a BBDO ad agency executive, and Alan Pottasch, Pepsi's Worldwide Creative Director, at the Shrine Auditorium in Los Angeles.
During a simulated concert before a full house of fans, pyrotechnics accidentally set Jackson's hair on fire, causing second-degree burns to his scalp.
Jackson underwent treatment to hide the scars and had his third rhinoplasty shortly thereafter.
Pepsi settled out of court, and Jackson donated the $1.5 million settlement to the Brotman Medical Center in Culver City, California; its Michael Jackson Burn Center is named in his honor.
Jackson signed a second agreement with Pepsi in the late 1980s for $10 million.
The second campaign covered 20 countries and provided financial support for Jackson's Bad album and 1987-88 world tour.
Jackson had endorsements and advertising deals with other companies, such as LA Gear, Suzuki, and Sony, but none were as significant as his deals with Pepsi.
The Victory Tour of 1984 headlined the Jacksons and showcased Jackson's new solo material to more than two million Americans.
It was the last tour he did with his brothers.
Following controversy over the concert's ticket sales, Jackson donated his share of the proceeds, an estimated , to charity.
During the last concert of the Victory Tour at the Dodger Stadium in Los Angeles, Jackson announced his split from The Jacksons during "Shake Your Body".
His charitable work continued with the release of "We Are the World" (1985), co-written with Lionel Richie, which raised money for the poor in the US and Africa.
It earned $63 million, It won four Grammys for 1985, including Song of the Year for Jackson and Richie as its writers.
Jackson collaborated with Paul McCartney in the early 1980s, and learned that McCartney was making $40 million a year from owning the rights to other artists' songs.
In 1981, McCartney had been offered the catalog for £20 million ($40 million).
Jackson submitted a bid of $46 million on November 20, 1984.
Jackson's purchase of ATV Music was finalized on August 10, 1985.
a condition characterized by patches of the skin losing their pigment, and sensitivity to sunlight.
He also identified discoid lupus erythematosus in Jackson.
He diagnosed Jackson with lupus that year, Vitiligo's drastic effects on the body can cause psychological distress.
Jackson used fair-colored makeup, and possibly skin-bleaching prescription creams, to cover up the uneven blotches of color caused by the illness.
The creams would have further lightened his skin, and, with the application of makeup, he could appear very pale.
Jackson said he had not purposely bleached his skin and could not control his vitiligo, adding, "When people make up stories that I don't want to be who I am, it hurts me."
He became friends with Klein and Klein's nurse Debbie Rowe.
Rowe later became Jackson's second wife and the mother of his first two children.
In his autobiography and the 1993 interview with Winfrey, Jackson said he had had two rhinoplasty surgeries and a cleft chin surgery but no more than that.
He said he lost weight in the early 1980s because of a change in diet to achieve a dancer's body.
Witnesses reported that he was often dizzy, and speculated he was suffering from anorexia nervosa.
Periods of weight loss became a recurring problem later in his life.
After his death, his mother Katherine told Winfrey that he first turned to cosmetic procedures to remedy his vitiligo, because he did not want to look like a "spotted cow."
She said her son had received more than the two cosmetic surgeries he claimed and speculated that he was addicted to them.
In 1986, tabloids reported that Jackson slept in a hyperbaric oxygen chamber to slow aging, and pictured him lying in a glass box.
The claim was untrue, and tabloids reported that he spread the story himself.
It was also reported, by the tabloids, that Jackson took female hormone shots to keep his voice high and facial hair wispy, proposed to Elizabeth Taylor and possibly had a shrine of her, and had cosmetic surgery on his eyes.
Jackson's manager Frank DiLeo denied all of them, except for Jackson having a chamber.
DiLeo added "I don't know if he sleeps in it.
I'm not for it.
But Michael thinks it's something that's probably healthy for him.
He's a bit of a health fanatic."
When Jackson took his pet chimpanzee Bubbles to tour in Japan, their public appearances caused a stir in the media.
They portrayed Jackson as an aspiring Disney cartoon character who befriended various animals.
Meanwhile, it was also reported that Jackson had offered to buy the bones of Joseph Merrick (the "Elephant Man").
In June 1987, the Chicago Tribune reported Jackson's publicist bidding $1 million for the skeleton to the London Hospital Medical College on his behalf.
The college maintained the skeleton was not for sale.
DiLeo said Jackson had an "absorbing interest" in Merrick, "purely based on his awareness of the ethical, medical and historical significance."
These tabloid stories inspired the name "Wacko Jacko," which Jackson came to despise.
According to music journalist Joseph Vogel, the demeaning name first appeared in British tabloid
The Sun in 1985.
The name's origins come from Jacko Macacco, the name of a famous monkey used in monkey-baiting matches at the Westminster Pit in the early 1820s.
"Jacko" was subsequently used in Cockney slang to refer to monkeys in general, hence a racist connotation behind the name.
In 1987, Rolling Stone described Jackson as "the flighty-genius star-child, a celebrity virtually all his life, who dwells in a fairy-tale kingdom of fellow celebrities, animals, mannequins and cartoons, who provides endless fodder for the tabloids....
But it’s the same child in Michael who inspires the artistry that fuels all the subsidiary industries, who turns his primal fears and fantasies into wondrous, hyperkinetic and emotional music."
After having been removed in the late 1990s, it returned to the theme park for several years after Jackson's death.
In 1987, Jackson disassociated himself from the Jehovah's Witnesses.
Katherine Jackson said this might have been because some Witnesses strongly opposed the Thriller video.
Jackson had denounced it in a Witness publication in 1984.
1987-1990: Bad, autobiography, and Neverland
Jackson's first album in five years, Bad (1987), was highly anticipated, with the industry expecting another major success.
It became the first album to produce five US number-one singles: "I Just Can't Stop Loving You", "Bad", "The Way You Make Me Feel", "Man in the Mirror", and "Dirty Diana".
Another song, "Smooth Criminal", peaked at number seven.
By 2012, it had sold between 30 and 45 million copies worldwide.
The Bad world tour ran from September 12, 1987 to January 14, 1989.
In Japan, the tour had 14 sellouts and drew 570,000 people, nearly tripling the previous record for a single tour.
The 504,000 people who attended seven sold-out shows at Wembley Stadium set a new Guinness world record.
In 1988, Jackson released his autobiography, Moonwalk, with input from Stephen Davis and Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis.
It sold 200,000 copies, and reached the top of the New York Times bestsellers list.
Jackson discussed his childhood, the Jackson 5, and the abuse from his father.
He attributed his changing facial appearance to three plastic surgeries, puberty, weight loss, a strict vegetarian diet, a change in hairstyle, and stage lighting.
In October, Jackson released a film, Moonwalker, which featured live footage and short films starring Jackson and Joe Pesci.
In the US it was released direct-to-video and became the best-selling video cassette.
The RIAA certified it as Platinum.
In March 1988, Jackson purchased of land near Santa Ynez, California, to build a new home, Neverland Ranch, at a cost of $17 million.
He installed a Ferris wheel, a carousel, a movie theater and a zoo.
A security staff of 40 patrolled the grounds.
Jackson became known as the "King of Pop", a nickname that Jackson's publicists embraced.
When Elizabeth Taylor presented him with the Soul Train Heritage Award in 1989, she called him "the true king of pop, rock and soul."
President George H. W. Bush designated him the White House's "Artist of the Decade".
From 1985 to 1990, Jackson donated $455,000 to the United Negro College Fund, and all profits from his single "Man in the Mirror" went to charity.
His rendition of "You Were There" at Sammy Davis Jr.'s 60th birthday celebration won Jackson a second Emmy nomination.
beating Neil Diamond's renewal contract with Columbia Records.
In 1991, he released his eighth album, Dangerous, co-produced with Teddy Riley.
It was certified seven times platinum in the US, and by 2008 had sold 30 million copies worldwide.
In the US, the first single, "Black or White", was the album's highest charting song; it was number one on the Billboard Hot 100 for seven weeks and achieved similar chart performances worldwide.
The second single, "Remember the Time" peaked at number three on the Billboard Hot 100 singles chart.
In 1993, he performed "Remember the Time" at the Soul Train Music Awards in a chair, saying he twisted his ankle during dance rehearsals.
In the UK, "Heal the World" made No. 2 on the charts in 1992.
Part of the proceeds went to Heal the World Foundation.
Jackson sold the broadcast rights of the tour to HBO for $20 million, a record-breaking deal that still stands.
Following the death of HIV AIDS charities and research and performed "Gone Too Soon", a song dedicated to White, and "Heal the World" at the gala.
Jackson visited Africa in early 1992; on his first stop in Gabon he was greeted by more than 100,000 people, some of them carrying signs that read "Welcome Home Michael".
During his trip to Ivory Coast, Jackson was crowned "King Sani" by a tribal chief.
He thanked the dignitaries in French and English, signed documents formalizing his kingship, and sat on a golden throne while presiding over ceremonial dances.
It was the first Super Bowl whose half-time performance drew greater audience figures than the game.
Jackson played "Jam", "Billie Jean", "Black or White", and "Heal the World".
Dangerous rose 90 places in the album chart after the performance.
Jackson gave a 90-minute interview to Winfrey on February 10, 1993.
He spoke of his childhood abuse at the hands of his father; he believed he had missed out on much of his childhood, and said that he often cried from loneliness.
He denied tabloid rumors that he had bought the bones of the Elephant Man, slept in a hyperbaric oxygen chamber, or bleached his skin, and stated for the first time that he had vitiligo.
Dangerous re-entered the album chart in the top 10, more than a year after its release.
In January 1993, Jackson won three American Music Awards: Favorite Pop R&B Single ("Remember the Time"), and was the first to win the International Artist Award of Excellence.
In February, he won the "Living Legend Award" at the 35th Annual Grammy Awards in Los Angeles.
Dangerous was nominated for Best Vocal Performance (for "Black or White"), Best R&B Vocal Performance ("Jam") and Best R&B Song ("Jam"), and Swedien and Riley won the award for Best Engineered - Non Classical.
Jordan said he and Jackson had engaged in acts of kissing, masturbation and oral sex.
Jordan's mother initially told police that she did not believe Jackson had molested her son; however, her position wavered a few days later.
Evan was recorded discussing his intention to pursue charges, which Jackson used to argue that he was the victim of a jealous father trying to extort money.
Jackson's older sister La Toya accused him of being a pedophile, which she later retracted.
Police raided Jackson's home in December and found books and photographs featuring young boys with little or no clothing.
The books were legal to own, and Jackson was not indicted.
Jordan Chandler gave police a description of Jackson's genitals.
A strip search was made, and the jurors felt the description was not a match.
In January 1994, Jackson settled with the Chandlers out of court for $25 million.
The police never pressed criminal charges.
Citing a lack of evidence without Jordan's testimony, the state closed its investigation on September 22, 1994.
Jackson had been taking painkillers for his reconstructive scalp surgeries, administered due to the Pepsi commercial accident in 1984, and became dependent on them to cope with the stress of the sexual abuse allegations.
On November 12, 1993, Jackson canceled the remainder of the Dangerous Tour due to health problems, stress from the allegations and painkiller addiction.
He thanked close friend Elizabeth Taylor for support, encouragement and counsel.
The end of the tour concluded his relationship with Pepsi-Cola which sponsored the tour.
In late 1993 Jackson proposed to Lisa Marie Presley, daughter of Elvis Presley, over the phone.
They married in La Vega, Dominican Republic in May 1994 by civil judge Hugo Francisco Alvarez Perez.
The tabloid media speculated that the wedding was a publicity stunt to deflect Jackson's sexual abuse allegations and jump-start Presley's career as a singer.
After the divorce, Judge Perez said, "They lasted longer than I thought they would.
I gave them a year.
They lasted a year and a half."
The first single from HIStory was "Scream/Childhood".
"Scream", a duet with Jackson's youngest sister Janet, protests the media's treatment of Jackson during the 1993 child abuse allegations against him.
The single made number five on the Billboard Hot 100, and received a Grammy nomination for "Best Pop Collaboration with Vocals".
In late 1995, Jackson was admitted to a hospital after collapsing during rehearsals for a televised performance, caused by a stress-related panic attack.
In November, Jackson merged his ATV Music catalog with Sony's music publishing division, creating Sony/ATV Music Publishing.
He retained ownership of half the company, earning $95 million up front as well as the rights to more songs.
"Earth Song" was the third single released from HIStory, and topped the UK Singles Chart for six weeks over Christmas 1995.
It became the 87th-best selling single in the nation.
At the 1996 Brit Awards, Jackson's performance of "Earth Song" was disrupted by a drunken Jarvis Cocker and his Pulp band-mate Peter Mansell, who were protesting what Cocker saw as Jackson's "Christ-like" persona.
Jackson said the stage invasion was "disgusting and cowardly".
In 1996, Jackson won a Grammy for Best Music Video, Short Form for "Scream" and an American Music Award for Favorite Pop/Rock Male Artist.
Jackson promoted HIStory with the HIStory World Tour, from September 7, 1996 to October 15, 1997.
He performed 82 concerts in five continents, 35 countries and 58 cities to over 4.5 million fans, his most attended tour.
It grossed .
During the tour, in Sydney, Australia, Jackson married Debbie Rowe, a dermatology nurse, who was six months pregnant with his first child.
Michael Joseph Jackson Jr. (commonly known as Prince) was born on February 13, 1997; his sister Paris-Michael Katherine Jackson was born a year later on April 3, 1998.
Jackson and Rowe divorced in 1999, and Rowe conceded custody of the children, with an $8 million settlement.
In 2004, after the second child abuse allegations against Jackson, she returned to court to reclaim custody.
The suit was settled in 2006.
In 1997, Jackson released Blood on the Dance Floor: HIStory in the Mix, which contained remixes of singles from HIStory and five new songs.
Worldwide sales stand at copies, making it the best-selling remix album of all time.
It reached number one in the UK, as did the title track.
In the US, the album reached number 24 and was certified platinum.
In June 1999, Jackson joined Luciano Pavarotti for a War Child benefit concert in Modena, Italy.
The show raised a million dollars for refugees of the Kosovo War, and additional funds for the children of Guatemala.
Later that month, Jackson organized a series of "Michael Jackson & Friends" benefit concerts in Germany and Korea.
Other artists involved included Slash, The Scorpions, Boyz II Men, Luther Vandross, Mariah Carey, A. R. Rahman, Prabhu Deva Sundaram, Shobana, Andrea Bocelli, and Luciano Pavarotti.
The proceeds went to the Nelson Mandela Children's Fund, the Red Cross and UNESCO.
From August 1999 to 2000, he lived in New York City at 4 East 74th Street.
At the turn of the century, Jackson won an American Music Award as Artist of the 1980s.
In 2000, Guinness World Records recognized him for supporting 39 charities, more than any other entertainer.
In September 2001, two 30th Anniversary concerts were held at Madison Square Garden to mark Jackson's 30th year as a solo artist.
Jackson performed with his brothers for the first time since 1984.
The show also featured Mýa, Usher, Whitney Houston, Destiny's Child, Monica, Liza Minnelli, and Slash.
The first show was marred by technical lapses, and the crowd booed a speech by Marlon Brando.
Almost 30 million people watched the television broadcast of the shows in November.
After 9/11, Jackson helped organize the United
We Stand: What More Can I Give benefit concert at RFK Stadium in Washington, D.C. on October 21, 2001.
Jackson performed "What More Can I Give" as the finale.
The release of Invincible was preceded by a dispute between Jackson and his record label, Sony Music Entertainment.
Jackson had expected the licenses to the masters of his albums to revert to him in the early 2000s, after which he would be able to promote the material however he pleased and keep the profits, but clauses in the contract set the revert date years into the future.
Jackson sought an early exit from his contract.
Invincible was released on October 30, 2001.
It was Jackson's first full-length album in six years, and the last album of original material he released in his lifetime.
It debuted at number one in 13 countries and went on to sell 6 million copies worldwide, receiving double-platinum certification in the US.
Later that year, an anonymous surrogate mother gave birth to his third child, Prince Michael Jackson II (nicknamed "Blanket"), who had been conceived by artificial insemination.
On November 20, Jackson briefly held Blanket over the railing of his Berlin hotel room, four stories above ground level, prompting widespread criticism in the media.
Jackson apologized for the incident, calling it "a terrible mistake."
In March, a Santa Maria jury ordered Jackson to pay Avram $5.3 million.
On December 18, 2003, Jackson's attorneys dropped all appeals on the verdict and settled the lawsuit for an undisclosed amount.
In July 2002, Jackson called Sony Music chairman Tommy Mottola "a racist, and very, very, very devilish," and someone who exploits black artists for his own gain, at Al Sharpton's National Action Network in Harlem.
The accusation prompted Sharpton to form a coalition investigating whether Mottola exploited black artists.
Jackson also charged that Mottola had called his colleague Irv Gotti a "fat nigger".
Responding to those attacks, Sony issued a statement calling them "ludicrous, spiteful, and hurtful" and defended Mottola as someone who had championed Jackson's career for many years.
The documentary, broadcast in February 2003 as Living with Michael Jackson, showed Jackson holding hands and discussing sleeping arrangements with a 12-year-old boy.
On December 18, 2003, Santa Barbara authorities charged Jackson with seven counts of child molestation and two counts of intoxicating a minor with alcoholic drinks.
Jackson denied the allegations and pleaded not guilty.
The People v. Jackson trial began on January 31, 2005, in Santa Maria, California, and lasted until the end of May.
Jackson found the experience stressful and it affected his health.
If convicted, he would have faced up to 20 years in prison.
On June 13, 2005, Jackson was acquitted on all counts.
After the trial, he became reclusive Jermaine Jackson later said the family had planned to send Jackson there had he been convicted, unbeknownst to Jackson.
On November 18, 2003, Sony released Number Ones, a greatest hits compilation.
It was certified triple platinum by the RIAA, and six times platinum in the UK, for shipments of at least 1.2 million units.
2006-2009: Closure of Neverland, final years, and
This Is It
In April 2006, Jackson agreed to use a piece of his ATV catalog stake as collateral against his $270 million worth of loans to Bank of America.
The catalog was worth about $1 billion at the time.
Bank of America had sold the loans to Fortress Investments, an investment company that buys distressed loans, the year before.
As part of the agreement, Fortress Investments provided Jackson a new loan of $300 million with reduced interest payments.
Sony Music would have the option to buy half of his stake, or about 25% of the catalog, at a set price.
Jackson's financial managers had urged him to shed part of his stake to avoid bankruptcy.
The main house at Neverland Ranch was closed as a cost-cutting measure, while Jackson lived in Bahrain at the hospitality of Sheik Abdullah, the ruler's son.
At least 30 workers had not been paid on time and were owed $306,000 in back wages; Jackson also had to pay $100,000 in penalties.
That October, Fox News entertainment reporter Roger Friedman said Jackson had been recording at a studio in County Westmeath, Ireland.
It was not known at the time what Jackson was working on, or who had paid for the sessions; his publicist had stated that he had left Two Seas by then.
In November 2006, Jackson invited an Access Hollywood camera crew into the studio in Westmeath, and MSNBC reported that he was working on a new album, produced by will.i.am.
Treacy became Jackson's personal dermatologist soon afterward.
On November 15, 2006, Jackson performed at the World Music Awards in London and accepted the Diamond Award honoring the sale of over of his records.
He returned to the US in December 2006 to attend James Brown's funeral in Augusta, Georgia, where he gave a eulogy calling Brown his "greatest inspiration."
In 2007, Jackson and Sony bought another music publishing company, Famous Music LLC, formerly owned by Viacom.
This deal gave him the rights to songs by Eminem and Beck, among others.
In March 2007, Jackson gave a brief interview to the Associated Press in Tokyo, in which he said he had no regrets about his lifelong career despite difficulties and "deliberate attempts to hurt him."
That month, Jackson visited a US Army post in Japan, Camp Zama, to greet over 3,000 troops and their families.
In September 2007, Jackson was still working on his next album, which he never completed.
In 2008, Jackson and Sony released Thriller 25 to mark the 25th anniversary of the original Thriller.
Two remixes were released as singles: "The Girl Is Mine 2008" (with will.i.am), based on an early demo version of the song without Paul McCartney, and "Wanna Be Startin' Somethin' 2008" with Akon.
For Jackson's 50th birthday, Sony BMG released a series of greatest hits albums titled King of Pop.
Different versions were released in various countries, based on polls of local fans.
In 2008, Fortress Investments threatened to foreclose on Neverland Ranch, which Jackson had used as collateral for his loans.
Fortress sold Jackson's debts to Colony Capital LLC.
In November, Jackson transferred Neverland Ranch's title to Sycamore Valley Ranch Company LLC, a joint venture between Jackson and Colony Capital LLC.
The deal earned him .
Jackson arranged to sell a large collection of his memorabilia (more than 1,000 items) through Julien's Auction House.
The auction was scheduled to take place between April 22 and 25, 2009.
On the eve of the first public exhibit in March, Jackson filed a legal action to block the auction.
Darren Julien, CEO of Julien's Auctions, was baffled by Jackson's sudden change of heart.
Jackson changed his mind after pocketing between $200 million to $300 million of initial sales from a series of concerts to be held in London.
In March 2009, at a press conference at The O2 Arena, Jackson announced a series of comeback concerts titled This Is It amid speculation about his finances and health.
The shows were to be his first major tour since the HIStory World Tour that ended in 1997.
Jackson suggested he would retire after the shows.
The initial plan was for 10 concerts in London, followed by shows in Paris, New York City and Mumbai.
Randy Phillips, president and chief executive of AEG Live, predicted the first 10 dates would earn Jackson £50 million.
The London residency show increased to 50 dates after record-breaking ticket sales; over one million sold in less than two hours.
The concerts were to run from July 13, 2009 to March 6, 2010.
Jackson rehearsed in Los Angeles in the weeks leading up to the tour under the direction of choreographer Kenny Ortega, whom he worked with during his previous tours.
Most rehearsals took place at the Staples Center owned by AEG.
Death
On June 25, 2009, less than three weeks before the first show was due to begin in London, with all concerts sold out, Jackson died from a cardiac arrest.
Conrad Murray, his personal physician, had given Jackson various medications to help him sleep at his rented mansion in Holmby Hills, Los Angeles.
Paramedics received a 911 call at 12:22 pm Pacific time (19:22 UTC), and arrived three minutes later.
Jackson was not breathing and CPR was performed.
Resuscitation efforts continued en route to Ronald Reagan UCLA Medical Center, and for more than an hour after arriving there, but were unsuccessful, and he was pronounced dead at 2:26 pm Pacific time (21:26 UTC).
Jackson had taken propofol, lorazepam, and midazolam; his death was caused by a propofol overdose.
and putting unprecedented strain on services and websites including Google, Overall, web traffic rose by between 11% and 20%.
MTV and BET aired marathons of Jackson's music videos.
Jackson specials aired on television stations around the world.
MTV briefly returned to its original music video format,
Memorial service
Jackson's memorial was held on July 7, 2009, at the Staples Center in Los Angeles, preceded by a private family service at Forest Lawn Memorial Park's Hall of Liberty.
Over 1.6 million fans applied for tickets to the memorial; the 8,750 recipients were drawn at random, and each received two tickets.
The memorial service was one of the most watched events in streaming history, with an estimated US audience of 31.1 million.
Mariah Carey, Stevie Wonder, Lionel Richie, Jennifer Hudson, and Shaheen Jafargholi performed at the event.
Smokey Robinson and Queen Latifah gave eulogies.
Al Sharpton received a standing ovation with cheers when he told Jackson's children, "Wasn't nothing strange about your daddy.
It was strange what your daddy had to deal with.
But he dealt with it anyway."
Jackson's 11-year-old daughter Paris Katherine, speaking publicly for the first time, wept as she addressed the crowd.
The Rev. Lucious Smith provided a closing prayer.
Jackson's body was entombed on September 3, 2009, at Forest Lawn Memorial Park in Glendale, California.
Criminal investigation and prosecution
In August 2009, the Los Angeles County Coroner ruled that Jackson's death was a homicide.
Law enforcement officials charged Murray with involuntary manslaughter on February 8, 2010.
On June 25, 2010, the first anniversary of Jackson's death, fans, family and friends visited Jackson's star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame, his family home, and Forest Lawn Memorial Park.
Many left tributes at the sites.
Murray's trial took place from September 27 to November 7, 2011, and he was found guilty of involuntary manslaughter and held without bail to await sentencing.
22 days after the trial ended, Murray received the maximum sentence of four years in prison.
He was released on October 28, 2013 due to California prison overcrowding and good behavior.
Posthumous sales
At the 2009 American Music Awards, Jackson won four posthumous awards, including two for his compilation album Number Ones, bringing his total American Music Awards to 26.
In the year after his death, more than 8.2 million of Jackson's albums sold in the US, and 35 million albums worldwide, more than any other artist in 2009.
He became the first artist to sell one million music downloads in a week, with 2.6 million song downloads.
Thriller, Number Ones and The Essential Michael Jackson became the first catalog albums to outsell any new album.
Jackson also became the first artist to have four of the top 20 best-selling albums in a single year in the US.
They also agreed to release ten albums of previously unreleased material and new collections of released work.
In 2017, Sony Music Entertainment extended its deal with the estate; that July, a Los Angeles court awarded Jones $9.4 million of disputed royalty payments for Off the Wall, Thriller and Bad.
In 2014, Jackson became the first artist to have a top ten single in the Billboard Hot 100 in five different decades.
In December 2015, Thriller was certified for 30 million shipments by the RIAA, one of only two albums to do so in the US.
A year later, it was certified at 33× platinum, after Soundscan added streams and audio downloads to album certifications.
Posthumous releases and productions
The first posthumous Jackson song, "This Is It", co-written in the 1980s with Paul Anka, was released in October 2009.
The surviving Jackson brothers reunited to record backing vocals.
On October 28, 2009, Sony released a documentary film about the rehearsals, Michael Jackson's This Is It.
Despite a limited two-week engagement, it became the highest-grossing documentary or concert film ever, with earnings of more than worldwide.
Jackson's estate received 90% of the profits.
The film was accompanied by a compilation album of the same name.
In late 2010, Sony released the first posthumous album, Michael and the promotional single "Breaking News".
Some doubt was cast upon whether the voice on some tracks was genuinely Jackson's.
Video game developer Ubisoft released a music video game featuring Jackson for the 2010 holiday season, Michael Jackson: The Experience; it was among the first games to use Kinect and PlayStation Move, the motion-detecting camera systems for Xbox 360 and PlayStation 3 respectively.
Xscape, an album of unreleased material, was released on May 13, 2014.
Later that year, Queen released three duets recorded with Jackson and Freddie Mercury in the 1980s.
In October 2011, the theater company Cirque du Soleil launched Michael Jackson: The Immortal World Tour, a $57-million production, in Montreal, with a permanent show resident in Las Vegas.
A larger and more theatrical Cirque show, Michael Jackson: One, designed for residency at the Mandalay Bay resort in Las Vegas, opened on May 23, 2013 in a renovated theater.
A jukebox musical, Don't Stop 'Til You Get Enough, is due to debut on Broadway in mid-2020.
The musical is directed and choreographed by Christopher Wheeldon and features a book by Lynn Nottage.
It was delayed and a pre-Broadway run in Chicago was canceled in the wake of the renewed claims of child sexual abuse.
In April 2011, Mohamed Al-Fayed, chairman of Fulham Football Club, unveiled a statue of Jackson outside the club stadium, Craven Cottage.
It was moved to the National Football Museum in Manchester in May 2014, then removed from display in March 2019 following renewed sexual assault allegations.
In 2012, in an attempt to end a family dispute, Jackson's brother Jermaine retracted his signature on a public letter criticizing executors of Jackson's estate and his mother's advisers over the legitimacy of his brother's will.
T.J. Jackson, son of Tito Jackson, was given co-guardianship of Michael Jackson's children after false reports of Katherine Jackson going missing.
Leaving Neverland and posthumous child sexual abuse allegations
In 2013, choreographer Wade Robson filed a lawsuit alleging that Jackson had sexually abused him for seven years, beginning when he was seven years old.
In 2014, a case was filed by James Safechuck, alleging sexual abuse over a four-year period from the age of ten.
Both had testified in Jackson's defense during the 1993 allegations; Robson did so again in 2005.
In 2015, Robson's case against Jackson's estate was dismissed on the grounds of being filed too late.
Safechuck's claim was also time barred.
In 2017, it was ruled that Jackson's corporations could not be held accountable for his alleged past actions.
Their individual lawsuits are currently on appeal.
Robson and Safechuck and their stories became the subject of the documentary Leaving Neverland.
The documentary covered their allegations of Jackson sexually abusing them in graphic detail, saying Jackson abused them "hundreds of times."
Radio stations in New Zealand, Canada, the UK and the Netherlands removed Jackson's music from their playlists indefinitely.
Jackson's family condemned the film as a "public lynching."
The Jackson estate released a statement calling the film a "tabloid character assassination Jackson endured in life, and now in death".
The film drew criticism from Jackson fans.
Close associates of Jackson, such as Corey Feldman, Aaron Carter, Brett Barnes, and Macaulay Culkin, said that Jackson had not molested them.
At the same time, Jackson's albums rose in the charts following the documentary.
Number Ones jumped to No. 23 in the UK iTunes charts.
The Essential Michael Jackson climbed to No. 76; Thriller climbed to No. 133 and Bad to No. 142.
Billboard senior editor Gail Mitchell said she and a colleague interviewed about thirty music executives who believed Jackson's legacy could withstand the controversy.
On February 21, the Jackson estate sued HBO for breaching a non-disparagement clause from a 1992 contract.
The suit sought to compel HBO to participate in a non-confidential arbitration that could result in $100 million or more in damages rewarded to the estate.
HBO said they did not breach a contract and filed an anti-SLAPP motion against the estate.
On September 20, Judge George H. Wu denied HBO's motion to dismiss the case, allowing the Jackson estate to arbitrate.
Legacy and influence
Jackson has been referred to as the "King of Pop" because he transformed the art of music videos and paved the way for modern pop music.
For much of Jackson's career, he had an unparalleled worldwide influence over the younger generation.
He is considered one of the most significant cultural icons of the 20th century, and his contributions to music, dance, and fashion, along with his publicized personal life, made him a global figure in popular culture for over four decades.
Danyel Smith, the chief content officer of Vibe Media Group and the editor-in-chief of Vibe describes Jackson as "The Greatest Star".
Huey calls Jackson "an unstoppable juggernaut, possessed of all the skills to dominate the charts seemingly at will: an instantly identifiable voice, eye-popping dance moves, stunning musical versatility and loads of sheer star power".
In 1984, Time magazine's pop critic Jay Cocks wrote that "Jackson is the biggest thing since the Beatles.
He is the hottest single phenomenon since Elvis Presley.
He just may be the most popular black singer ever."
In 2007, Jackson said: "Music has been my outlet, my gift to all of the lovers in this world.
Through it, my music, I know I will live forever."
At Jackson's memorial service on July 7, 2009, Motown founder Berry Gordy called Jackson "the greatest entertainer that ever lived".
In a June 28, 2009 Baltimore Sun article, Jill Rosen wrote that Jackson's legacy influenced fields including sound, dance, fashion, music videos and celebrity.
In July 2009, the Lunar Republic Society named a crater on the Moon after Jackson.
In August, for what would have been Jackson's 51st birthday, Google dedicated their Google Doodle to him.
In 2010, two university librarians found that there were references to Jackson in academic writing on music, popular culture, chemistry and other topics.
On December 19, 2014, the British Council of Cultural Relations deemed Jackson's life one of the 80 most important cultural moments of the 20th century.
Robert Christgau wrote that Jackson's work from the 1970s to the early 1990s showed "immense originality, adaptability, and ambition" that "generated genius beats, hooks, arrangements, and vocals (though not lyrics)"; music that "will stand forever as a reproach to the puritanical notion that pop music is slick or shallow and that's the end of it."
During the 1990s as Jackson lost control of his "troubling life", his music suffered and began to shape "an arc not merely of promise fulfilled and outlived, but of something approaching tragedy: a phenomenally ebullient child star tops himself like none before, only to transmute audibly into a lost weirdo."
Jackson's image by the 2000s-his "obsession with fame, his grotesque life magnified by his grotesque wealth"-had become what Christgau called "such an offense to rock aesthetes that the fact that he's a great musician is now often forgotten."
Artistry
Influences
Jackson was influenced by musicians including James Brown, Little Richard, Jackie Wilson, Diana Ross, Fred Astaire, Sammy Davis Jr., Gene Kelly, and David Ruffin.
Little Richard had a substantial influence on Jackson, but Brown was his greatest inspiration; he later said that as a small child, his mother would waken him whenever Brown appeared on television.
Jackson described being "mesmerized".
Jackson's vocal technique was influenced by Diana Ross; his use of the oooh interjection from a young age was something Ross had used on many of her songs with the Supremes.
She was a mother figure to him, and he often watched her rehearse.
He said he had learned a lot from watching how she moved and sang, and that she had encouraged him to have confidence in himself.
Choreographer David Winters, who met Jackson while choreographing the 1971 Diana Ross TV special Diana!, said that Jackson watched the musical West Side Story almost every week, and it was his favorite film; he paid tribute to it in "Beat It" and the "Bad" video.
Musicianship
Jackson had no formal music training and could not read or write music notation; he is credited for playing guitar, keyboard and drums, but was not proficient in them.
When composing, he recorded ideas by beatboxing and imitating instruments vocally.
soul, rock, post-disco, the funk pieces "Billie Jean" and "Wanna Be Startin' Somethin'", The lead single "I Just Can't Stop Loving You" is a traditional love ballad, and "Man in the Mirror" is a ballad of confession and resolution.
"Smooth Criminal" is an evocation of bloody assault, rape and likely murder.
The first half of the record is dedicated to new jack swing, including songs like "Jam" and "Remember the Time".
It was the first Jackson album in which social ills became a primary theme; "Why You Wanna Trip on Me", for example, protests world hunger, AIDS, homelessness and drugs.
Dangerous contains sexually charged songs such as "In the Closet".
The title track continues the theme of the predatory lover and compulsive desire.
The second half includes introspective, pop-gospel anthems such as "Will You Be There", "Heal the World" and "Keep the Faith".
In the ballad "Gone Too Soon", Jackson gives tribute to Ryan White and the plight of those with AIDS.
HIStory creates an atmosphere of paranoia.
In the new jack swing-funk rock tracks "Scream" and "Tabloid Junkie", and the R&B ballad "You Are Not Alone", Jackson retaliates against the injustice and isolation he feels, and directs his anger at the media.
In the introspective ballad "Stranger in Moscow", Jackson laments his "fall from grace"; "Earth Song", "Childhood", "Little Susie" and "Smile" are operatic pop songs.
Invincible was produced by Rodney Jerkins.
Vocal style
Jackson sang from childhood, and over time his voice and vocal style changed.
Between 1971 and 1975, his voice descended from boy soprano to high tenor.
He was known for his vocal range.
With the arrival of Off the Wall in the late 1970s, Jackson's abilities as a vocalist were well regarded; Rolling Stone compared his vocals to the "breathless, dreamy stutter" of Stevie Wonder, and wrote that "Jackson's feathery-timbred tenor is extraordinarily beautiful.
It slides smoothly into a startling falsetto that's used very daringly."
By the time of 1982's Thriller, Rolling Stone wrote that Jackson was singing in a "fully adult voice" that was "tinged by sadness".
Joseph Vogel notes Jackson's ability to use non-verbal sounds to express emotion.
Neil McCormick wrote that Jackson's unorthodox singing style "was original and utterly distinctive".
Music videos and choreography
Jackson released "Thriller", a 14-minute music video directed by John Landis, in 1983.
The zombie-themed video "defined music videos and broke racial barriers" on MTV, which had launched two years earlier.
Before Thriller, Jackson struggled to receive coverage on MTV, allegedly because he was African American.
Pressure from CBS Records persuaded MTV to start showing "Billie Jean" and later "Beat It", which led to a lengthy partnership with Jackson, and helped other black music artists gain recognition.
The popularity of his videos on MTV helped the relatively new channel's viewing figures, and MTV's focus shifted toward pop and R&B. His performance on Motown 25: Yesterday, Today, Forever changed the scope of live stage shows, making it acceptable for artists to lip-sync to music video on stage.
The choreography in Thriller has been copied in Indian films and prisons in the Philippines.
Thriller marked an increase in scale for music videos, and was named the most successful music video ever by the Guinness World Records.
For the "Smooth Criminal" video, Jackson experimented with leaning forward at a 45 degree angle, beyond the performer's center of gravity.
To accomplish this live, Jackson and designers developed a special shoe to lock the performer's feet to the stage, allowing them to lean forward.
They were granted for the device.
The video for "Leave Me Alone" was not officially released in the US, but in 1989 was nominated for three Billboard Music Video Awards and won a Golden Lion Award for its special effects.
It won a Grammy for Best Music Video, Short Form.
The "Black or White" video simultaneously premiered on November 14, 1991, in 27 countries with an estimated audience of 500 million people, the largest audience ever for a music video at the time.
"Remember the Time" was set in ancient Egypt, and featured Eddie Murphy, Iman, and Magic Johnson.
The video for "Scream", directed by Mark Romanek and production designer Tom Foden, gained a record 11 MTV Video Music Award Nominations, and won "Best Dance Video", "Best Choreography", and "Best Art Direction".
The song and its video are Jackson's response to being accused of child molestation in 1993.
A year later, it won a Grammy for Best Music Video, Short Form.
It has been reported as the most expensive music video ever made, at $7 million; Romanek has contradicted this.
The "Earth Song" video was nominated for the 1997 Grammy for Best Music Video, Short Form.
Michael Jackson's Ghosts, a short film written by Jackson and Stephen King and directed by Stan Winston, premiered at the 1996 Cannes Film Festival.
At over 38 minutes long, it held the Guinness world record for the longest music video until 2013, when it was eclipsed by Pharrell Williams' "Happy".
The 2001 video for "You Rock My World" lasts over 13 minutes, was directed by Paul Hunter, and features Chris Tucker and Marlon Brando.
It won an NAACP Image Award for Outstanding Music Video in 2002.
In December 2009, the Library of Congress selected "Thriller" as the only music video to be preserved in the National Film Registry, as a work of "enduring importance to American culture".
Huey wrote that Jackson transformed the music video into an art form and a promotional tool through complex story lines, dance routines, special effects and famous cameos, while breaking down racial barriers.
He was inducted to the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame as a member of The Jackson 5 in 1997, and again as a solo artist in 2001.
In 2002 he was added to the Songwriters Hall of Fame.
In 2010, Jackson was the first pop and rock 'n' roll performer inducted into the Dance Hall of Fame, and in 2014 he was posthumously inducted into the Rhythm and Blues Music Hall of Fame.
Jackson won hundreds of awards, more than any other popular music recording artist.
His awards include many Guinness world records (eight in 2006 alone), including Most Successful Entertainer of All Time, the Grammy Legend Award and the Grammy Lifetime Achievement Award, and a record 26 American Music Awards .-and estimated sales of over 350 million records worldwide making him one of the best-selling artists in music history.
Jackson received an Honorary Doctorate of Humane Letters from Fisk University in 1988.
On December 29, 2009, the American Film Institute recognized Jackson's death as a "moment of significance".
Earnings
In 1989, Jackson's annual earnings from album sales, endorsements, and concerts were estimated at $125 million.
Forbes placed Jackson's annual income at $35 million in 1996 and $20 million in 1997.
Forbes reported in August 2018 that Jackson's total career pretax earnings in life and death were $4.2 billion.
Sales of his recordings through Sony's music unit earned him an estimated $300 million in royalties.
He may have earned another $400 million from concerts, music publishing (including his share of the Beatles catalog), endorsements, merchandising and music videos.
Estimates of Jackson's net worth during his life range from negative $285 million to positive $350 million for 2002, 2003 and 2007.
In 2013, the executors of Jackson's estate filed a petition in the United States Tax Court as a result of a dispute with the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) over US federal estate taxes.
The executors claim that it was worth about $7 million, the IRS that it was worth over $1.1 billion.
In February 2014, the IRS reported that Jackson's estate owed $702 million; $505 million in taxes, and $197 million in penalties.
A trial was held from February 6 to 24, 2017, and a decision is expected in 2019.
In 2016, Forbes estimated annual gross earnings by the Jackson estate at $825 million, the largest ever recorded for a celebrity, mostly due to the sale of the Sony/ATV catalog.
It was the seventh consecutive year since his death in which Jackson's annual earnings were over $100 million.
In 2018 the figure was $400 million.
According to Forbes in 2016, Jackson had been the top-earning dead celebrity each year since his death.
Discography
Filmography
*Michael Jackson's Journey from Motown to Off the Wall (2016)
Tours
Notes
References
Citations
Print sources
