The Mughal (or Moghul) Empire was an early-modern empire in South Asia.
For some two centuries, the empire stretched from the outer fringes of the Indus basin in the west, northern Afghanistan in the northwest, and Kashmir in the north, to the highlands of present-day Assam and Bangladesh in the east, and the uplands of the Deccan plateau in South India.
At its greatest extent, it was one of the largest empires in the history of South Asia.
The Mughal Empire is conventionally said to have been founded in 1526 by Babur, a warrior chieftain from what today is Uzbekistan, who employed aid from the neighboring Safavid and Ottoman empires to defeat the Sultan of Delhi, Ibrahim Lodhi, in the First Battle of Panipat, and to sweep down the plains of Upper India.
The Mughal imperial structure, however, is sometimes dated to 1600, to the rule of Babur's grandson, Akbar.
This imperial structure lasted until 1720, until shortly after the death of the last major emperor, Aurengzeb, during whose reign the empire also achieved its maximum geographical extent.
The empire subsequently fragmented, reduced to the region in and around Old Delhi by the time the British East India Company came to rule most of India.
The empire was formally dissolved by the British Raj after the Indian Rebellion of 1857.
Although the Mughal Empire was created and sustained by military warfare, it did not vigorously suppress the cultures and peoples it came to rule, but rather equalized and placated them through new administrative practices, and diverse ruling elites, leading to more efficient, centralised, and standardized rule.
The main base of the empire's collective wealth was agricultural taxes, instituted by the third Mughal emperor, Akbar.
There was more conspicuous consumption among the Mughal elite, resulting in greater patronage of painting, literary forms, textiles, and architecture, especially during the reign of Shah Jahan.
Among the Mughal UNESCO
World Heritage Sites in South Asia are the Agra Fort, Fatehpur Sikri, the Red Fort, Humayun's Tomb, the Lahore Fort and the Taj Mahal, which is described as "the jewel of Muslim art in India, and one of the universally admired masterpieces of the world's heritage".
Name
Contemporaries referred to the empire founded by Babur as the Timurid empire, which reflected the heritage of his dynasty, and this was the term preferred by the Mughals themselves.
The Mughal designation for their own dynasty was Gurkani (, Gūrkāniyān, meaning "sons-in-law").
The use of "Mughal" derived from the Arabic and Persian corruption of "Mongol", and it emphasised the Mongol origins of the Timurid dynasty.
The term gained currency during the 19th century, but remains disputed by Indologists.
Similar terms had been used to refer to the empire, including "Mogul" and "Moghul".
Nevertheless, Babur's ancestors were sharply distinguished from the classical Mongols insofar as they were oriented towards Persian rather than Turco-Mongol culture.
Another name for the empire was Hindustan, which was documented in the Ain-i-Akbari, and which has been described as the closest to an official name for the empire.
In the west, the term "Mughal" was used for the emperor, and by extension, the empire as a whole.
History
Babur and Humayun (1526-1556)
The Mughal Empire was founded by Babur (reigned 1526-1530), a Central Asian ruler who was descended from the Turco-Mongol conqueror Timur (the founder of the Timurid Empire) on his father's side, and from Genghis Khan on his mother's side.
Ousted from his ancestral domains in Central Asia, Babur turned to India to satisfy his ambitions.
He established himself in Kabul and then pushed steadily southward into India from Afghanistan through the Khyber Pass.
The instability of the empire became evident under his son, Humayun (reigned 1530-1556), who was forced into exile in Persia by rebels.
The Sur Empire (1540-1555), founded by Sher Shah Suri (reigned 1540-1545), briefly interrupted Mughal rule.
in the Rajput Umarkot Fort, to Humayun and his wife Hamida Banu Begum, a Persian princess.
Akbar succeeded to the throne under a regent, Bairam Khan, who helped consolidate the Mughal Empire in India.
Through warfare and diplomacy, Akbar was able to extend the empire in all directions and controlled almost the entire Indian subcontinent north of the Godavari River.
He created a new ruling elite loyal to him, implemented a modern administration, and encouraged cultural developments.
He increased trade with European trading companies.
He "was addicted to opium, neglected the affairs of the state, and came under the influence of rival court cliques".
During the reign of Shah Jahan, the splendour of the Mughal court reached its peak, as exemplified by the Taj Mahal.
The cost of maintaining the court, however, began to exceed the revenue coming in.
with some historians arguing his religious conservatism and intolerance undermined the stability of Mughal society, employed significantly more Hindus in his imperial bureaucracy than his predecessors did, opposed bigotry against Hindus and Shia Muslims,
Meanwhile, some regional polities within the increasingly fragmented Mughal Empire, involved themselves and the state within global conflicts, leading only to defeat and loss of territory during the Carnatic Wars and the Bengal War.
The Mughal Emperor Shah Alam II (1759-1806) made futile attempts to reverse the Mughal decline but ultimately had to seek the protection of the Emir of Afghanistan, Ahmed Shah Abdali, which led to the Third Battle of Panipat between the Maratha Empire and the Afghans led by Abdali in 1761.
In 1771, the Marathas recaptured Delhi from Afghan control and in 1784 they officially became the protectors of the emperor in Delhi, a state of affairs that continued further until after the Third Anglo-Maratha War.
Thereafter, the British East India Company became the protectors of the Mughal dynasty in Delhi.
Contemporary chroniclers bewailed the decay they witnessed, a theme picked up by the first British historians who wanted to underscore the need for a British-led rejuvenation.
Modern views on the decline
Since the 1970s historians have taken multiple approaches to the decline, with little consensus on which factor was dominant.
The psychological interpretations emphasise depravity in high places, excessive luxury, and increasingly narrow views that left the rulers unprepared for an external challenge.
A Marxist school (led by Irfan Habib and based at Aligarh Muslim University) emphasises excessive exploitation of the peasantry by the rich, which stripped away the will and the means to support the regime.
Karen Leonard has focused on the failure of the regime to work with Hindu bankers, whose financial support was increasingly needed; the bankers then helped the Maratha and the British.
In a religious interpretation, some scholars argue that the Hindu powers revolted against the rule of a Muslim dynasty.
Finally, other scholars argue that the very prosperity of the Empire inspired the provinces to achieve a high degree of independence, thus weakening the imperial court.
Jeffrey G. Williamson has argued that the Indian economy went through deindustrialization in the latter half of the 18th century as an indirect outcome of the collapse of the Mughal Empire, with British rule later causing further deindustrialization.
According to Williamson, the decline of the Mughal Empire led to a decline in agricultural productivity, which drove up food prices, then nominal wages, and then textile prices, which led to India losing a share of the world textile market to Britain even before it had superior factory technology.
Indian textiles, however, still maintained a competitive advantage over British textiles up until the 19th century.
Administrative divisions
Subah (Urdu: صوبہ) was the term for a province in the Mughal Empire.
The word is derived from Arabic.
The governor of a Subah was known as a subahdar (sometimes also referred to as a "Subah"), which later became subedar to refer to an officer in the Indian Army.
The subahs were established by padshah (emperor) Akbar during his administrative reforms of 1572-1580; initially they numbered 12, but his conquests expanded the number of subahs to 15 by the end of his reign.
Subahs were divided into Sarkars, or districts.
Sarkars were further divided into Parganas or Mahals.
His successors, most notably Aurangzeb, expanded the number of subahs further through their conquests.
As the empire began to dissolve in the early 18th century, many subahs became effectively independent, or were conquered by the Marathas or the British.
The original twelve subahs created as a result of administrative reform by Akbar:
Economy
The Indian economy was large and prosperous under the Mughal Empire.
During the Mughal era, the gross domestic product (GDP) of India in 1600 was estimated at about 22% of the world economy, the second largest in the world, behind only Ming China but larger than Europe.
By 1700, the GDP of Mughal India had risen to 24% of the world economy, the largest in the world, larger than both Qing China and Western Europe.
Mughal India was the world leader in manufacturing, India's GDP growth increased under the Mughal Empire, with India's GDP having a faster growth rate during the Mughal era than in the 1,500 years prior to the Mughal era.
The empire had an extensive road network, which was vital to the economic infrastructure, built by a public works department set up by the Mughals which designed, constructed and maintained roads linking towns and cities across the empire, making trade easier to conduct.
These taxes, which amounted to well over half the output of a peasant cultivator, were paid in the well-regulated silver currency, and caused peasants and artisans to enter larger markets.
Coinage
The Mughals adopted and standardized the rupee (rupiya, or silver) and dam (copper) currencies introduced by Sur Emperor Sher Shah Suri during his brief rule.
The currency was initially 48 dams to a single rupee in the beginning of Akbar's reign, before it later became 38 dams to a rupee in the 1580s, with the dam's value rising further in the 17th century as a result of new industrial uses for copper, such as in bronze cannons and brass utensils.
The dam was initially the most common coin in Akbar's time, before being replaced by the rupee as the most common coin in succeeding reigns.
The Mughals minted coins with high purity, never dropping below 96%, and without debasement until the 1720s.
Despite India having its own stocks of gold and silver, the Mughals produced minimal gold of their own, but mostly minted coins from imported bullion, as a result of the empire's strong export-driven economy, with global demand for Indian agricultural and industrial products drawing a steady stream of precious metals into India.
with major sources of imported bullion including the New World and Japan, Mughal India's workforce had a higher percentage in the non-primary sector than Europe's workforce did at the time; agriculture accounted for 65-90% of Europe's workforce in 1700, and 65-75% in 1750, including 65% of England's workforce in 1750.
Real wages and living standards in 18th-century Mughal Bengal and South India were higher than in Britain, which in turn had the highest living standards in Europe.
before Western European per-capita income pulled ahead after 1800.
According to Moosvi, Mughal India also had a per-capita income 1.24% higher in the late 16th century than British India did in the early 20th century.
However, in a system where wealth was hoarded by elites, wages were depressed for manual labour,
Agriculture
Indian agricultural production increased under the Mughal Empire.
Mughal agriculture was in some ways advanced compared to European agriculture at the time, exemplified by the common use of the seed drill among Indian peasants before its adoption in Europe.
While the average peasant across the world was only skilled in growing very few crops, the average Indian peasant was skilled in growing a wide variety of food and non-food crops, increasing their productivity.
Indian peasants were also quick to adapt to profitable new crops, such as maize and tobacco from the New World being rapidly adopted and widely cultivated across Mughal India between 1600 and 1650.
Bengali farmers rapidly learned techniques of mulberry cultivation and sericulture, establishing Bengal Subah as a major silk-producing region of the world.
According to evidence cited by the economic historians Immanuel Wallerstein, Irfan Habib, Percival Spear, and Ashok Desai, per-capita agricultural output and standards of consumption in 17th-century Mughal India were higher than in 17th-century Europe and early 20th-century British India.
The increased agricultural productivity led to lower food prices.
In turn, this benefited the Indian textile industry.
Compared to Britain, the price of grain was about one-half in South India and one-third in Bengal, in terms of silver coinage.
This resulted in lower silver coin prices for Indian textiles, giving them a price advantage in global markets.
Up until 1750, India produced about 25% of the world's industrial output.
In early modern Europe, there was significant demand for products from Mughal India, particularly cotton textiles, as well as goods such as spices, peppers, indigo, silks, and saltpeter (for use in munitions).
In contrast, there was very little demand for European goods in Mughal India, which was largely self-sufficient, thus Europeans had very little to offer, except for some woolens, unprocessed metals and a few luxury items.
The trade imbalance caused Europeans to export large quantities of gold and silver to Mughal India in order to pay for South Asian imports.
Bengal accounted for more than 50% of textiles and around 80% of silks imported by the Dutch from Asia, Another innovation, the incorporation of the crank handle in the cotton gin, first appeared in India some time during the late Delhi Sultanate or the early Mughal Empire.
The production of cotton, which may have largely been spun in the villages and then taken to towns in the form of yarn to be woven into cloth textiles, was advanced by the diffusion of the spinning wheel across India shortly before the Mughal era, lowering the costs of yarn and helping to increase demand for cotton.
The diffusion of the spinning wheel, and the incorporation of the worm gear and crank handle into the roller cotton gin, led to greatly expanded Indian cotton textile production during the Mughal era.
Shipbuilding industry
Mughal India had a large shipbuilding industry, which was also largely centered in the Bengal province.
Economic historian Indrajit Ray estimates shipbuilding output of Bengal during the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries at 223,250 tons annually, compared with 23,061 tons produced in nineteen colonies in North America from 1769 to 1771.
He also assesses ship repairing as very advanced in Bengal.
Bengal Subah
The Bengal Subah province was especially prosperous from the time of its takeover by the Mughals in 1590 until the British East India Company seized control in 1757.
It was the Mughal Empire's wealthiest province, and the economic powerhouse of the Mughal Empire, estimated to have generated up to 50% of the empire's GDP.
Domestically, much of India depended on Bengali products such as rice, silks and cotton textiles.
Overseas, Europeans depended on Bengali products such as cotton textiles, silks and opium; Bengal accounted for 40% of Dutch imports from Asia, for example, including more than 50% of textiles and around 80% of silks.
The Mughals introduced agrarian reforms, including the modern Bengali calendar.
The calendar played a vital role in developing and organising harvests, tax collection and Bengali culture in general, including the New Year and Autumn festivals.
The province was a leading producer of grains, salt, fruits, liquors and wines, precious metals and ornaments.
Its handloom industry flourished under royal warrants, making the region a hub of the worldwide muslin trade, which peaked in the 17th and 18th centuries.
The provincial capital Dhaka became the commercial capital of the empire.
The Mughals expanded cultivated land in the Bengal delta under the leadership of Sufis, which consolidated the foundation of Bengali Muslim society.
After 150 years of rule by Mughal viceroys, Bengal gained semi-independence as a dominion under the Nawab of Bengal in 1717.
The Nawabs permitted European companies to set up trading posts across the region, including firms from Britain, France, the Netherlands, Denmark, Portugal and Austria-Hungary.
An Armenian community dominated banking and shipping in major cities and towns.
The Europeans regarded Bengal as the richest place for trade.
to 253% in 200 years during 1500-1700.
The Indian population had a faster growth during the Mughal era than at any known point in Indian history prior to the Mughal era.
This was higher than the percentage of the urban population in contemporary Europe at the time and higher than that of British India in the 19th century;
Under Akbar's reign in 1600, the Mughal Empire's urban population was up to 17 million people, 15% of the empire's total population.
This was larger than the entire urban population in Europe at the time, and even a century later in 1700, the urban population of England, Scotland and Wales did not exceed 13% of its total population, By 1700, Mughal India had an urban population of 23 million people, larger than British India's urban population of 22.3 million in 1871.
The historian Nizamuddin Ahmad (1551-1621) reported that, under Akbar's reign, there were 120 large cities and 3200 townships.
Dhaka (in Bengal Subah) with over 1 million people, and Delhi (in Delhi Subah) with over 600,000 people.
Cities acted as markets for the sale of goods, and provided homes for a variety of merchants, traders, shopkeepers, artisans, moneylenders, weavers, craftspeople, officials, and religious figures.
Culture
The Mughal Empire was definitive in the early-modern and modern periods of South Asian history, with its legacy in India, Pakistan, Bangladesh and Afghanistan seen in cultural contributions such as:
* Centralized imperial rule that consolidated the smaller polities of South Asia.
The amalgamation of Persian art and literature with Indian art.
The development of Mughlai cuisine, an amalgamation of South Asian, Iranian and Central Asian culinary styles.
The development of Mughal clothing, jewelry and fashion, utilizing richly decorated fabrics such as muslin, silk, brocade and velvet.
The standardization of the Hindustani language (the colloquial language of Bollywood), and thus the development of Hindi and Urdu.
The introduction of sophisticated Iranian-style waterworks and horticulture through Mughal gardening.
The introduction of Turkish baths into the Indian subcontinent.
The evolution and refinement of Mughal and Indian architecture and in turn, the development of later Rajput and Sikh palatial architecture.
A famous Mughal landmark is the Taj Mahal.
The development of the Pehlwani style of Indian wrestling, a combination of Indian malla-yuddha and Persian varzesh-e bastani.
The construction of Maktab schools, where youth were taught the Quran and Islamic law such as the Fatawa-i-Alamgiri in their indigenous languages.
The development of Hindustani classical music, and instruments such as the sitar.
Architecture
The Mughals made a major contribution to the Indian subcontinent with the development of their unique Indo-Persian architecture.
Many monuments were built during the Mughal era by the Muslim emperors, especially Shah Jahan, including the Taj Mahal-a UNESCO
World Heritage Site considered to be "the jewel of Muslim art in India and one of the universally admired masterpieces of the world's heritage", attracting 7-8 million unique visitors a year.
The palaces, tombs, gardens and forts built by the dynasty stand today in Agra, Aurangabad, Delhi, Dhaka, Fatehpur Sikri, Jaipur, Lahore, Kabul, Sheikhupura, and many other cities of India, Pakistan, Afghanistan, and Bangladesh, such as:
Art and literature
The Mughal artistic tradition was eclectic, borrowing from Iranian, Indian and even Renaissance European stylistic and thematic elements.
Mughal emperors often hosted Iranian bookbinders, illustrators, painters and calligraphers from the Safavid court due to the commonalities of their Timurid styles, and due to the Mughal affinity for Iranian art and calligraphy.
Persian miniatures commissioned during the Mughal period focus on eventful historical or political scenes such as Iranian and Indian myths/romances, major battles, court life and marriages, but also display a profound appreciation for the serenity and beauty of the natural world.
For example, Emperor Jahangir commissioned brilliant artists such as Ustad Mansur to realistically portray unusual flora and fauna throughout the empire.
The literary works Jahangir ordered ranged from epics like the Razmnama (a Persian translation of the Hindu epic, the Mahabharata) to historical memoirs and recountings, including an illustrated version of the history of his reign --
Tuzuk-i Jahangiri.
Richly-finished albums decorated with calligraphy and artistic scenes were mounted onto pages with decorative borders and then bound with covers of stamped and gilded or painted and lacquered leather.
Language
Although Persian was the dominant and "official" language of the empire, the language of the elite was a Persianised form of Hindustani called Urdu.
The language was written in a type of Perso-Arabic script known as Nastaliq, and with literary conventions and specialised vocabulary borrowed from Persian, Arabic and Turkic; the dialect was eventually given its own name of Urdu.
The Mughals spoke Urdu, and by the year 1700, the Mughals had formalized the language.
Modern Hindi, which uses Sanskrit-based vocabulary along with Perso-Arabic loanwords, is mutually intelligible with Urdu.
Military
Gunpowder warfare
Mughal India was one of the three Islamic gunpowder empires, along with the Ottoman Empire and Safavid Persia.
By the time he was invited by Lodi governor of Lahore, Daulat Khan, to support his rebellion against Lodi Sultan Ibrahim Khan, Babur was familiar with gunpowder firearms and field artillery, and a method for deploying them.
Babur had employed Ottoman expert Ustad Ali Quli, who showed Babur the standard Ottoman formation-artillery and firearm-equipped infantry protected by wagons in the center and the mounted archers on both wings.
Babur used this formation at the First Battle of Panipat in 1526, where the Afghan and Rajput forces loyal to the Delhi Sultanate, though superior in numbers but without the gunpowder weapons, were defeated.
The decisive victory of the Timurid forces is one reason opponents rarely met Mughal princes in pitched battle over the course of the empire's history.
In India, guns made of bronze were recovered from Calicut (1504) and Diu (1533).
Fathullah Shirazi (c. 1582), a Persian polymath and mechanical engineer who worked for Akbar, developed an early multi gun shot.
As opposed to the polybolos and repeating crossbows used earlier in ancient Greece and China, respectively, Shirazi's rapid-firing gun had multiple gun barrels that fired hand cannons loaded with gunpowder.
It may be considered a version of a volley gun.
By the 17th century, Indians were manufacturing a diverse variety of firearms; large guns in particular, became visible in Tanjore, Dacca, Bijapur and Murshidabad.
Gujarāt supplied Europe saltpeter for use in gunpowder warfare during the 17th century, and Mughal Bengal and Mālwa also participated in saltpeter production.
Rocketry and explosives
In the 16th century, Akbar was the first to initiate and use metal cylinder rockets known as bans, particularly against war elephants, during the Battle of Sanbal.
In 1657, the Mughal Army used rockets during the Siege of Bidar.
Prince Aurangzeb's forces discharged rockets and grenades while scaling the walls.
Sidi Marjan was mortally wounded when a rocket struck his large gunpowder depot, and after twenty-seven days of hard fighting Bidar was captured by the victorious Mughals.
Science
Astronomy
While there appears to have been little concern for theoretical astronomy, Mughal astronomers made advances in observational astronomy and produced nearly a hundred Zij treatises.
Humayun built a personal observatory near Delhi; Jahangir and Shah Jahan were also intending to build observatories, but were unable to do so.
The astronomical instruments and observational techniques used at the Mughal observatories were mainly derived from Islamic astronomy.
In the 17th century, the Mughal Empire saw a synthesis between Islamic and Hindu astronomy, where Islamic observational instruments were combined with Hindu computational techniques.
Metallurgy
One of the most remarkable astronomical instruments invented in Mughal India is the seamless celestial globe.
It was invented in Kashmir by Ali Kashmiri ibn Luqman in 998 AH (1589-90 CE), and twenty other such globes were later produced in Lahore and Kashmir during the Mughal Empire.
Before they were rediscovered in the 1980s, it was believed by modern metallurgists to be technically impossible to produce metal globes without any .
Notes
Further reading
Alam, Muzaffar.
Crisis of Empire in Mughal North India: Awadh & the Punjab, 1707-48 (1988)
* Black, Jeremy.
"The Mughals Strike Twice", History Today (April 2012) 62#4 pp.
full text online
* Dale, Stephen F.
The Muslim Empires of the Ottomans, Safavids and Mughals (Cambridge U.P. 2009)
* Gommans; Jos. Mughal Warfare: Indian Frontiers and Highroads to Empire, 1500-1700 (Routledge, 2002) https:/ PM.qst?a
o&d
102714757 online edition
* Gordon, S. The New Cambridge History of India, II, 4: The Marathas 1600-1818 (Cambridge, 1993).
* Habib, Irfan.
Atlas of the Mughal Empire: Political and Economic Maps (1982).
* Srivastava, Ashirbadi Lal.
The Mughul Empire, 1526-1803 (1952) online.
Culture
* Berinstain, V. Mughal India: Splendour of the Peacock Throne (London, 1998).
* Busch, Allison.
Poetry of Kings: The Classical Hindi Literature of Mughal India (2011)
https:/ Poetry-Kings-Classical-Literature-Research 0199765928/ref
sr_1_2?s
books&ie
UTF8&qid
1339157925&sr=1-2 excerpt and text search
* Schimmel, Annemarie.
The Empire of the Great Mughals: History, Art and Culture (Reaktion 2006)
Society and economy
* Habib, Irfan.
Atlas of the Mughal Empire: Political and Economic Maps (1982).
* Habib, Irfan.
Agrarian System of Mughal India (1963, revised edition 1999).
* Rothermund, Dietmar.
An Economic History of India: From Pre-Colonial Times to 1991 (1993)
Primary sources
* Hiro, Dilip, ed, Journal of Emperor Babur (Penguin Classics 2007)
The Baburnama: Memoirs of Babur, Prince and Emperor ed. by W.M. Thackston Jr. (2002); this was the first autobiography in Islamic literature
* Jackson, A.V. et al., eds.
History of India (1907) v. 9.
Historic accounts of India by foreign travellers, classic, oriental, and occidental, by A.V.W. Jackson https:/ details/historyofindia09jackiala online edition
Older histories
* Elliot, Sir H.M., Edited by Dowson, John.
The History of India, as Told by Its Own Historians.
The Muhammadan Period; published by London Trubner Company 1867-1877.
(Online Copy at Packard Humanities Institute - Other Persian Texts in Translation; historical books:
Author List and Title List)
