Spinosaurus (meaning "spine lizard") is a genus of theropod dinosaur that lived in what now is North Africa, during the upper Albian to upper Turonian stages of the Cretaceous period, about 112 to 93.5 million years ago.
This genus was known first from Egyptian remains discovered in 1912 and described by German paleontologist Ernst Stromer in 1915.
The original remains were destroyed in World War II, but additional material has come to light in the early 21st century.
It is unclear whether one or two species are represented in the fossils reported in the scientific literature.
The best known species is S. aegyptiacus from Egypt, although a potential second species, S. maroccanus, has been recovered from Morocco.
Spinosaurus was among the largest of all known carnivorous dinosaurs, nearly as large as or even larger than Tyrannosaurus, Giganotosaurus and Carcharodontosaurus.
Estimates published in 2005, 2007, and 2008 suggested that it was between in length and in weight.
New estimates published in 2014 and 2018 based on a more complete specimen, supported the earlier research, finding that Spinosaurus could reach lengths of .
The latest estimates suggest a weight of .
Both Friedrich von Huene in 1926 and Donald F. Glut in 1982 listed it as among the most massive theropods in their surveys, at in length and upwards of in weight.
In 1988, Gregory Paul also listed it as the longest theropod at , but gave a lower mass estimate of .
Improvement of the precision of size estimates for Spinosaurus requires the discovery of more complete remains as available for some other dinosaurs, especially the limb bones of Spinosaurus which are "hitherto unknown".
The Dal Sasso and colleagues skull length estimate is questioned because skull shapes can vary across spinosaurid species and because MSNM V4047 may not belong to Spinosaurus itself.
Neural spines
Very tall neural spines growing on the back vertebrae of Spinosaurus formed the basis of what is usually called the animal's "sail".
The lengths of the neural spines reached over 10 times the diameters of the vertebral bodies from which they extended.
The neural spines were slightly longer front to back at the base than higher up, and were unlike the thin rods seen in the pelycosaur finbacks Edaphosaurus and Dimetrodon, contrasting also with the thicker spines in the iguanodontian Ouranosaurus.
Stromer considered them different enough to belong to another species, and this has been borne out.
With the advantage of more expeditions and material, it appears that they pertain either to Carcharodontosaurus or to Sigilmassasaurus.
S. maroccanus was originally described by Dale Russell in 1996 as a new species based on the length of its neck vertebrae.
most researchers regard S. maroccanus as a nomen dubium or as a junior synonym of S. aegyptiacus.
Described by Taquet and Russell in 1998, the specimen is in width; no length was stated.
Other known specimens consist mainly of very fragmentary remains and scattered teeth.
These include:
*A 1986 paper described prismatic structures in tooth enamel from two Spinosaurus teeth from Tunisia.
* Buffetaut (1989, 1992) referred three specimens from the Institut und Museum für Geologie und Paläontologie of the University of Göttingen in Germany to Spinosaurus: a right maxilla fragment IMGP 969-1, a jaw fragment IMGP 969-2, and a tooth IMGP 969-3.
These had been found in a Lower Cenomanian or Upper Albian deposit in southeastern Morocco in 1971.
*Teeth from the Chenini Formation in Tunisia which are "narrow, somewhat rounded in cross-section, and lack the anterior and posterior serrated edges characteristic of theropods and basal archosaurs" were assigned to Spinosaurus in 2000.
*Teeth from the Echkar Formation of Niger were tentatively referred to Spinosaurus in 2007.
A partial tooth 8 cm long purchased at a fossil trade show, reportedly from the Kem Kem Bed of Morocco and attributed to Spinosaurus maroccanus, showed 1-5 mm wide longitudinal striations and micro-structures (irregular ridges) among the striations in a 2010 paper.
Possible specimens
Material possibly belonging to Spinosaurus has been reported from the Turkana Grits of Kenya.
Some scientists have considered the genus Sigilmassasaurus a junior synonym of Spinosaurus.
In Ibrahim and colleagues (2014), the specimens of Sigilmassasaurus was referred to Spinosaurus aegyptiacus together with "Spinosaurus B" as the neotype and Spinosaurus maroccanus was considered as a nomen dubium following the conclusions of the other papers.
This conclusion was further supported in 2018 by Arden and colleagues, who consider Sigilmassasaurus to be a distinct genus, though a very close relative of Spinosaurus, the two unified in the tribe Spinosaurini, coined in the study.
An analysis of Spinosauridae by Arden and colleagues (2018) named the clade Spinosaurini and defined it as all spinosaurids closer to Spinosaurus aegyptiacus than to Irritator challengeri or Oxalaia quilombensis; it also found Siamosaurus suteethorni and Icthyovenator laosensis to be members of the Spinosaurinae.
The cladogram below depicts the findings of Arden and colleagues (2018):
However, Bailey (1997) was of the opinion that a sail could have absorbed more heat than it radiated.
Gimsa and others point out that more basal, long-legged spinosaurids had otherwise round or crescent-shaped dorsal sails, whereas in Spinosaurus, the dorsal neural spines formed a shape that was roughly rectangular, similar in shape to the dorsal fins of sailfish.
They therefore argue that Spinosaurus used its dorsal neural sail in the same manner as sailfish, and that it also employed its long narrow tail to stun prey like a modern thresher shark.
Sailfish employ their dorsal fins for herding schools of fish into a "bait ball" where they cooperate to trap the fish into a certain area where the sailfish can snatch the fish with their bills.
The sail could have possibly reduced yaw rotation by counteracting the lateral force in the direction opposite to the slash as suggested by Gimsa and colleagues (2015).
Gimsa and colleagues specifically wrote :
Spinosaurus anatomy exhibits another feature that may have a modern analogy: its long tail resembled that of the thresher shark, employed to slap the water to herd and stun shoals of fish before devouring them (Oliver and colleagues, 2013).
The strategies that sailfish and thresher sharks employ against shoaling fish are more effective when the shoal is first concentrated into a ‘bait ball’ (Helfman, Collette & Facey, 1997; Oliver and colleagues, 2013; Domenici and colleagues, 2014).
Since this is difficult for individual predators to achieve, they cooperate in this effort.
When herding a shoal of fish or squid, sailfish also raise their sails to make themselves appear larger.
When they slash or wipe their bills through shoaling fish by turning their heads, their dorsal sail and fins are outstretched to stabilize their bodies hydrodynamically (Lauder & Drucker, 2004).
Domenici and colleagues (2014) postulate that these fin extensions enhance the accuracy of tapping and slashing.
The sail can reduce yaw rotation by counteracting the lateral force in the direction opposite to the slash.
This means that prey is less likely to recognize the massive trunk as being part of an approaching predator (Marras and colleagues, 2015; Webb & Weihs 2015).
Spinosaurus exhibited the anatomical features required to combine all three hunting strategies: a sail for herding prey more efficiently, as well as flexible tail and neck to slap the water for stunning, injuring or killing prey.
The submerged dorsal sail would have provided a strong centreboard-like counterforce for powerful sidewards movements of the strong neck and long tail, as performed by sailfish (Domenici and colleagues, 2014) or thresher sharks (Oliver and colleagues, 2013).
While smaller dorsal sails or fins make the dorsal water volume better accessible for slashing, it can be speculated that their smaller stabilization effect makes lateral slashing less efficient (e.g. for thresher sharks).
Forming a hydrodynamic fulcrum and hydrodynamically stabilizing the trunk along the dorsoventral axis, Spinosaurus’ sail would also have compensated for the inertia of the lateral neck by tail movements and vice versa not only for predation but also for accelerated swimming.
This behaviour might also have been one reason for Spinosaurus’ muscular chest and neck reported by Ibrahim and colleagues (2014).
Diet
It is unclear whether Spinosaurus was primarily a terrestrial predator or a piscivore, as indicated by its elongated jaws, conical teeth and raised nostrils.
The hypothesis of spinosaurs as specialized fish eaters has been suggested before by A. J. Charig and A. C. Milner for Baryonyx.
They base this on the anatomical similarity with crocodilians and the presence of digestive acid-etched fish scales in the rib cage of the type specimen.
Large fish are known from the faunas containing other spinosaurids, including the Mawsonia, in the mid-Cretaceous of northern Africa and Brazil.
Direct evidence for spinosaur diet comes from related European and South American taxa.
Baryonyx was found with fish scales and bones from juvenile Iguanodon in its stomach, while a tooth embedded in a South American pterosaur bone suggests that spinosaurs occasionally preyed on pterosaurs, but Spinosaurus was likely to have been a generalized and opportunistic predator, possibly a Cretaceous equivalent of large grizzly bears, being biased toward fishing, though it undoubtedly scavenged and took many kinds of small or medium-sized prey.
A study by Cuff and Rayfield (2013) concluded that bio-mechanical data suggests that Spinosaurus was not an obligate piscivore and that its diet was more closely associated with each individual's size.
The characteristic rostral morphology of Spinosaurus allowed its jaws to resist bending in the vertical direction, however its jaws were poorly adapted with respect to resisting lateral bending.
As the foramina on the outside all communicated with a space on the inside of the snout, the authors speculated that Spinosaurus had pressure receptors inside the space that allowed it to hold its snout at the surface of the water to detect swimming prey species without seeing them.
Isotope ratios from tooth enamel and from other parts of Spinosaurus (found in Morocco and Tunisia) and of other predators from the same area such as Carcharodontosaurus were compared with isotopic compositions from contemporaneous theropods, turtles, and crocodilians.
Posture
Although traditionally depicted as a biped, it has been suggested since the mid-1970s that Spinosaurus was at least an occasional quadruped.
Because of the mass of the hypothesized fatty dorsal humps of Spinosaurus, Bailey (1997) was open to the possibility of a quadrupedal posture, The hypothesis that Spinosaurus had a typical quadrupedal gait since fell out of favor, however it was still believed that spinosaurids may have crouched in a quadrupedal posture, due to biological and physiological constraints.
The possibility of a quadrupedal Spinosaurus was revived by a 2014 paper by Ibrahim and colleagues that described new material of the animal.
The paper found that the hind limbs of Spinosaurus were much shorter than previously believed, and that its center of mass was located in the midpoint of the trunk region, as opposed to near the hip as in typical bipedal theropods.
It was therefore proposed that Spinosaurus was poorly adapted for bipedal terrestrial locomotion, and must have been an obligate quadruped on land.
The reconstruction used in the study was an extrapolation based on different sized individuals, scaled to what were assumed to be the correct proportions.
Scott Hartman also expressed criticism because he believed the legs and the pelvis were inaccurately scaled (27% too short) and didn't match the published lengths.
However, Mark Witton expressed agreement with the proportions reported in the paper.
In their 2015 re-description of Sigilmassasaurus, Evers and colleagues argued that Sigilmassasaurus was in fact a distinct genus from Spinosaurus, and therefore doubted whether the material assigned to Spinosaurus by Ibrahim et.
al. should be assigned to Spinosaurus or Sigilmassasaurus.
Paleoecology
The environment inhabited by Spinosaurus is only partially understood, and covers a great deal of what is now northern Africa.
The region of Africa Spinosaurus is preserved in dates from 112 to 93.5 million years ago.
Those Spinosaurus that lived in the Bahariya Formation of what is now Egypt may have contended with shoreline conditions on tidal flats and channels, living in mangrove forests alongside similarly large dinosaurian predators Bahariasaurus and Carcharodontosaurus, the titanosaur sauropods Paralititan and Aegyptosaurus, crocodylomorphs, bony and cartilaginous fish, turtles, lizards, and plesiosaurs.
In the dry season it might have resorted to preying on pterosaurs.
This situation resembles that in the Late Jurassic Morrison Formation of North America, which boasts up to five theropod genera over in weight, as well as several smaller genera (Henderson, 1998; Holtz and colleagues, 2004).
Differences in head shape and body size among the large North African theropods may have been enough to allow niche partitioning as seen among the many different predator species found today in the African savanna (Farlow & Pianka, 2002).
In popular culture
Spinosaurus appeared in the 2001 film Jurassic Park III, replacing Tyrannosaurus as the main antagonist.
The film's consulting paleontologist John R. Horner was quoted as saying: "If we base the ferocious factor on the length of the animal, there was nothing that ever lived on this planet that could match this creature Spinosaurus.
Also my hypothesis is that T-rex was actually a scavenger rather than a killer.
Spinosaurus was really the predatory animal."
He has since retracted the statement about T. rex being a scavenger.
In the film, Spinosaurus was portrayed as larger and more powerful than , there is a nod to this fight where the T. rex smashes through the skeleton of a Spinosaurus in the climatic fight near the end of the film.
Spinosaurus has long been depicted in popular books about dinosaurs, although only recently has there been enough information about spinosaurids for an accurate depiction.
After an influential 1955 skeletal reconstruction by Lapparent and Lavocat based on a 1936 diagram by Stromer, it has been treated as a generalized upright theropod, with a skull similar to that of other large theropods and a sail on its back, even having four-fingered hands.
Further reading
* Glut, D.F. "In search of Spinosaurus."
In: Jurassic classics: a collection of saurian essays and Mesozoic musings, pp. 77-85.
Jefferson, NC: McFarland, 2001. .
* Nothdurft, W.; and Smith, J. The Lost Dinosaurs of Egypt.
New York: Random House, 2002. .
*A Tribute to Ernst Stromer: Hundred Years of the Discovery of Spinosaurus aegyptiacus: Saubhik Ghosh
