A mountain bike or mountain bicycle (abbreviated MTB) is a bicycle designed for off-road cycling.
Mountain bikes share similarities with other bicycles, but incorporate features designed to enhance durability and performance in rough terrain.
These typically include a front or full suspension, large knobby tires, more durable wheels, more powerful brakes, straight handlebars, and lower gear ratios for climbing steep grades.)
Mountain bikes are generally specialized for use on mountain trails, single track, fire roads, and other unpaved surfaces, although perhaps the majority of them are never used off pavement, and it is common to find hybrid road bikes based on "mountain bike" frames for sale.
This type of terrain commonly has rocks, roots, loose dirt, and steep grades.
Many trails have additional TTFs (Technical Trail Features) such as log piles, log rides, rock gardens, skinnies, gap jumps, and wall-rides.
Mountain bikes are built to handle these types of terrain and features.
The heavy-duty construction combined with stronger rims and wider tires has also made this style of bicycle popular with urban riders and couriers who must navigate through potholes and over curbs.
Since the development of the sport in the 1970s, many new subtypes of mountain biking have developed, such as cross-country (XC), all-day endurance, freeride, downhill, and a variety of track and slalom types.
Each of these place different demands on the bike, requiring different designs for optimal performance.
MTB development has led to an increase in suspension travel, now often up to , and gearing up to 27 speeds, to facilitate both climbing and rapid descents.
Advancements in gearing have also led to a "1x" (pronounced "one-by") trend, simplifying the gearing to one chainring in the front and a cassette at the rear, typically with 9 to 12 sprockets.
The expressions "all terrain bicycle", "all terrain bike", and the acronym "ATB" are used as synonyms for "mountain bike", but some authors consider them passé.
These modified bikes were called "ballooners" in CA, "klunkers" in CO, and "dirt bombers" in OR.
Joe Breeze, a bicycle frame builder, used this idea and developed what is considered the first mountain bike.
It was not until the late 1970s and early 1980s that road bicycle companies started to manufacture mountain bicycles using high-tech lightweight materials, such as M4 aluminum.
The first production Mountain bike available was the 1979 Lawwill Pro Cruiser.
The frame design was based on a frame that Don Koski fabricated from electrical conduit and a Schwinn Varsity frame.
Mert Lawwill had Terry Knight of Oakland build the frames.
The bikes sold for about $500 new and were made from 1979 though 1980 (approximate run of 600 bikes).
The first mass production mountain bike was the Specialized Stumpjumper, first produced in 1981.
With the rising popularity of mountain bikes, Randolph (Randy) Ross, executive vice president of Ross Bicycles Inc., was quoted in the New York Times saying I'd say these bikes are one of the biggest things that ever happened to the biking industry.
Its basic look constitutes "a total shift in image" for the industry.
Throughout the 1990s and 2000s, mountain biking moved from a little-known sport to a mainstream activity complete with an international racing circuit and a world championship, in addition to various free ride competitions, such as the .
Designs
Mountain bikes can be divided into three broad categories based on suspension configuration:
*Rigid: A mountain bike with large, knobby tires and straight handlebars, but with neither front nor rear suspension.
*Hard tail: A mountain bike equipped with a suspension fork for the front wheel, but otherwise a rigid frame.
*Full suspension (or dual suspension): A mountain bike equipped with both front and rear suspension.
The front suspension is usually a telescopic fork similar to that of a motorcycle, and the rear is suspended by a mechanical linkage with components for absorbing shock.
Discipline-oriented designs
There are several different styles of mountain biking, usually defined by the terrain, and therefore the type of bikes employed.
Styles of mountain bike riding and mountain bikes have evolved rapidly in recent years leading to terms such as Freeride and "Trail bike" being used to categorise mountain bikes.
Definitions for the most widely used terms are listed below.
Cross country (XC) mountain bikes are designed primarily around the discipline of cross country racing, placing emphasis on climbing speed and endurance, and therefore demanding lightweight, efficient bikes.
In the 1980s and early 1990s, XC mountain bikes typically consisted of a lightweight steel hardtail frame with rigid forks.
Throughout the 1990s XC bikes evolved to incorporate lightweight aluminum frames and short travel (65 to 110 mm) front suspension forks.
Recently full suspension designs have become more popular among racers and enthusiasts alike, and the use of advanced carbon fiber composites has allowed bike designers to produce full-suspension designs under .
In recent years 29" wheels have largely replaced the original standard of 26"; the US men's and women's marathon cross-country races were won on 29ers in 2009 and 2010.
North Shore bikes are much like free-ride bikes in their geometry and downhill bikes in their component makeup.
Because north shore stunts have evolved to not only include simple and complex bridges but also large drops and high-speed descents through a series of stunts north shore bikes commonly have as much travel as downhill and freeride bikes, however with much more nimble and maneuverable frame designs, and often lighter weight.
Circle dirt track racing In this class of racing any kind of bikes are used, most commonly a hard tail mountain bike with front suspension.
Many different modifications are made to track racing bikes, such as reducing bike weight, increasing brake power, trying different cambers (so that when the bike leans the tire is more level with the track thus creating more grip), and trying different gear ratios.
In the earliest days of mountain biking, all mountain bikes were somewhat custom, home-built machines, and were used for any number of stunts, tricks, racing or other activities.
The general design of the bikes were similar.
As the sport grew, more specialized designs and equipment were introduced.
The further market segmentation beyond simple front suspension XC bicycles began to occur in the mid-1990's, as large bicycle and equipment manufacturers were able to cater specifically to changing demands.
Modern designs
Gears
Since the 1980s, mountain bikes have had anywhere from 7 to 27 speeds, with 1 to 3 chain-rings on the crankset and 4 to 12 sprockets in the cogset.
30-speed and 33-speed mountain bikes were found to be unworkable, as the mud-shedding capabilities of a 10-speed or 11-speed cassette, and the intricacies of a 10-speed or 11-speed rear derailleur have never been suitable.
However, many pro-level mountain bikers have taken to using a narrower 10-speed road chain with a 9-speed setup in an effort to reduce the weight of their bike.
In early 2009, component group SRAM announced their release of their XX groupset, which uses a 2-speed front derailleur, and a 10-speed rear derailleur and cassette, similar to that of a road bike.
Mud-shedding capabilities of their 10-speed XX cassette are made suitable for MTB use by extensive CNC machining of the cassette.
Due to the time and cost involved in such a product, they were only aimed at top-end XC-racers.
However, 10-speed has become the norm by 2011 and the market leader Shimano even offers its budget groupset "Alivio" in a 10-speed version.
In July 2012, SRAM announced a 1x11 drivetrain called XX1 that does not make use of a front derailleur for lighter weight and simplicity.
In the 2014 Commonwealth Games at Glasgow all leading riders used 1x11 drivetrains.
SRAM's new 1x12 gearing was introduced in 2016 as SRAM Eagle.
This gives a single chain ring bike better ability to climb.
Geometry
The critical angles in bicycle geometry are the head angle (the angle of the head tube), and the seat tube angle (the angle of the seat tube).
These angles are measured from the horizontal, and drastically affect the rider position and performance characteristics of the bicycle.
Mountain bike geometry will often feature a seat tube angle around 73 degrees, with a head tube angle of anywhere from 60-73 degrees.
The intended application of the bike affects its geometry very heavily.
In general, steeper angles (closer to 90 degrees from the horizontal) are more efficient for pedaling up hills and make for sharper handling.
Slacker angles are preferred for high speeds and downhill stability.
Suspension
In the past mountain bikes had a rigid frame and fork.
In the early 1990s, the first mountain bikes with suspension forks were introduced.
This made riding on rough terrain easier and less physically stressful.
The first front suspension forks had about 1½ to 2 inches (38 to 50 mm) of suspension travel.
Once suspension was introduced, bikes with front suspension and rigid, non-suspended rear wheels, or "hardtails", became popular nearly overnight.
While the hardtail design has the benefits of lower cost, less maintenance, and better pedaling efficiency, it is slowly losing popularity due to improvements in full suspension designs.
Front fork suspensions are now available with of travel or more (see above under "Design.")
Many new mountain bikes integrate a "full suspension" design known as Dual Suspension, meaning that both the front and rear wheel are fitted with a shock absorber in some form as the wheel attaches to the bike.
This provides a smoother ride as the front and rear wheels can now travel up and down to absorb the force of obstacles striking the tires.
Dual suspension bikes of a similar quality are considerably more expensive, but this price increase brings an enormous off-road performance upgrade as dual suspension bikes are much faster on downhill and technical/rough sections, than other forms of the mountain bike.
This is because when the wheel strikes an obstacle its tendency is to bounce up.
Due to some forward energy being lost in the upward movement some speed is lost.
Dual Suspension bikes solve this problem by absorbing this upward force and transmit it into the shocks of the front and rear wheels, drastically decreasing the translation of forward momentum into useless upward movement.
Disadvantages of rear suspension are increased weight, increased price, and with some designs, decreased pedaling efficiency, which is especially noticeable when cycling on roads and hard trails.
At first, early rear suspension designs were overly heavy, and susceptible either to pedaling-induced bobbing or lockout.
Disc brakes
Most new mountain bikes use disc brakes.
They offer much improved stopping power (less lever pressure is required providing greater braking modulation) over rim brakes under all conditions especially adverse conditions, because they are located at the center of the wheel (on the wheel hub).
They therefore remain drier and cleaner than wheel rims, which are more readily soiled or damaged.
The disadvantage of disc brakes is their increased cost and often greater weight.
Disc brakes do not allow heat to build up in the tires on long descents; instead, heat builds up in the rotor, which can become extremely hot.
Wheel and tire design
Typical features of a mountain bike are wide knobby tires.
The original 26 inch wheel diameter with ~2.125" width (ISO 559 mm rim diameter) is increasingly being displaced by 29 inch wheels with ~2.35" width (ISO 622 mm rim diameter), as well as the 27.5 inch wheel diameter with ~2.25 widths (ISO 584 mm rim diameter).
Mountain bikes with 24 inch wheels are also available, sometimes for dirt jumping, or as a junior bike.
24 inch wheels are used for dirt jumping bikes and sometimes on freeride bikes, rear wheel only, as this makes the bike more maneuverable.
29 inch wheels were once used for only Cross Country purposes, but are now becoming more commonplace in other disciplines of mountain biking.
A mountain bike with 29" wheels is often referred to as a 29er, and a bike with 27.5 inch wheels is called a 27.5 mountain bike or as a marketing term ″650B bike″. Popular tire manufacturers include Wilderness Trail Bikes, Schwalbe, Maxxis, Nokian, Michelin, Continental, Tioga, Kenda, Hutchinson Specialized and Panaracer.
Tandems
Mountain bikes are available in tandem configurations.
For example, Cannondale and Santana Cycles offer ones without suspension, while Ellsworth, Nicolai, and Ventana manufacture tandems with full suspension.
nsp1vod5lbnjlwfwcsijdpeqvr49qjg
