Of Mice and Men is a novella written by John Steinbeck.
Published in 1937, it tells the story of George Milton and Lennie Small, two displaced migrant ranch workers, who move from place to place in California in search of new job opportunities during the Great Depression in the United States.
Steinbeck based the novella on his own experiences working alongside migrant farm workers as a teenager in the 1910s (before the arrival of the Okies that he would describe in The Grapes of Wrath).
The title is taken from Robert Burns' poem "To a Mouse", which reads: "The best laid schemes o' mice an' men Often go awry.)
While it is a book taught in many schools, Of Mice and Men has been a frequent target of censors for vulgarity, and what some consider offensive and racist language; consequently, it appears on the American Library Association's list of the Most Challenged Books of 21st Century.
Plot
Two migrant field workers in California on their plantation during the Great Depression-George Milton, an intelligent but uneducated man, and Lennie Small, a bulky, strong man but mentally disabled-are in Soledad on their way to another part of California.
They hope to one day attain the dream of settling down on their own piece of land.
Lennie's part of the dream is merely to tend and pet rabbits on the farm, as he loves touching soft animals, although he always accidentally kills them.
This dream is one of Lennie's favorite stories, which George constantly retells.
They had fled from Weed after Lennie touched a young woman's dress and would not let go, leading to an accusation of rape.
It soon becomes clear that the two are close and George is Lennie's protector, despite his antics.
After being hired at a farm, the pair are confronted by Curley-The Boss's small, aggressive son with a Napoleon complex who dislikes larger men, and starts to target Lennie.
Curley's flirtatious and provocative wife, to whom Lennie is instantly attracted, poses a problem as well.
In contrast, the pair also meets Candy, an elderly ranch handyman with one hand and a loyal dog, and Slim, an intelligent and gentle jerkline-skinner whose dog has recently had a litter of puppies.
Slim gives a puppy to Lennie and Candy, whose loyal, accomplished sheep dog was put down by fellow ranch-hand Carlson.
In spite of problems, their dream leaps towards reality when Candy offers to pitch in $350 with George and Lennie so that they can buy a farm at the end of the month, in return for permission to live with them.
The trio are ecstatic, but their joy is overshadowed when Curley attacks Lennie, who defends himself by easily crushing Curley's fist while urged on by George.
Nevertheless, George feels more relaxed, to the extent that he even leaves Lennie behind on the ranch while he goes into town with the other ranch hands.
Lennie wanders into the stable, and chats with Crooks, the bitter, yet educated stable buck, who is isolated from the other workers due to being black.
Candy finds them
and they discuss their plans for the farm with Crooks, who cannot resist asking them if he can hoe a garden patch on the farm albeit scorning its possibility.
Curley's wife makes another appearance and flirts with the men, especially Lennie.
However, her spiteful side is shown when she belittles them and threatens to have Crooks lynched.
The next day, Lennie accidentally kills his puppy while stroking it.
Curley's wife enters the barn and tries to speak to Lennie, admitting that she is lonely and how her dreams of becoming a movie star are crushed, revealing her personality.
After finding out about Lennie's habit, she offers to let him stroke her hair, but panics and begins to scream when she feels his strength.
Lennie becomes frightened, and unintentionally breaks her neck thereafter and runs away.
When the other ranch hands find the corpse, George realizes that their dream is at an end.
George hurries to find Lennie, hoping he will be at the meeting place they designated in case he got into trouble.
George meets Lennie at the place, their camping spot before they came to the ranch.
The two sit together and George retells the beloved story of the dream, knowing it is something they will never share.
He then euthanizes Lennie by shooting him, because he sees it as an action in Lennie's best interest.
Curley, Slim, and Carlson arrive seconds after.
Only Slim realizes what happened, and consolingly leads him away.
Curley and Carlson look on, unable to comprehend the subdued mood of the two men.
Characters
* George Milton:
A quick-witted man who is Lennie's guardian and best friend.
His friendship with Lennie helps sustain his dream of a better future.
He was bound in teasing Lennie since he was young.
He is described by Steinbeck in the novel as "small and quick," every part of him being "defined," with small strong hands on slender arms.
He has a dark face and "restless eyes" and "sharp, strong features" including a "thin, bony nose."
* Lennie Small: A mentally disabled, but gigantic and physically strong man who travels with George and is his constant companion.
He dreams of "living off the fatta' the lan'" and being able to tend to rabbits.
His love for soft things conspires against him, mostly because he does not know his own strength, and eventually becomes his undoing.
Steinbeck defines his appearance as George's "opposite," writing that he is a "huge man, shapeless of face, with large, pale eyes" and "wide, sloping shoulders."
Lennie walks heavily, dragging his feet a little, "the way a bear drags his paws," adding that his arms do not swing at his sides, but hang loosely.
* Candy: An aging ranch handyman, Candy lost his hand in an accident and worries about his future on the ranch.
Fearing that his age is making him useless, he seizes on George’s description of the farm he and Lennie will have, offering his life’s savings if he can join George and Lennie in owning the land.
Slim: A "jerkline skinner," the main driver of a mule team and the "prince of the ranch".
Slim is greatly respected by many of the characters and is the only character whom Curley treats with respect.
His insight, intuition, kindness and natural authority draw the other ranch hands automatically towards him, and he is significantly the only character to fully understand the bond between George and Lennie.
* Curley: The Boss' son, a young, pugnacious character, once a semi-professional boxer.
He is described by others, with some irony, as "handy", partly because he likes to keep a glove filled with vaseline on his left hand.
He is very jealous and protective of his wife and immediately develops a dislike toward Lennie.
At one point, Curley loses his temper after he sees Lennie appear to laugh at him, and ends up with his hand horribly damaged after Lennie fights back against him.
* Curley's wife: A young, pretty woman, who is mistrusted by her husband.
The other characters refer to her only as "Curley's wife".
Steinbeck explained that she is "not a person, she's a symbol.
She has no function, except to be a foil - and a danger to Lennie."
The author further reinforces this theme through subtle methods by situating the story near the town of Soledad, which means "solitude" in Spanish.
Despite the need for companionship, Steinbeck emphasizes how loneliness is sustained through the barriers established from acting inhuman to one another.
The loneliness of Curley's wife is upheld by Curley's jealousy, which causes all the ranch hands to avoid her.
Crooks's barrier results from being barred from the bunkhouse by restraining him to the stable; his bitterness is partially broken, however, through Lennie's ignorance.
Steinbeck's characters are often powerless, due to intellectual, economic, and social circumstances.
Lennie possesses the greatest physical strength of any character, which should therefore establish a sense of respect as he is employed as a ranch hand.
However, his intellectual handicap undercuts this and results in his powerlessness.
Economic powerlessness is established as many of the ranch hands are victims of the Great Depression.
As George, Candy and Crooks are positive, action- oriented characters, they wish to purchase a homestead, but because of the Depression, they are unable to generate enough money.
Lennie is the only one who is basically unable to take care of himself, but the other characters would do this in the improved circumstances they seek.
Since they cannot do so, the real danger of Lennie's mental handicap comes to the fore.
Regarding human interaction, evil of oppression and abuse is a theme that is illustrated through Curley and Curley's wife.
Curley uses his aggressive nature and superior position in an attempt to take control of his father's farm.
He constantly reprimands the farm hands and accuses some of fooling around with his wife.
Curley's Napoleon complex is evidenced by his threatening of the farm hands for minuscule incidents.
Curley's wife, on the other hand, is not physically but verbally manipulative.
She uses her sex appeal to gain some attention, flirting with the farm hands.
According to the Penguin Teacher's Guide for Of Mice and Men, Curley and Curley's wife represent evil in that both oppress and abuse the migrants in different ways.
Fate is felt most heavily as the characters' aspirations are destroyed when George is unable to protect Lennie (who is a real danger).
Steinbeck presents this as "something that happened" or as his friend coined for him "non-teleological thinking" or "is thinking", which postulates a non-judgmental point of view.
Development
Of Mice and Men was Steinbeck's first attempt at writing in the form of novel-play termed a "play-novelette" by one critic.
Structured in three acts of two chapters each, it is intended to be both a novella and a script for a play.
It is only 30,000 words in length.
Steinbeck wanted to write a novel that could be played from its lines, or a play that could be read like a novel.
Steinbeck originally titled it Something That Happened (referring to the events of the book as "something that happened" because nobody can be really blamed for the tragedy that unfolds in the story).
However, he changed the title after reading Robert Burns's poem To a Mouse.
Burns's poem tells of the regret the narrator feels for having destroyed the home of a mouse while plowing his field.
Steinbeck wrote this book and The Grapes of Wrath in what is now Monte Sereno, California.
An early draft of Of Mice and Men was eaten by Steinbeck's dog, named Max.
Reception
Attaining the greatest positive response of any of his works up to that time, Steinbeck's novella was chosen as a Book of the Month Club selection before it was published.
Praise for the work came from many notable critics, including Maxine Garrard (Enquirer-Sun), Christopher Morley, and Harry Thornton Moore (New Republic).
New York Times critic Ralph Thompson described the novella as a "grand little book, for all its ultimate melodrama."
The novella has been banned from various US public and school libraries or curricula for allegedly "promoting euthanasia", "condoning
racial slurs", being "anti-business", containing profanity, and generally containing "vulgar" and "offensive language".
Many of the bans and
restrictions have been lifted and it remains required reading in many other American, Australian, Irish, British, New Zealand and Canadian
high schools.
As a result of being a frequent target of censors, Of Mice and Men appears on the American Library Association's list
of the Most Challenged Books of the 21st Century (number 4).
In the UK, it was listed at number 52 of the "nation's best loved novels" on the BBC's 2003 survey The Big Read.
Of Mice and Men has been challenged (proposed for censorship) 54 times since it was published in 1936.
However, scholars
like Thomas Scarseth have fought to protect the book by citing its literary value.
According to Scarseth "in true great literature the
pain of Life is transmuted into the beauty of Art",.
Adaptations
Stage
The first stage production was written by Steinbeck, produced by Sam H. Harris and directed by George S. Kaufman.
It opened on November 23, 1937, in the Music Box Theatre on Broadway.
Running for 207 performances, it starred Wallace Ford as George and Broderick Crawford as Lennie.
Whipper repeated this role in the 1939 film version.
In 1939 the production was moved to Los Angeles, still with Wallace Ford in the role of George, but with Lon Chaney, Jr., taking on the role of Lennie.
Chaney's performance in the role resulted in his casting in the movie.
A 1958, a musical theater adaptation by Ira Bilowit (1925-2016) was produced Off-Broadway in New York City.
The cast included several in-demand performers of their day, including Art Lund and Jo Sullivan, re-teamed after performing together in the hit musical
The Most Happy Fella, as well as Leo Penn.
However, a newspaper strike negatively affected the production and it closed after six weeks.
The play was revived in a 1974 Broadway production in the Brooks Atkinson Theatre starring Kevin Conway as George and James Earl Jones as Lennie.
Noted stage actress Pamela Blair played Curley's Wife in this production.
In 1970 Carlisle Floyd wrote an opera based on this novella.
One departure between Steinbeck's book and Floyd's opera is that the opera features The Ballad Singer, a character not found in the book.
A new version of the play opened on Broadway at The Longacre Theater on March 19, 2014 for a limited 18-week engagement, starring James Franco, Chris O'Dowd, Leighton Meester and Jim Norton.
Film
A 1972 Iranian film, Topoli, directed by Reza Mirlohi was adapted from and dedicated to John Steinbeck and his story.
In 1981 a TV movie version was made, starring Randy Quaid as Lennie, and Robert Blake as George, and directed by Reza Badiyi.
Another theatrical film version was made in 1992, directed by Gary Sinise, who was nominated for the Palme d'Or at Cannes.
Sinise also played George in the film, and the role of Lennie was played by John Malkovich.
For this adaptation, both men reprised their roles from the 1980 Steppenwolf Theatre Company production.
The 1992 Malayalam film Soorya Manasam directed by Viji Thampi is also based on the novel.
Radio
Of Mice and Men was adapted by Donna Franceschild as a radio play directed by Kirsty Williams starring David Tennant and Liam Brennan broadcast on BBC Radio 4 on 7 March 2010.
References
Notes
Bibliography
