Jumbo (about Christmas 1860 - September 15, 1885), also known as Jumbo the Elephant and Jumbo the Circus Elephant, was a 19th-century male African bush elephant born in Sudan.
Jumbo was exported to Jardin des Plantes, a zoo in Paris, and then transferred in 1865 to London Zoo in England.
Despite public protest, Jumbo was sold to P. T. Barnum, who took him to the United States for exhibition in March 1882.
The giant elephant's name has spawned the common word, "", "jumbo shrimp," "jumbo marshmallows," and "jumbotron."
Jumbo's shoulder height has been estimated to be at the time of his death, and is referenced by a plaque outside the old Liberal Hall, now a Wetherspoons pub, in Crediton.
History
Jumbo was born around Christmas 1860 in Sudan, and after his mother was killed by hunters, the infant Jumbo was captured by Sudanese elephant hunter Taher Sheriff and German big-game hunter Johann Schmidt.
Despite a lawsuit against the Zoological Gardens alleging the sale was in violation of multiple zoo bylaws, and the zoo's attempt to renege on the sale, the court upheld the sale.
Death
Jumbo died at a railway classification yard in St. Thomas, Ontario, Canada, on September 15, 1885.
In those days the circus crisscrossed North America by train.
St. Thomas was the perfect location for a circus because many rail lines converged there.
Jumbo and the other animals had finished their performances that night, and as they were being led to their box car, a train came down the track.
Jumbo was hit and mortally wounded, dying within minutes.
Barnum told the story that Tom Thumb, a young circus elephant, was walking on the railroad tracks and Jumbo was attempting to lead him to safety.
Barnum claimed that the locomotive hit and killed Tom Thumb before it derailed and hit Jumbo.
However, other witnesses did not support Barnum's account.
According to newspapers, the freight train hit Jumbo directly, killing him, while Tom Thumb suffered a broken leg.
Many metallic objects were found in the elephant's stomach, including English pennies, keys, rivets, and a police whistle.
Ever the showman, Barnum had portions of his star attraction separated, to have multiple sites attracting curious spectators.
After touring with Barnum's circus, the skeleton was donated to the American Museum of Natural History in New York City, where it remains.
The elephant's heart was sold to Cornell University.
Jumbo's hide was stuffed by William J. Critchley and Carl Akeley, both of Ward's Natural Science, who stretched it during the mounting process; the mounted specimen traveled with Barnum's circus for two years.
Jumbo remains the mascot of Tufts, and representations of the elephant are featured prominently throughout the campus.
Jumbo was the inspiration of the nickname of the 19th-century Jumbo Water Tower in the town of Colchester in Essex, England.
Lucy the Elephant, a six-story structure in Margate City, New Jersey, was modeled after Jumbo.
Built by James V. Lafferty in 1881, Lucy is the oldest surviving roadside tourist attraction in America and a National Historic Landmark.
Lafferty also made other Jumbo-shaped structures, including Elephantine Colossus, on Coney Island.
Jumbo has been lionized on a series of sheet-music covers from roughly 1882-83.
The four-colour lithograph of Jumbo was created by Alfred Concanen of England, with the music title "Why Part With Jumbo", a song by the lion comique of Victorian British music halls, G. H. MacDermott.
It pictured children zoo visitors riding, somewhat precariously, on Jumbo's back.
Multiple American lithographic music covers were done, including by J. H. Bufford's Sons.
Canadian folk singer James Gordon wrote the song "Jumbo's Last Ride", which recounts the story of Jumbo's life and death.
It is on his 1999 CD Pipe Street Dreams.
Canadian professional ice hockey player Joe Thornton (b. 1979), 6'4" in height and weighing 220 pounds and hailing from St. Thomas, Ontario, is nicknamed Jumbo Joe as a homage to Jumbo the Elephant.
More evidence
A television program about Jumbo, Attenborough and the Giant Elephant, presented by the naturalist and broadcaster David Attenborough, was transmitted on BBC One in the United Kingdom on 10 December 2017.
An international team of scientists examined the skeleton and found:
* Jumbo's molar teeth were malformed and out of line as a result of a long-term soft diet that did not wear his molar teeth down enough, obstructing the forward eruptive movement of the next molar.
Jumbo's nightly rages were probably caused by toothache, rather than musth, as his keeper thought at the time.
* A post mortem photograph of Jumbo shows skin abrasions consistent with an illustration produced just after his death of the freight train hitting him on a hip from behind as he was being led across to his traveling carriage, and said that the likeliest cause of death was internal bleeding from his injuries.
* Examination of Jumbo's limb bones showed overgrown tendon attachment areas consistent with a long-term history of being overloaded at his work.
* Jumbo was still growing at the time of his death, as is normal for African male elephants of his age, and might eventually have attained the size claimed by Barnum.
References
Notes
Citations
Bibliography
*Chambers, Paul.
Jumbo: The Greatest Elephant in the World, Andre Deutsch, 2007.
*Harding, Les.
Elephant Story: Jumbo and P.T. Barnum Under the Big Top.
McFarland, 2000.
*Knowles, Sebastian D. G. At Fault: Joyce and the Crisis of the Modern University.
The Florida James Joyce Series, Gainesville, University Press of Florida, 2018.
*McClellan, Andrew.
“P. T. Barnum, Jumbo the Elephant, and the Barnum Museum of Natural History at Tufts University,” Journal of the History of Collections, Volume 24, Issue 1, 1 March 2012, Pages 45-62, https:/ 10.1093 fhr001
*Nicholls, Henry.
“Jumbo the Elephant: the Afterlife.”
The Guardian, Guardian News and Media, 11 Nov. 2013, 2013 11/jumbo-the-elephant-the-afterlife.
*Scott, Matthew.
The autobiography of Matthew Scott and his biography of P.T. Barnum's great elephant Jumbo. 1885.
