Martha Washington (née Dandridge; - May 22, 1802) was the wife of George Washington, the first President of the United States.
Although the title was not coined until after her death, Martha Washington served as the inaugural First Lady of the United States.
During her lifetime she was often referred to as "Lady Washington".
She had first married Daniel Parke Custis, with whom she had four children, and was widowed by the age of 25.
Two of her children by Custis survived to young adulthood.
She brought her vast wealth to her marriage to Washington, which enabled him to buy land to add to his personal estate.
She also brought nearly 100 dower slaves for her use during her lifetime.
They and their descendants reverted to her first husband's estate at her death and were inherited by his heirs.
She and Washington did not have children together but they did rear her two surviving children by Daniel Parke Custis, including son John "Jacky" Parke Custis.
They also helped both of their extended families.
Family and background
Martha Dandridge was born on June 2, 1731 (O.S. June 2) on her parents' plantation Chestnut Grove in the British colony, Province of Virginia.
She was the oldest daughter of John Dandridge (1700-1756), a Virginia planter and immigrant from England, by his wife Frances Jones (1710-1785), who was of American birth and English, Welsh, and French descent.
Martha had three brothers and four sisters: John (1733-1749), William (1734-1776), Bartholomew (1737-1785), Anna Maria "Fanny" Bassett (1739-1777), Frances Dandridge (1744-1757), Elizabeth Aylett Henley (1749-1800) and Mary Dandridge (1756-1763).
descent, and her father was believed to be John Dandridge.
Martha's father may also have fathered an out-of-wedlock half-brother to Martha named Ralph Dandridge (years of birth and death unknown), who was probably white.
According to her biographer, "she capably ran the five plantations left to her when her first husband died, bargaining with London merchants for the best tobacco prices."
The wedding was grand.
Washington's suit was of blue and silver cloth with red trimming and gold knee buckles.
The bride wore purple silk shoes with spangled buckles, which are displayed at Mount Vernon.
John Parke "Jacky" Custis left King's College that fall and married Eleanor Calvert in February 1774.
At the 1777-1778 Valley Forge encampment
By tradition, Washington was described as spending her days at the Revolutionary War winter encampments visiting with the common soldiers in their huts.
But Nancy Loane, author of Following the Drum: Women at the Valley Forge Encampment, says there is no evidence that Washington visited with the common soldiers, noting that Martha Washington was fashionably dressed, assertive, and a woman of great wealth and independent means.
Mrs. Washington joined her husband during the Revolution for all the Continental Army's winter encampments.
Before the revolution began, she had kept close to home; during it, she traveled thousands of miles to be with her husband.
General Lafayette observed that she loved "her husband madly".
The Continental Army settled in Valley Forge, the third of the eight winter encampments of the Revolution, on December 19, 1777.
Martha Washington traveled ten days and hundreds of miles to join her husband in Pennsylvania.
Primary documents of the Revolutionary period refer to Lady Washington's activities at the site.
Martha Washington took her familiar role as her husband's hostess at camp.
On April 6, Elizabeth Drinker and three friends arrived at Valley Forge to plead with General Washington to release their husbands from jail; the men, all Quakers, had refused to swear a loyalty oath to the United States.
Because the commander was not available at first, the women visited with Mrs. Washington.
Martha Washington was regarded as a matriarch in the camps she visited.
Drinker described her later in her diary as "a sociable pretty kind of Woman."
Martha Washington also socialized with the wives of the senior officers at Valley Forge.
Years later, Pierre DuPonceau, an aide to Baron von Steuben, recalled that in the evenings the ladies and officers at camp would meet at each other's quarters for conversation.
During these social evenings, each lady and gentleman present was "called upon in turn for a song" as they sipped tea or coffee.
There was no card-playing during these Valley Forge social gatherings, games of chance having been forbidden by General Washington.
Charles Willson Peale painted a miniature of Washington-for which he charged his usual "56 Dollars"-and presented it to Martha, along with painting other miniatures of Washington.
He also painted 50 other officers and their wives that winter.
Lady Washington took part in the camp's May 6 celebration of the formal announcement of the French-American alliance.
Soon after the thunderous feu de joie, when thousands of soldiers fired off their muskets, General Washington and his wife received other officers under a large marquee fashioned from dozens of officers' tents.
General Washington was said to have worn "a countenance of uncommon delight and complacence."
Five days later, on May 11, 1778, Martha Washington and the commander attended the camp production of Joseph Addison's play Cato, a favorite of the General's.
The play was performed by the staff officers for a "very numerous and splendid audience," including many officers and several of their wives.
First Lady 1789-1797
After the war, Martha wasn't fully supportive of Washington's agreeing to be President of the newly formed United States, Once he assumed office, as the First Lady (a term that was later used) she hosted many affairs of state at New York City and Philadelphia during their years as temporary capitals.
The socializing became known as "the Republican Court".
In July 1790, the artist John Trumbull gave a full-length portrait painting of General George Washington to her as a gift.
It was displayed in their home at Mount Vernon in the New Room.
Dower slaves, estate, death and interment
Although her father had owned fifteen to twenty slaves, her first husband, Daniel Parke Custis, owned nearly three hundred, making him one of the largest slaveowners and wealthiest men in the Virginia colony.
The full Custis estate contained plantations and farms totaling about , and 285 enslaved men, women, and children attached to those holdings.
Daniel Parke Custis' death in 1757 without a will meant that, according to law, his and Martha's eldest male child, John (Jacky) Parke Custis, who was at that time a minor, would inherit when he became an adult two-thirds of the Custis estate, its slaves and the children of those slaves.
She also would control any children they had, as they would become part of the dower.
This created complex inheritance issues.
Seven of the nine slaves whom President Washington brought to Philadelphia (the national capital, 1790-1800) to work in the President's House were "dowers".
Pennsylvania passed a gradual abolition law in 1780, under which non-residents were allowed to hold slaves in the state for up to six months; after that date, they could claim freedom.
Because Washington would have been liable for compensating the Custis estate for any dower slaves freed under this law, he surreptitiously rotated his President's House slaves in and out of the state before the six-month deadline to prevent their establishing residency (and legally qualifying for manumission).
Martha Washington promised her lady's maid Oney Judge, a "dower" slave, to her granddaughter Elizabeth Parke Custis as a wedding gift.
To prevent being sent back to Virginia, Judge escaped in 1796 from the Philadelphia household during Washington's second term.
She hid with free black friends in the city, who helped arrange her travel by ship to Portsmouth, New Hampshire.
There she married and had three children.
Patricia Brady, in her 2005 biography of Martha Washington, writes:
Martha felt a responsibility for the unsophisticated girl under her care, especially since her mother and sister were expecting to see her back at Mount Vernon.
What she could never understand was that Oney had ... a simple desire to be free.
Ona, as she preferred to call herself, wanted to live where she pleased, do what work she pleased, and learn to read and write ...
Ona Judge professed a great regard for Martha and the way she had been treated, but she couldn't face a future as a slave for herself and her children.
After Oney's escape, Martha gave her younger enslaved sister Delphy (also known as Philadelphia) to Elizabeth and her husband as a wedding gift.
Washington's slave Hercules, who had worked as his chief cook at the President's House (Philadelphia) before being returned to Mount Vernon in 1796, escaped from there on February 22, 1797.
He was known to have traveled to Philadelphia, and by December 1801 was living in New York City.
His six-year-old daughter, still enslaved at Mount Vernon, told a visitor that she was glad her father was free.
In his July 1790 will, written a year after he became President of the United States in April 1789 and nine years before his death in December 1799, George Washington left directions for the emancipation, after Martha Washington's death, of all the slaves that he owned.
The slaves received their freedom on January 1, 1801, a little over a year after George's death.
Just a few weeks earlier in December, Abigail Adams, wife of the second President, had visited Mount Vernon and wrote: "Many of those who are liberated have married with what are called the dower Negroes, so that they all quit their family connections, yet what could she do?"
Mrs. Adams suggested a motive for Martha to have freed Washington's slaves early:
QTEMPLATE |In the state in which they were left by the General, to be free at her death, she did not feel as tho her Life was safe in their Hands, many of whom would be told that it was in their interest to get rid of her-She therefore was advised to set them all free at the close of the year.|A. A. to Mary Cranch, 21 December 1800
Martha's health, always somewhat precarious, declined after her husband's death.
Two and a half years after the death of her husband, Martha died on May 22, 1802 at the age of 70.
In 1831, the surviving executors of Washington's estate removed the bodies of George and Martha Washington and those of other members of the family from the old vault to a similar structure within the present enclosure at Mount Vernon.
Upon her death, her dower slaves reverted to the Custis estate and were divided among her four grandchildren.
An stamp, it was printed in violet-black ink.
The second stamp issued in her honor, a definitive stamp printed in orange-brown ink, was released in 1923.
The third stamp to honor Martha Washington was issued in 1938, as part of the Presidential Issue series.
A stamp, it was printed in yellow-brown ink.
U.S. paper currency
Martha Washington is the only woman (other than allegories of Justice, Liberty, etc.) depicted on the face of a United States Banknote.
Her engraved portrait bust was used on the face of the $1 Silver Certificate of 1886 and 1891.
Both Martha and George Washington are depicted together on the reverse of the $1 silver certificate of 1896.
File:US-$1-SC-1891-Fr.223.jpg|$1 silver certificate, issue 1886
File:US-$1-SC-1896-Fr-224- (3923429).jpg|$1 Silver Certificate, issue 1896
U.S. coins
The First Spouse Program under the Presidential $1 Coin Act authorizes the United States Mint to issue 1/2 ounce $10 gold coins and bronze medal duplicates to honor the first spouses of the United States.
The Martha Washington coin was released on June 19, 2007, and was sold out in hours.
File:Martha Washington First Spouse Coin obverse.jpg|Obverse
File:Martha Washington First Spouse Coin reverse.jpg|Reverse
File:Washington m-o.jpg|Obverse (bronze medal)
File:Washington m-r.jpg|Reverse (bronze medal)
Educational institutions
The Martha Washington College for Women was founded in Abingdon, Virginia in 1860.
In 1918, its administration was merged with Emory & Henry College and in 1931, Martha Washington ceased to function as a separate entity, merging completely with Emory & Henry.
The main original building of Martha Washington College is now known and operated as the Martha Washington Inn.
There was also Martha Washington Seminary, a finishing school for young women in Washington, DC, that was founded in 1905 and ceased operations in 1949.
In popular culture
*In 1955, the actress Karen Sharpe played Custis in the NBC television film, The Courtship of George Washington and Martha Custis, a production of the Hallmark Hall of Fame.
Marshall Thompson, nine years older than Sharpe, portrayed Washington, who was a year younger than Custis.
*Annette Haven played Martha Washington in the 1976 pornographic film Spirit of Seventy Sex.
*Emmy-winning actress Patty Duke portrayed Martha Washington in the TV miniseries George Washington (1984) and its sequel George Washington II: The Forging of a Nation (1986).
*Martha Washington is the name of a fox in The Life and Times of Grizzly Adams, episode 2 ("Blood Brothers").
*A member of the geranium (a flower) family, scientific name Pelargonium x domesticum, is named after Martha Washington as the Martha Washington geranium.
*Martha Washington was portrayed by Lilli Birdsell in the third and fourth seasons of from 2016-2017.
*Martha Washington was satirically portrayed as a ghost of the past by Aidy Bryant in the February 4, 2018 episode of Saturday Night Live on NBC television.
Alexander Macomb House - Second Presidential Mansion.
* President's House (Philadelphia) - Third Presidential Mansion.
Further reading
