Oxygen is the chemical element with the symbol O and atomic number 8.
It is a member of the chalcogen group in the periodic table, a highly reactive nonmetal, and an oxidizing agent that readily forms oxides with most elements as well as with other compounds.
By mass, oxygen is the third-most abundant element in the universe, after hydrogen and helium.
At standard temperature and pressure, two atoms of the element bind to form dioxygen, a colorless and odorless diatomic gas with the formula .
Diatomic oxygen gas constitutes 20.8% of the Earth's atmosphere.
As compounds including oxides, the element makes up almost half of the Earth's crust.
Dioxygen is used in cellular respiration and many major classes of organic molecules in living organisms contain oxygen, such as proteins, nucleic acids, carbohydrates, and fats, as do the major constituent inorganic compounds of animal shells, teeth, and bone.
Most of the mass of living organisms is oxygen as a component of water, the major constituent of lifeforms.
Oxygen is continuously replenished in Earth's atmosphere by photosynthesis, which uses the energy of sunlight to produce oxygen from water and carbon dioxide.
Oxygen is too chemically reactive to remain a free element in air without being continuously replenished by the photosynthetic action of living organisms.
Another form (allotrope) of oxygen, ozone (), strongly absorbs ultraviolet UVB radiation and the high-altitude ozone layer helps protect the biosphere from ultraviolet radiation.
However, ozone present at the surface is a byproduct of smog and thus a pollutant.
Oxygen was isolated by Michael Sendivogius before 1604, but it is commonly believed that the element was discovered independently by Carl Wilhelm Scheele, in Uppsala, in 1773 or earlier, and Joseph Priestley in Wiltshire, in 1774.
Priority is often given for Priestley because his work was published first.
Priestley, however, called oxygen "dephlogisticated air", and did not recognize it as a chemical element.
The name oxygen was coined in 1777 by Antoine Lavoisier, who first recognized oxygen as a chemical element and correctly characterized the role it plays in combustion.
Common uses of oxygen include production of steel, plastics and textiles, brazing, welding and cutting of steels and other metals, rocket propellant, oxygen therapy, and life support systems in aircraft, submarines, spaceflight and diving.
History
Early experiments
One of the first known experiments on the relationship between combustion and air was conducted by the 2nd century BCE Greek writer on mechanics, Philo of Byzantium.
In his work Pneumatica, Philo observed that inverting a vessel over a burning candle and surrounding the vessel's neck with water resulted in some water rising into the neck.
Philo incorrectly surmised that parts of the air in the vessel were converted into the classical element fire and thus were able to escape through pores in the glass.
Many centuries later Leonardo da Vinci built on Philo's work by observing that a portion of air is consumed during combustion and respiration.
In the late 17th century, Robert Boyle proved that air is necessary for combustion.
English chemist John Mayow (1641-1679) refined this work by showing that fire requires only a part of air that he called spiritus nitroaereus.
In one experiment, he found that placing either a mouse or a lit candle in a closed container over water caused the water to rise and replace one-fourteenth of the air's volume before extinguishing the subjects.
From this he surmised that nitroaereus is consumed in both respiration and combustion.
Mayow observed that antimony increased in weight when heated, and inferred that the nitroaereus must have combined with it.
This may have been in part due to the prevalence of the philosophy of combustion and corrosion called the phlogiston theory, which was then the favored explanation of those processes.
Established in 1667 by the German alchemist J. J. Becher, and modified by the chemist Georg Ernst Stahl by 1731, phlogiston theory stated that all combustible materials were made of two parts.
One part, called phlogiston, was given off when the substance containing it was burned, while the dephlogisticated part was thought to be its true form, or calx.), and this substance is identical with oxygen.
Sendivogius, during his experiments performed between 1598 and 1604, properly recognized that the substance is equivalent to the gaseous byproduct released by the thermal decomposition of potassium nitrate.
In Bugaj's view, the isolation of oxygen and the proper association of the substance to that part of air which is required for life, lends sufficient weight to the discovery of oxygen by Sendivogius.
This discovery of Sendivogius was however frequently denied by the generations of scientists and chemists which succeeded him.
It is also commonly claimed that oxygen was first discovered by Swedish pharmacist Carl Wilhelm Scheele.
He had produced oxygen gas by heating mercuric oxide and various nitrates in 1771-2.
In the meantime, on August 1, 1774, an experiment conducted by the British clergyman Joseph Priestley focused sunlight on mercuric oxide (HgO) contained in a glass tube, which liberated a gas he named "dephlogisticated air".
He noted that candles burned brighter in the gas and that a mouse was more active and lived longer while breathing it.
After breathing the gas himself, Priestley wrote: "The feeling of it to my lungs was not sensibly different from that of common air, but I fancied that my breast felt peculiarly light and easy for some time afterwards."
Because he published his findings first, Priestley is usually given priority in the discovery.
The French chemist Antoine Laurent Lavoisier later claimed to have discovered the new substance independently.
Priestley visited Lavoisier in October 1774 and told him about his experiment and how he liberated the new gas.
Scheele had also dispatched a letter to Lavoisier on September 30, 1774, which described his discovery of the previously unknown substance, but Lavoisier never acknowledged receiving it.
Chemists (such as Sir Humphry Davy in 1812) eventually determined that Lavoisier was wrong in this regard (hydrogen forms the basis for acid chemistry), but by then the name was too well established.
Oxygen entered the English language despite opposition by English scientists and the fact that the Englishman Priestley had first isolated the gas and written about it.
This is partly due to a poem praising the gas titled "Oxygen" in the popular book The Botanic Garden (1791) by Erasmus Darwin, grandfather of Charles Darwin.
In 1805, Joseph Louis Gay-Lussac and Alexander von Humboldt showed that water is formed of two volumes of hydrogen and one volume of oxygen; and by 1811 Amedeo Avogadro had arrived at the correct interpretation of water's composition, based on what is now called Avogadro's law and the diatomic elemental molecules in those gases.
By the late 19th century scientists realized that air could be liquefied and its components isolated by compressing and cooling it.
Using a cascade method, Swiss chemist and physicist Raoul Pierre Pictet evaporated liquid sulfur dioxide in order to liquefy carbon dioxide, which in turn was evaporated to cool oxygen gas enough to liquefy it.
He sent a telegram on December 22, 1877 to the French Academy of Sciences in Paris announcing his discovery of liquid oxygen.
Just two days later, French physicist Louis Paul Cailletet announced his own method of liquefying molecular oxygen.
In 1891 Scottish chemist James Dewar was able to produce enough liquid oxygen for study.
The first commercially viable process for producing liquid oxygen was independently developed in 1895 by German engineer Carl von Linde and British engineer William Hampson.
Both men lowered the temperature of air until it liquefied and then distilled the component gases by boiling them off one at a time and capturing them separately.
Later, in 1901, oxyacetylene welding was demonstrated for the first time by burning a mixture of acetylene and compressed .
This method of welding and cutting metal later became common.
Oxygen levels in the atmosphere are trending slightly downward globally, possibly because of fossil-fuel burning.
Characteristics
Properties and molecular structure
At standard temperature and pressure, oxygen is a colorless, odorless, and tasteless gas with the molecular formula , referred to as dioxygen.
As dioxygen, two oxygen atoms are chemically bound to each other.
The bond can be variously described based on level of theory, but is reasonably and simply described as a covalent double bond that results from the filling of molecular orbitals formed from the atomic orbitals of the individual oxygen atoms, the filling of which results in a bond order of two.
More specifically, the double bond is the result of sequential, low-to-high energy, or Aufbau, filling of orbitals, and the resulting cancellation of contributions from the 2s electrons, after sequential filling of the low σ and σ* orbitals; σ overlap of the two atomic 2p orbitals that lie along the O-O molecular axis and overlap of two pairs of atomic 2p orbitals perpendicular to the O-O molecular axis, and then cancellation of contributions from the remaining two of the six 2p electrons after their partial filling of the lowest and
This combination of cancellations and σ and overlaps results in dioxygen's double bond character and reactivity, and a triplet electronic ground state.
An electron configuration with two unpaired electrons, as is found in dioxygen orbitals (see the filled * orbitals in the diagram) that are of equal energy-i.e., degenerate-is a configuration termed a spin triplet state.
Hence, the ground state of the molecule is referred to as triplet oxygen.
The highest energy, partially filled orbitals are antibonding, and so their filling weakens the bond order from three to two.
Because of its unpaired electrons, triplet oxygen reacts only slowly with most organic molecules, which have paired electron spins; this prevents spontaneous combustion.
In the triplet form, molecules are paramagnetic.
That is, they impart magnetic character to oxygen when it is in the presence of a magnetic field, because of the spin magnetic moments of the unpaired electrons in the molecule, and the negative exchange energy between neighboring molecules.
Singlet oxygen is a name given to several higher-energy species of molecular in which all the electron spins are paired.
It is much more reactive with common organic molecules than is molecular oxygen per se.
In nature, singlet oxygen is commonly formed from water during photosynthesis, using the energy of sunlight.
It is also produced in the troposphere by the photolysis of ozone by light of short wavelength, and by the immune system as a source of active oxygen.
Carotenoids in photosynthetic organisms (and possibly animals) play a major role in absorbing energy from singlet oxygen and converting it to the unexcited ground state before it can cause harm to tissues.
Allotropes
The common allotrope of elemental oxygen on Earth is called dioxygen, , the major part of the Earth's atmospheric oxygen (see Occurrence).
O2 has a bond length of 121 pm and a bond energy of 498 kJ/mol, which is smaller than the energy of other double bonds or pairs of single bonds in the biosphere and responsible for the exothermic reaction of O2 with any organic molecule.
Due to its energy content, O2 is used by complex forms of life, such as animals, in cellular respiration.
Other aspects of are covered in the remainder of this article.
Trioxygen () is usually known as ozone and is a very reactive allotrope of oxygen that is damaging to lung tissue.
Ozone is produced in the upper atmosphere when combines with atomic oxygen made by the splitting of by ultraviolet (UV) radiation.
The metastable molecule tetraoxygen () was discovered in 2001, and was assumed to exist in one of the six phases of solid oxygen.
It was proven in 2006 that this phase, created by pressurizing to 20 GPa, is in fact a rhombohedral cluster.
This cluster has the potential to be a much more powerful oxidizer than either or and may therefore be used in rocket fuel.
and it was shown in 1998 that at very low temperatures, this phase becomes superconducting.
Physical properties
Oxygen dissolves more readily in water than nitrogen, and in freshwater more readily than seawater.
Water in equilibrium with air contains approximately 1 molecule of dissolved for every 2 molecules of (1:2), compared with an atmospheric ratio of approximately 1:4.
The solubility of oxygen in water is temperature-dependent, and about twice as much (14.6 mg·L−1) dissolves at 0 °C than at 20 °C (7.6 mg·L−1).
At 25 °C and of air, freshwater contains about 6.04 milliliters (mL) of oxygen per liter, and seawater contains about 4.95 mL per liter.
At 5 °C the solubility increases to 9.0 mL (50% more than at 25 °C) per liter for water and 7.2 mL (45% more) per liter for sea water.
Oxygen condenses at 90.20 K (−182.95 °C, −297.31 °F), and freezes at 54.36 K (−218.79 °C, −361.82 °F).
Both liquid and solid are clear substances with a light sky-blue color caused by absorption in the red (in contrast with the blue color of the sky, which is due to Rayleigh scattering of blue light).
High-purity liquid is usually obtained by the fractional distillation of liquefied air.
Liquid oxygen may also be condensed from air using liquid nitrogen as a coolant.
Oxygen is a highly reactive substance and must be segregated from combustible materials.
The absorption in the Herzberg continuum and Schumann-Runge bands in the ultraviolet produces atomic oxygen that is important in the chemistry of the middle atmosphere.
Excited state singlet molecular oxygen is responsible for red chemiluminescence in solution.
Isotopes and stellar origin
Naturally occurring oxygen is composed of three stable isotopes, 16O, 17O, and 18O, with 16O being the most abundant (99.762% natural abundance).
Most 16O is synthesized at the end of the helium fusion process in massive stars but some is made in the neon burning process.
17O is primarily made by the burning of hydrogen into helium during the CNO cycle, making it a common isotope in the hydrogen burning zones of stars.
to yield nitrogen, and the most common mode for the isotopes heavier than 18O is beta decay to yield fluorine.
About 0.9% of the Sun's mass is oxygen.
as part of oxide compounds such as silicon dioxide and is the most abundant element by mass in the Earth's crust.
It is also the major component of the world's oceans (88.8% by mass).
Earth is unusual among the planets of the Solar System in having such a high concentration of oxygen gas in its atmosphere: Mars (with 0.1% by volume) and Venus have much less.
The surrounding those planets is produced solely by the action of ultraviolet radiation on oxygen-containing molecules such as carbon dioxide.
The unusually high concentration of oxygen gas on Earth is the result of the oxygen cycle.
This biogeochemical cycle describes the movement of oxygen within and between its three main reservoirs on Earth: the atmosphere, the biosphere, and the lithosphere.
The main driving factor of the oxygen cycle is photosynthesis, which is responsible for modern Earth's atmosphere.
Photosynthesis releases oxygen into the atmosphere, while respiration, decay, and combustion remove it from the atmosphere.
In the present equilibrium, production and consumption occur at the same rate.
Free oxygen also occurs in solution in the world's water bodies.
The increased solubility of at lower temperatures (see Physical properties) has important implications for ocean life, as polar oceans support a much higher density of life due to their higher oxygen content.
Water polluted with plant nutrients such as nitrates or phosphates may stimulate growth of algae by a process called eutrophication and the decay of these organisms and other biomaterials may reduce the content in eutrophic water bodies.
Scientists assess this aspect of water quality by measuring the water's biochemical oxygen demand, or the amount of needed to restore it to a normal concentration.
Analysis
Paleoclimatologists measure the ratio of oxygen-18 and oxygen-16 in the shells and skeletons of marine organisms to determine the climate millions of years ago (see oxygen isotope ratio cycle).
Seawater molecules that contain the lighter isotope, oxygen-16, evaporate at a slightly faster rate than water molecules containing the 12% heavier oxygen-18, and this disparity increases at lower temperatures.
During periods of lower global temperatures, snow and rain from that evaporated water tends to be higher in oxygen-16, and the seawater left behind tends to be higher in oxygen-18.
Marine organisms then incorporate more oxygen-18 into their skeletons and shells than they would in a warmer climate.
Oxygen presents two spectrophotometric absorption bands peaking at the wavelengths 687 and 760 nm.
Some remote sensing scientists have proposed using the measurement of the radiance coming from vegetation canopies in those bands to characterize plant health status from a satellite platform.
This approach exploits the fact that in those bands it is possible to discriminate the vegetation's reflectance from its fluorescence, which is much weaker.
The measurement is technically difficult owing to the low signal-to-noise ratio and the physical structure of vegetation; but it has been proposed as a possible method of monitoring the carbon cycle from satellites on a global scale.
Biological role of O2
Photosynthesis and respiration
In nature, free oxygen is produced by the light-driven splitting of water during oxygenic photosynthesis.
According to some estimates, green algae and cyanobacteria in marine environments provide about 70% of the free oxygen produced on Earth, and the rest is produced by terrestrial plants.
Other estimates of the oceanic contribution to atmospheric oxygen are higher, while some estimates are lower, suggesting oceans produce ~45% of Earth's atmospheric oxygen each year.
A simplified overall formula for photosynthesis is:
or simply
:: carbon dioxide + water + sunlight → glucose + dioxygen
Photolytic oxygen evolution occurs in the thylakoid membranes of photosynthetic organisms and requires the energy of four photons.
Many steps are involved, but the result is the formation of a proton gradient across the thylakoid membrane, which is used to synthesize adenosine triphosphate (ATP) via photophosphorylation.
The remaining (after production of the water molecule) is released into the atmosphere.
Oxygen is used in mitochondria to generate ATP during oxidative phosphorylation.
The reaction for aerobic respiration is essentially the reverse of photosynthesis and is simplified as:
:: + 6 → 6 + 6 + 2880 kJ/mol
In vertebrates, diffuses through membranes in the lungs and into red blood cells.
Hemoglobin binds , changing color from bluish red to bright red oxygen was thought to be a requirement for all complex life.
Reactive oxygen species, such as superoxide ion () and hydrogen peroxide (), are reactive by-products of oxygen use in organisms.
An adult human at rest inhales 1.8 to 2.4 grams of oxygen per minute.
This amounts to more than 6 billion tonnes of oxygen inhaled by humanity per year.
Living organisms
The free oxygen partial pressure in the body of a living vertebrate organism is highest in the respiratory system, and decreases along any arterial system, peripheral tissues, and venous system, respectively.
Partial pressure is the pressure that oxygen would have if it alone occupied the volume.
Build-up in the atmosphere
Free oxygen gas was almost nonexistent in Earth's atmosphere before photosynthetic archaea and bacteria evolved, probably about 3.5 billion years ago.
Free oxygen first appeared in significant quantities during the Paleoproterozoic eon (between 3.0 and 2.3 billion years ago).
Even if there was much dissolved iron in the oceans when oxygenic photosynthesis was getting more common, it appears the banded iron formations were created by anoxyenic or micro-aerophilic iron-oxidizing bacteria which dominated the deeper areas of the photic zone, while oxygen-producing cyanobacteria covered the shallows.
Free oxygen began to outgas from the oceans 3-2.7 billion years ago, reaching 10% of its present level around 1.7 billion years ago.
The presence of large amounts of dissolved and free oxygen in the oceans and atmosphere may have driven most of the extant anaerobic organisms to extinction during the Great Oxygenation Event (oxygen catastrophe) about 2.4 billion years ago.
Cellular respiration using enables aerobic organisms to produce much more ATP than anaerobic organisms.
Cellular respiration of occurs in all eukaryotes, including all complex multicellular organisms such as plants and animals.
Since the beginning of the Cambrian period 540 million years ago, atmospheric levels have fluctuated between 15% and 30% by volume.
Towards the end of the Carboniferous period (about 300 million years ago) atmospheric levels reached a maximum of 35% by volume,
Variations in atmospheric oxygen concentration have shaped past climates.
When oxygen declined, atmospheric density dropped, which in turn increased surface evaporation, causing precipitation increases and warmer temperatures.
At the current rate of photosynthesis it would take about 2,000 years to regenerate the entire in the present atmosphere.
Industrial production
One hundred million tonnes of are extracted from air for industrial uses annually by two primary methods.
Oxygen gas can also be produced through electrolysis of water into molecular oxygen and hydrogen.
DC electricity must be used: if AC is used, the gases in each limb consist of hydrogen and oxygen in the explosive ratio 2:1.
A similar method is the electrocatalytic evolution from oxides and oxoacids.
Chemical catalysts can be used as well, such as in chemical oxygen generators or oxygen candles that are used as part of the life-support equipment on submarines, and are still part of standard equipment on commercial airliners in case of depressurization emergencies.
Another air separation method is forcing air to dissolve through ceramic membranes based on zirconium dioxide by either high pressure or an electric current, to produce nearly pure gas.
Treatments are flexible enough to be used in hospitals, the patient's home, or increasingly by portable devices.
Oxygen tents were once commonly used in oxygen supplementation, but have since been replaced mostly by the use of oxygen masks or nasal cannulas.
Hyperbaric (high-pressure) medicine uses special oxygen chambers to increase the partial pressure of around the patient and, when needed, the medical staff.
Carbon monoxide poisoning, gas gangrene, and decompression sickness (the 'bends') are sometimes addressed with this therapy.
Increased concentration in the lungs helps to displace carbon monoxide from the heme group of hemoglobin.
Oxygen gas is poisonous to the anaerobic bacteria that cause gas gangrene, so increasing its partial pressure helps kill them.
Decompression sickness occurs in divers who decompress too quickly after a dive, resulting in bubbles of inert gas, mostly nitrogen and helium, forming in the blood.
Increasing the pressure of as soon as possible helps to redissolve the bubbles back into the blood so that these excess gasses can be exhaled naturally through the lungs.
Normobaric oxygen administration at the highest available concentration is frequently used as first aid for any diving injury that may involve inert gas bubble formation in the tissues.
There is epidemiological support for its use from a statistical study of cases recorded in a long term database.
Life support and recreational use
An application of as a low-pressure breathing gas is in modern space suits, which surround their occupant's body with the breathing gas.
These devices use nearly pure oxygen at about one-third normal pressure, resulting in a normal blood partial pressure of .
This trade-off of higher oxygen concentration for lower pressure is needed to maintain suit flexibility.
Scuba and surface-supplied underwater divers and submariners also rely on artificially delivered .
Submarines, submersibles and atmospheric diving suits usually operate at normal atmospheric pressure.
Breathing air is scrubbed of carbon dioxide by chemical extraction and oxygen is replaced to maintain a constant partial pressure.
Ambient pressure divers breathe air or gas mixtures with an oxygen fraction suited to the operating depth.
Pure or nearly pure use in diving at pressures higher than atmospheric is usually limited to rebreathers, or decompression at relatively shallow depths (~6 meters depth, or less), or medical treatment in recompression chambers at pressures up to 2.8 bar, where acute oxygen toxicity can be managed without the risk of drowning.
Deeper diving requires significant dilution of with other gases, such as nitrogen or helium, to prevent oxygen toxicity.
Pressurized commercial airplanes have an emergency supply of automatically supplied to the passengers in case of cabin depressurization.
Sudden cabin pressure loss activates chemical oxygen generators above each seat, causing oxygen masks to drop.
Pulling on the masks "to start the flow of oxygen" as cabin safety instructions dictate, forces iron filings into the sodium chlorate inside the canister.
Professional athletes, especially in American football, sometimes go off-field between plays to don oxygen masks to boost performance.
The pharmacological effect is doubted; a placebo effect is a more likely explanation.
Other recreational uses that do not involve breathing include pyrotechnic applications, such as George Goble's five-second ignition of barbecue grills.
Industrial
Smelting of iron ore into steel consumes 55% of commercially produced oxygen.
Compounds
The oxidation state of oxygen is −2 in almost all known compounds of oxygen.
The oxidation state −1 is found in a few compounds such as peroxides.
Compounds containing oxygen in other oxidation states are very uncommon: −1 3 (ozonides), 0 (elemental, hypofluorous acid), +1/2 (dioxygenyl), +1 (dioxygen difluoride), and +2 (oxygen difluoride).
Oxides and other inorganic compounds
Water () is an oxide of hydrogen and the most familiar oxygen compound.
Hydrogen atoms are covalently bonded to oxygen in a water molecule but also have an additional attraction (about 23.3 kJ/mol per hydrogen atom) to an adjacent oxygen atom in a separate molecule.
These hydrogen bonds between water molecules hold them approximately 15% closer than what would be expected in a simple liquid with just van der Waals forces.
Due to its electronegativity, oxygen forms chemical bonds with almost all other elements to give corresponding oxides.
The surface of most metals, such as aluminium and titanium, are oxidized in the presence of air and become coated with a thin film of oxide that passivates the metal and slows further corrosion.
Many oxides of the transition metals are non-stoichiometric compounds, with slightly less metal than the chemical formula would show.
For example, the mineral FeO (wüstite) is written as \ce_\ce, where x is usually around 0.05.
Oxygen is present in the atmosphere in trace quantities in the form of carbon dioxide ().
The Earth's crustal rock is composed in large part of oxides of silicon , aluminium (aluminium oxide , in bauxite and corundum), iron (iron (III) oxide , in hematite and rust), and calcium carbonate (in limestone).
The rest of the Earth's crust is also made of oxygen compounds, in particular various complex silicates (in silicate minerals).
The Earth's mantle, of much larger mass than the crust, is largely composed of silicates of magnesium and iron.
Water-soluble silicates in the form of , , and are used as detergents and adhesives.
Oxygen also acts as a ligand for transition metals, forming transition metal dioxygen complexes, which feature metal-.
This class of compounds includes the heme proteins hemoglobin and myoglobin.
An exotic and unusual reaction occurs with , which oxidizes oxygen to give O2+PtF6−, dioxygenyl hexafluoroplatinate.
Organic compounds
is an important feeder material in the chemical industry.
Among the most important classes of organic compounds that contain oxygen are (where "R" is an organic group): alcohols (R-OH); ethers (R-O-R); ketones (R-CO-R); aldehydes (R-CO-H); carboxylic acids (R-COOH); esters (R-COO-R); acid anhydrides (R-CO-O-CO-R); and amides ().
There are many important organic solvents that contain oxygen, including: acetone, methanol, ethanol, isopropanol, furan, THF, diethyl ether, dioxane, ethyl acetate, DMF, DMSO, acetic acid, and formic acid.
Acetone () and phenol () are used as feeder materials in the synthesis of many different substances.
Other important organic compounds that contain oxygen are: glycerol, formaldehyde, glutaraldehyde, citric acid, acetic anhydride, and acetamide.
Epoxides are ethers in which the oxygen atom is part of a ring of three atoms.
The element is similarly found in almost all biomolecules that are important to (or generated by) life.
Oxygen reacts spontaneously with many organic compounds at or below room temperature in a process called autoxidation.
Most of the organic compounds that contain oxygen are not made by direct action of .
Organic compounds important in industry and commerce that are made by direct oxidation of a precursor include ethylene oxide and peracetic acid.
Toxicity
Oxygen gas () can be toxic at elevated partial pressures, leading to convulsions and other health problems.
Oxygen toxicity usually begins to occur at partial pressures more than 50 kilopascals (kPa), equal to about 50% oxygen composition at standard pressure or 2.5 times the normal sea-level partial pressure of about 21 kPa.
This is not a problem except for patients on mechanical ventilators, since gas supplied through oxygen masks in medical applications is typically composed of only 30%-50% by volume (about 30 kPa at standard pressure).
In the case of spacesuits, the partial pressure in the breathing gas is, in general, about 30 kPa (1.4 times normal), and the resulting partial pressure in the astronaut's arterial blood is only marginally more than normal sea-level partial pressure.
Oxygen toxicity to the lungs and central nervous system can also occur in deep scuba diving and surface supplied diving.
Exposure to a partial pressures greater than 160 kPa (about 1.6 atm) may lead to convulsions (normally fatal for divers).
Acute oxygen toxicity (causing seizures, its most feared effect for divers) can occur by breathing an air mixture with 21% at or more of depth; the same thing can occur by breathing 100% at only .
Combustion and other hazards
Highly concentrated sources of oxygen promote rapid combustion.
Fire and explosion hazards exist when concentrated oxidants and fuels are brought into close proximity; an ignition event, such as heat or a spark, is needed to trigger combustion.
Oxygen is the oxidant, not the fuel, but nevertheless the source of most of the chemical energy released in combustion.
Liquid oxygen spills, if allowed to soak into organic matter, such as wood, petrochemicals, and asphalt can cause these materials to detonate unpredictably on subsequent mechanical impact.
* Hypoxia (environmental) for depletion in aquatic ecology
Notes
References
General references
