Donald John Trump (born June 14, 1946) is the 45th and current president of the United States.
Before entering politics, he was a businessman and television personality.
Trump was born and raised in the New York City borough of Queens, and received a B.S. degree in economics from the Wharton School at the University of Pennsylvania.
He took charge of his family's real-estate business in 1971, renamed it The Trump Organization, and expanded its operations from Queens and Brooklyn into Manhattan.
The company built or renovated skyscrapers, hotels, casinos, and golf courses.
In the 1980s and 1990s, following setbacks in several highly leveraged real estate ventures, Trump diversified into various side ventures, mostly by licensing his name.
He co-authored several books, including The Art of the Deal.
He owned the Miss Universe and Miss USA beauty pageants from 1996 to 2015, and produced and hosted The Apprentice, a reality television show, from 2003 to 2015.
Forbes estimates his net worth to be $3.1 billion.
Trump entered the 2016 presidential race as a Republican and defeated 16 other candidates in the primaries.
His political positions have been described as populist, protectionist, and nationalist.
He was elected in a surprise victory over Democratic nominee Hillary Clinton, although he lost the popular vote.
He became the oldest first-term U.S. president, and the first one without prior military or government service.
His election and policies have sparked numerous protests.
During his presidency, Trump ordered a travel ban on citizens from several Muslim-majority countries, citing security concerns; after legal challenges, the Supreme Court upheld the policy's third revision.
In 2011, he was given a weekly unpaid guest commentator spot on Fox & Friends that continued until he started his presidential candidacy in 2015.
Political career
Political activities up to 2015
Trump's political party affiliation has changed numerous times.
He registered as a Republican in Manhattan in 1987, He made donations to both the Democratic and the Republican parties, party committees, and candidates until 2010 when he stopped donating to Democrats and increased his donations to Republicans considerably.
In 1987, Trump spent $94,801 () to place full-page advertisements in three major newspapers, proclaiming "America should stop paying to defend countries that can afford to defend themselves."
The advertisements also advocated for "reducing the budget deficit, working for peace in Central America, and speeding up nuclear disarmament negotiations with the Soviet Union."
After rumors of a presidential run, Trump was invited by then U.S. senator John Kerry (Democrat from Massachusetts), House speaker Jim Wright of Texas, and Arkansas congressman Beryl Anthony Jr. to host a fundraising dinner for Democratic congressional candidates and to switch parties.
Anthony told The New York Times that "the message Trump has been preaching is a Democratic message."
Asked whether the rumors were true, Trump denied being a candidate, but said, "I believe that if I did run for President, I'd win."
A July 1999 poll matching him against likely Republican nominee George W. Bush and likely Democratic nominee Al Gore showed Trump with seven percent support.
Trump eventually dropped out of the race, but still went on to win the Reform Party primaries in California and Michigan.
After his run, he left the party due to the involvement of David Duke, Pat Buchanan, and Lenora Fulani.
He also considered running for president in 2004.
In 2005, Trump said he had voted for George W. Bush.
In 2008, he endorsed Republican John McCain for president.
2012 presidential speculation
Trump publicly speculated about running for president in the 2012 election, and made his first speaking appearance at the Conservative Political Action Conference (CPAC) in February 2011.
The speech is credited for helping kick-start his political career within the Republican Party.
On May 16, 2011, Trump announced he would not run for president in the 2012 election.
In February 2012, Trump endorsed Mitt Romney for president.
Trump's presidential ambitions were generally not taken seriously at the time.
Trump's moves were interpreted by some media as possible promotional tools for his reality show The Apprentice.
Before the 2016 election, The New York Times speculated that Trump "accelerated his ferocious efforts to gain stature within the political world" after Obama lampooned him at the White House Correspondents' Association Dinner in April 2011.
In 2011, according to Evan Jones, the headmaster of the New York Military Academy at the time, the then-superintendent Jeffrey Coverdale had demanded Trump's academic records, to hand them over to "prominent, wealthy alumni of the school who were Mr. Trump's friends" at their request.
Coverdale said he had refused to hand over Trump's records to trustees of the school, and instead sealed Trump's records on campus.
Jones stated: "It was the only time in my education career that I ever heard of someone's record being removed," while Coverdale further said: "It's the only time I ever moved an alumnus's records."
The incident reportedly happened days after Trump demanded President Barack Obama's academic records.
In 2013, Trump was a featured CPAC speaker.
In a sparsely-attended speech, he railed against illegal immigration while seeming to encourage immigration from Europe, bemoaned Obama's "unprecedented media protection", advised against harming Medicare, Medicaid, and Social Security, and suggested that the government "take" Iraq's oil and use the proceeds to pay a million dollars each to families of dead soldiers.
He spent over $1 million that year to research a possible 2016 candidacy.
In October 2013, New York Republicans circulated a memo suggesting Trump should run for governor of the state in 2014 against Andrew Cuomo.
Trump responded that while New York had problems and its taxes were too high, he was not interested in the governorship.
A February 2014 Quinnipiac poll had shown Trump losing to the more popular Cuomo by 37 points in a hypothetical election.
Trump's former personal lawyer Michael Cohen revealed during a congressional hearing that Trump had instructed him to threaten schools he attended not to release Trump's academic records, including Fordham University and the New York Military Academy.
Cohen provided copies of a May 2015 letter threatening Fordham University with civil and criminal actions if any were released without Trump's permission which Fordham University confirmed receiving.
A former dean of academics at the New York Military Academy, Mika Saarela, also acknowledged receiving a similar letter.
2016 presidential campaign
Republican primaries
On June 16, 2015, Trump announced his candidacy for President of the United States at Trump Tower in Manhattan.
In the speech, Trump discussed illegal immigration, offshoring of American jobs, the U.S. national debt, and Islamic terrorism, which all remained large priorities during the campaign.
He also announced his campaign slogan: "Make America Great Again".
Trump said his wealth would make him immune to pressure from campaign donors.
He declared that he was funding his own campaign, but according to The Atlantic, "Trump's claims of self-funding have always been dubious at best and actively misleading at worst."
In the primaries, Trump was one of seventeen candidates vying for the 2016 Republican nomination; this was the largest presidential field in American history.
Trump's campaign was initially not taken seriously by political analysts, but he quickly rose to the top of opinion polls.
On Super Tuesday, Trump won the plurality of the vote, and he remained the front-runner throughout the remainder of the primaries.
By March 2016, Trump was poised to win the Republican nomination.
After a landslide win in Indiana on May 3, 2016 which prompted the remaining candidates Cruz and John Kasich to suspend their presidential campaigns RNC chairman Reince Priebus declared Trump the presumptive Republican nominee.
General election campaign
After becoming the presumptive Republican nominee, Trump shifted his focus to the general election.
Trump began campaigning against Hillary Clinton, who became the presumptive Democratic nominee on June 6, 2016.
Clinton had established a significant lead over Trump in national polls throughout most of 2016.
In early July, Clinton's lead narrowed in national polling averages following the FBI's re-opening of its investigation into her ongoing email controversy.
On July 15, 2016, Trump announced his selection of Indiana governor Mike Pence as his running mate.
Four days later, the two were officially nominated by the Republican Party at the Republican National Convention.
The list of convention speakers and attendees included former presidential nominee Bob Dole, but the other prior nominees did not attend.
On September 26, 2016, Trump and Clinton faced off in their first presidential debate, which was held at Hofstra University in Hempstead, New York.
The second presidential debate was held at Washington University in Saint Louis, Missouri.
The beginning of that debate was dominated by references to a recently leaked tape of Trump making sexually explicit comments, which Trump countered by referring to alleged sexual misconduct on the part of Bill Clinton.
Prior to the debate, Trump had invited four women who had accused Bill Clinton of impropriety to a press conference.
The final presidential debate was held on October 19 at the University of Nevada, Las Vegas.
Trump's refusal to say whether he would accept the result of the election, regardless of the outcome, drew particular attention, with some saying it undermined democracy.
Political positions
Trump's campaign platform emphasized renegotiating U.S.-China relations and free trade agreements such as NAFTA and the Trans-Pacific Partnership, strongly enforcing immigration laws, and building a new wall along the U.S.-Mexico border.
His other campaign positions included pursuing energy independence while opposing climate change regulations such as the Clean Power Plan and the Paris Agreement, modernizing and expediting services for veterans, repealing and replacing the Affordable Care Act, abolishing Common Core education standards, investing in infrastructure, simplifying the tax code while reducing taxes for all economic classes, and imposing tariffs on imports by companies that offshore jobs.
During the campaign, he also advocated a largely non-interventionist approach to foreign policy while increasing military spending, extreme vetting or banning immigrants from Muslim-majority countries to pre-empt domestic Islamic terrorism, and aggressive military action against the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant.
During the campaign Trump repeatedly called NATO "obsolete".
His political positions have been described as populist, and some of his views cross party lines.
For example, his economic campaign plan calls for large reductions in income taxes and deregulation, consistent with Republican Party policies, along with significant infrastructure investment, usually considered a Democratic Party policy.
According to political writer Jack Shafer, Trump may be a "fairly conventional American populist when it comes to his policy views", but he attracts free media attention, sometimes by making outrageous comments.
Trump has supported or leaned toward varying political positions over time.
Politico has described his positions as "eclectic, improvisational and often contradictory",
Campaign rhetoric
In his campaign, Trump said he disdained political correctness; he also stated that the media had intentionally misinterpreted his words, and he made other claims of adverse media bias.
In part due to his fame, and due to his willingness to say things other candidates would not, and because a candidate who is gaining ground automatically provides a compelling news story, Trump received an unprecedented amount of free media coverage during his run for the presidency, which elevated his standing in the Republican primaries.
Fact-checking organizations have denounced Trump for making a record number of false statements compared to other candidates.
At least four major publications Politico, The Washington Post, The New York Times, and the Los Angeles Times have pointed out lies or falsehoods in his campaign statements, with the Los Angeles Times saying that "Never in modern presidential politics has a major candidate made false statements as routinely as Trump has".
NPR said Trump's campaign statements were often opaque or suggestive.
Trump's penchant for hyperbole is believed to have roots in the New York real estate scene, where Trump established his wealth and where puffery abounds.
During his presidential campaign, Trump was accused of pandering to white supremacists.
He retweeted open racists, and repeatedly refused to condemn David Duke, the Ku Klux Klan or white supremacists, in an interview on CNN's State of the Union, saying he would first need to "do research" because he knew nothing about Duke or white supremacists.
Duke himself enthusiastically supported Trump throughout the 2016 primary and election, and has stated that he and like-minded people voted for Trump because of his promises to "take our country back".
After repeated questioning by reporters, Trump said he disavowed David Duke and the KKK.
Trump said on MSNBC's Morning Joe: "I disavowed him.
I disavowed the KKK.
Do you want me to do it again for the 12th time?
I disavowed him in the past, I disavow him now."
due in part to its opposition to multiculturalism and immigration.
Members of the alt-right enthusiastically supported Trump's campaign.
In August 2016, he appointed Steve Bannon the executive chairman of Breitbart News as his campaign CEO; Bannon described Breitbart News as "the platform for the alt-right".
In an interview days after the election, Trump condemned supporters who celebrated his victory with Nazi salutes.
Financial disclosures
As a presidential candidate, Trump disclosed details of his companies, assets, and revenue sources to the extent required by the FEC.
His 2015 report listed assets above $1.4 billion and outstanding debts of at least $265 million.
The 2016 form showed little change.
He said his tax returns were being audited, and his lawyers had advised him against releasing them.
Trump has told the press his tax rate was none of their business, and that he tries to pay "as little tax as possible".
In October 2016, portions of Trump's state filings for 1995 were leaked to a reporter from The New York Times.
They show that Trump declared a loss of $916 million that year, which could have let him avoid taxes for up to 18 years.
During the second presidential debate, Trump acknowledged using the deduction, but declined to provide details such as the specific years it was applied.
On March 14, 2017, the first two pages of Trump's 2005 federal income tax returns were leaked to MSNBC.
The document states that Trump had a gross adjusted income of $150 million and paid $38 million in federal taxes.
The White House confirmed the authenticity of the documents.
On April 3, 2019, the House Ways and Means Committee made a formal request to the Internal Revenue Service for Trump's personal and business tax returns from 2013 to 2018, setting a deadline of April 10.
That day, Treasury secretary Steven Mnuchin stated the deadline would not be met, and the deadline was extended to April 23, which also was not honored, and on May 6 Mnuchin said the request would be denied.
On May 10, 2019, committee chairman Richard Neal subpoenaed the Treasury Department and the IRS for the returns and seven days later the subpoenas were defied.
A fall 2018 draft IRS legal memo asserted that Trump must provide his tax returns to Congress unless he invokes executive privilege, contradicting the administration's justification for defying the earlier subpoena.
Mnuchin asserted the memo actually addressed a different matter.
Election to the presidency
On November 8, 2016, Trump received 306 pledged electoral votes versus 232 for Clinton.
The official counts were 304 and 227 respectively, after defections on both sides.
Trump received a smaller share of the popular vote than Clinton, which made him the fifth person to be elected president while losing the popular vote.
Clinton was ahead nationwide by 2.1 percentage points, with 65,853,514 votes () to 62,984,828 votes (); neither candidate reached a majority.
Trump's victory was considered a stunning political upset by most observers, as polls had consistently showed Hillary Clinton with a nationwide though diminishing lead, as well as a favorable advantage in most of the competitive states.
Trump's support had been modestly underestimated throughout his campaign, and many observers blamed errors in polls, partially attributed to pollsters overestimating Clinton's support among well-educated and nonwhite voters, while underestimating Trump's support among white working-class voters.
The polls were relatively accurate, but media outlets and pundits alike showed overconfidence in a Clinton victory despite a large number of undecided voters and a favorable concentration of Trump's core constituencies in competitive states.
Trump won 30 states, including Michigan, Pennsylvania, and Wisconsin, which had been considered a blue wall of Democratic strongholds since the 1990s.
Clinton won 20 states and the District of Columbia.
Trump's victory marked the return of a Republican White House combined with control of both chambers of Congress.
Trump is the wealthiest president in U.S. history, even after adjusting for inflation, and the oldest person to take office as president.
He is also the first president who did not serve in the military or hold elective or appointed government office prior to being elected.
Of the 43 previous presidents, 38 had held prior elective office, two had not held elective office but had served in the Cabinet, and three had never held public office but had been commanding generals.
Trump's election victory sparked protests across the United States, in opposition to his policies and his inflammatory statements.
Trump initially said on Twitter that these were "professional protesters, incited by the media", and were "unfair", but he later tweeted, "Love the fact that the small groups of protesters last night have passion for our great country."
In the weeks following Trump's inauguration, massive anti-Trump demonstrations took place, such as the Women Marches, which gathered 2,600,000 people worldwide, including 500,000 in Washington alone.
Moreover, marches against his travel ban began across the country on January 29, 2017, just nine days after his inauguration.
2020 presidential campaign
Trump signaled his intention to run for a second term by filing with the FEC within hours of assuming the presidency.
This transformed his 2016 election committee into a 2020 reelection one.
Trump marked the official start of the campaign with a rally in Melbourne, Florida, on February 18, 2017, less than a month after taking office.
By January 2018, Trump's reelection committee had $22 million in hand, and it had raised a total amount exceeding $67 million .
$23 million were spent in the fourth quarter of 2018, as Trump supported various Republican candidates for the 2018 midterm elections.
Presidency
Early actions
Trump was inaugurated as the 45th president of the United States on January 20, 2017.
During his first week in office, he signed six executive orders: interim procedures in anticipation of repealing the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (Obamacare), withdrawal from the Trans-Pacific Partnership negotiations, reinstatement of the Mexico City Policy, unlocking the Keystone XL and Dakota Access Pipeline construction projects, reinforcing border security, and beginning the planning and design process to construct a wall along the U.S. border with Mexico.
Upon inauguration, Trump delegated the management of his real estate business to his sons Eric and Don Jr.
His daughter Ivanka resigned from the Trump Organization and moved to Washington, D.C., with her husband Jared Kushner.
She serves as an assistant to the President, and he is a Senior Advisor in the White House.
On January 31, Trump nominated U.S. Appeals Court judge Neil Gorsuch to fill the seat on the Supreme Court previous held by Justice Antonin Scalia until his death on February 13, 2016.
Domestic policy
Economy and trade
The economic expansion that began in June 2009 continued through Trump's first three years in office.
Throughout his presidency, he has repeatedly and falsely characterized the economy as the best in American history.
In December 2017, Trump signed the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act of 2017, which cut the corporate tax rate to 21 percent, lowered personal tax brackets, increased child tax credit, doubled the estate tax exemption to $11.2 million, and limited the state and local tax deduction to $10,000.
Trump is a skeptic of multilateral trade deals, as he believes they indirectly incentivize unfair trade practices that then tend to go unpoliced.
He favors bilateral trade deals, as they allow one party to pull out if the other party is believed to be behaving unfairly.
Trump favors neutral or positive balances of trade over negative balances of trade, also known as a "trade deficit".
Trump adopted his current skeptical views toward trade liberalization in the 1980s, and he sharply criticized NAFTA during the Republican primary campaign in 2015.
He withdrew the U.S. from the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) negotiations, imposed tariffs on steel and aluminum imports, and launched a trade war with China by sharply increasing tariffs on 818 categories (worth $50 billion) of Chinese goods imported into the U.S.
On several occasions, Trump has said incorrectly that these import tariffs are paid by China into the U.S. Treasury.
Energy and climate
Trump rejects the scientific consensus on climate change.
Since his election Trump has made large budget cuts to programs that research renewable energy and has rolled back Obama-era policies directed at curbing climate change and limiting environmental pollution.
In June 2017, Trump announced the withdrawal of the United States from the Paris Agreement, making the U.S. the only nation in the world to not ratify the agreement.
Trump attended the 44th G7 summit held in Canada in 2018 and the 45th G7 summit held in France in 2019, but he skipped the discussions related to the environment and climate.
He held a press conference following the 2019 summit in which he said that he is "an environmentalist" adding, "I think I know more about the environment than most people."
Government size and deregulation
Trump's early policies have favored rollback and dismantling of government regulations.
He signed a Congressional Review Act disapproval resolution, the first in 16 years and second overall.
During his first six weeks in office, he delayed, suspended or reversed ninety federal regulations.
On January 23, 2017, Trump ordered a temporary government-wide hiring freeze, except for those working in certain areas.
Unlike some past freezes, it barred agencies from adding contractors to make up for employees leaving.
The hiring freeze was lifted in April 2017.
A week later Trump signed Executive Order 13771, which directed administrative agencies to repeal two existing regulations for every new regulation they issue.
Agency defenders expressed opposition to Trump's criticisms, saying the bureaucracy exists to protect people against well-organized, well-funded interest groups.
Health care
During his campaign, Trump repeatedly vowed to repeal and replace Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (ACA or "Obamacare").
Shortly after taking office, he urged Congress to repeal and replace it.
In May of that year, the House of Representatives voted to repeal it.
Over the course of several months' effort, however, the Senate was unable to pass any version of a repeal bill.
Trump has expressed a desire to "let Obamacare fail", and the Trump administration has cut the ACA enrollment period in half and drastically reduced funding for advertising and other ways to encourage enrollment.
The tax reform Trump signed into law at the end of his first year in office effectively repealed the individual health insurance mandate that was a major element of the Obamacare health insurance system; this repeal is scheduled to be implemented in 2019.
Social issues
Trump favored modifying the 2016 Republican platform opposing abortion, to allow for exceptions in cases of rape, incest, and circumstances endangering the health of the mother.
He has said he is committed to appointing pro-life justices.
but considers the nationwide legality of same-sex marriage a "settled" issue.
Despite the statement by Trump and the White House saying they would keep in place a 2014 executive order from the Obama administration which created federal workplace protections for LGBT people, in March 2017, the Trump administration rolled back key components of the Obama administration's workplace protections for LGBT people.
Trump supports a broad interpretation of the Second Amendment and says he is opposed to gun control in general, although his views have shifted over time.
Trump opposes legalizing recreational marijuana but supports legalizing medical marijuana.
He favors capital punishment, as well as the use of waterboarding and "a hell of a lot worse" methods.
Immigration
Trump's proposed immigration policies were a topic of bitter and contentious debate during the campaign.
He promised to build a more substantial wall on the Mexico-United States border to keep out illegal immigrants and vowed that Mexico would pay for it.
He pledged to massively deport illegal immigrants residing in the United States, and criticized birthright citizenship for creating "anchor babies".
He said deportation would focus on criminals, visa overstays, and security threats.
As president, he frequently described illegal immigration as an "invasion" and conflated immigrants with the gang MS-13, even though research shows undocumented immigrants have a lower crime rate than native-born Americans.
Travel ban
Following the November 2015 Paris attacks, Trump made a controversial proposal to ban Muslim foreigners from entering the United States until stronger vetting systems could be implemented.
He later reframed the proposed ban to apply to countries with a "proven history of terrorism".
On January 27, 2017, Trump signed Executive Order 13769, which suspended admission of refugees for 120 days and denied entry to citizens of Iraq, Iran, Libya, Somalia, Sudan, Syria, and Yemen for 90 days, citing security concerns.
The order was imposed without warning and took effect immediately.
Confusion and protests caused chaos at airports.
Sally Yates, the acting Attorney General, directed Justice Department lawyers not to defend the executive order, which she deemed unenforceable and unconstitutional; Trump immediately dismissed her.
Multiple legal challenges were filed against the order, and on February 5 a federal judge in Seattle blocked its implementation nationwide.
On March 6, Trump issued a revised order, which excluded Iraq, gave specific exemptions for permanent residents, and removed priorities for Christian minorities.
On June 26, 2017, the Supreme Court ruled that the ban could be enforced on visitors who lack a "credible claim of a bona fide relationship with a person or entity in the United States".
The temporary order was replaced by Presidential Proclamation 9645 on September 24, 2017, which permanently restricts travel from the originally targeted countries except Iraq and Sudan, and further bans travelers from North Korea and Chad, along with certain Venezuelan officials.
After lower courts partially blocked the new restrictions, the Supreme Court allowed the September version to go into full effect on December 4, and ultimately upheld the travel ban in a June 2019 ruling.
DACA
In September 2017, Attorney General Jeff Sessions announced that DACA would be repealed after six months.
Trump argued that "top legal experts" believed DACA was unconstitutional, and called on Congress to use the six-month delay to pass legislation solving the "Dreamers" issue permanently.
, when the delay expired, no legislation had been agreed on DACA.
Several states immediately challenged the DACA rescission in court.
Two injunctions in January and February 2018 allowed renewals of applications and stopped the rolling back of DACA, and in April 2018 a federal judge ordered the acceptance of new applications.
In August 2018, United States District Judge Andrew Hanen of the United States District Court for the Southern District of Texas ruled that DACA is likely unconstitutional, but left the program in place as litigation proceeds.
Family separation at border
In April 2018, Trump enacted a "zero tolerance" immigration policy that temporarily took adults irregularly entering the U.S. into custody for criminal prosecution and forcibly separated children from parents, eliminating the policy of previous administrations, which had made exceptions for families with children.
By mid-June, more than 2,300 children had been placed in shelters, including Department of Health and Human Services-designated "tender age" shelters for children under thirteen, culminating in demands from Democrats, Republicans, Trump allies, and religious groups that the policy be rescinded.
Trump falsely asserted that his administration was merely following the law.
On June 20, Trump signed an executive order to end family separations at the U.S. border.
On June 26 a federal judge in San Diego issued a preliminary injunction requiring the Trump administration to stop detaining immigrant parents separately from their minor children, and to reunite family groups who had been separated at the border.
2018-2019 federal government shutdown
On December 22, 2018, the federal government was partially shut down after Trump declared that any funding extension must include $5.6 billion in federal funds for a U.S.-Mexico border wall to partly fulfill his campaign promise.
The shutdown was caused by a lapse in funding for nine federal departments, affecting about one-fourth of federal government activities.
Trump said he would not accept any bill that does not include funding for the wall, and Democrats, who control the House, said they would not support any bill that does.
Senate Republicans have said they will not advance any legislation that Trump would not sign.
In earlier negotiations with Democratic leaders, Trump commented that he would be "proud to shut down the government for border security".
Foreign policy
Trump has been described as a non-interventionist and as an American nationalist.
In 2019, Trump gave a speech at the UN General Assembly calling for world leaders to look after their own interests.
He has repeatedly said he supports an "America First" foreign policy.
He supports increasing United States military defense spending, He says America should look inward, stop "nation building", and re-orient its resources toward domestic needs.
Trump has cited China's president Xi Jinping, Philippines president Rodrigo Duterte, Egyptian president Abdel Fattah el-Sisi, Turkey's president Tayyip Erdoğan, King Salman of Saudi Arabia, Italy's prime minister Giuseppe Conte, Brazil's president Jair Bolsonaro and Hungarian prime minister Viktor Orbán as examples of good leaders.
Trump has also praised Poland under the EU-skeptic, anti-immigrant Law and Justice party (PiS) as a defender of Western civilization.
ISIS and foreign wars
In April 2017, Trump ordered a missile strike against a Syrian airfield in retaliation for the Khan Shaykhun chemical attack.
According to investigative journalist Bob Woodward, Trump had ordered his defense secretary James Mattis to assassinate Syrian president Bashar al-Assad after the chemical attack, but Mattis declined; Trump denied doing so.
In April 2018, he announced missile strikes against Assad's regime, following a suspected chemical attack near Damascus.
In December 2018, Trump declared "we have won against ISIS," and ordered the withdrawal of all troops from Syria, contradicting Department of Defense assessments.
Mattis resigned the next day over disagreements in foreign policy, calling this decision an abandonment of Kurd allies who had played a key role in fighting ISIS.
One week after his announcement, Trump said he would not approve any extension of the American deployment in Syria.
On January 6, 2019, national security advisor John Bolton announced America would remain in Syria until ISIS is eradicated and Turkey guaranteed it would not strike America's Kurdish allies.
Trump actively supported the Saudi Arabian-led intervention in Yemen against the Houthis and signed a $110 billion agreement to sell arms to Saudi Arabia.
Trump also praised his relationship with Saudi Arabia's powerful Crown Prince Mohammad bin Salman.
reversing Trump's pre-election position critical of further involvement in Afghanistan.
U.S. officials said then that they aimed to "force the Taliban to negotiate a political settlement"; in January 2018, however, Trump spoke against talks with the Taliban.
In October 2019, after Trump spoke to Turkish president Tayyip Erdoğan, the White House acknowledged that Turkey would be carrying out a planned military offensive into northern Syria; as such, U.S. troops in northern Syria were withdrawn from the area to avoid interference with that operation.
The statement also passed responsibility for the area's captured ISIS fighters to Turkey.
In the following days, Trump suggested that the Kurds intentionally released ISIS prisoners in order to gain sympathy, suggested that they were only fighting for their own financial interests, suggested that some of them were worse than ISIS, and termed them "no angels".
Congress members of both parties denounced the move, including Republican allies of Trump such as Senator Lindsey Graham.
They argued that the move betrayed the American-allied Kurds, and would benefit ISIS, Turkey, Russia, Iran, and Bashar al-Assad's Syrian regime.
Trump defended the move, citing the high cost of supporting the Kurds, and the lack of support from the Kurds in past U.S. wars.
After the U.S. pullout, Turkey proceeded to attack Kurdish-controlled areas in northeastern Syria.
On October 16, the United States House of Representatives, in a rare bipartisan vote of 354 to 60, "condemned" Trump's withdrawal of U.S. troops from Syria, for, in the view of both parties, "abandoning U.S. allies, undermining the struggle against ISIS, and spurring a humanitarian catastrophe".
From 2011, a reward of $10 million was offered for Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi by the U.S. State Department, increasing to $25 million in 2017, for information or intelligence on his whereabouts to enable capture, dead or alive.
On October 27, 2019, he killed himself and three children by detonating a suicide vest during the Barisha raid conducted by the U.S. Delta Force in Syria's northwestern Idlib Province, according to a statement by Trump.
Iran
Trump has described the regime in Iran as "the rogue regime".
He has repeatedly criticized the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA or "Iran nuclear deal") that was negotiated with the United States, Iran, and five other world powers in 2015, calling it "terrible" and saying the Obama administration had negotiated the agreement "from desperation".
Following Iran's ballistic missile tests on January 29, 2017, the Trump administration imposed sanctions on 25 Iranian individuals and entities in February 2017.
Trump reportedly lobbied "dozens" of European officials against doing business with Iran during the May 2017 Brussels summit; this likely violated the terms of the JCPOA, under which the U.S. may not pursue "any policy specifically intended to directly and adversely affect the normalization of trade and economic relations with Iran".
The Trump administration certified in July 2017 that Iran had upheld its end of the agreement.
On August 2, 2017, Trump signed into law the Countering America's Adversaries Through Sanctions Act (CAATSA) that grouped together sanctions against Iran, Russia, and North Korea.
On May 18, 2018, Trump announced the unilateral departure of the U.S. from the JCPOA.
In May 2017, strained relations between the U.S. and Iran escalated when Trump deployed military bombers and a carrier group to the Persian Gulf.
Trump hinted at war on social media, provoking a response from Iran for what Iranian foreign minister Javad Zarif called "genocidal taunts".
Trump and Saudi Crown Prince Mohammad bin Salman are allies in the conflict with Iran.
Trump has approved the deployment of additional U.S. troops to Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates following the attack on Saudi oil facilities which the United States has blamed on Iran.
Israel
Trump has supported the policies of Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu.
On May 22, 2017, he was the first U.S. president to visit the Western Wall in Jerusalem, during his first foreign trip.
Trump officially recognized Jerusalem as the capital of Israel on December 6, 2017, despite criticism and warnings from world leaders.
He subsequently opened a new U.S. embassy in Jerusalem in May 2018.
The United Nations General Assembly condemned the move, adopting a resolution that "calls upon all States to refrain from the establishment of diplomatic missions in the Holy City of Jerusalem".
In March 2019, Trump reversed decades of U.S. policy by recognizing Israel's annexation of the Golan Heights, a move condemned by the European Union and Arab League.
China
Before and during his presidency, Trump has repeatedly accused China of taking unfair advantage of the U.S.
During his presidency, Trump has launched a trade war against China, sanctioned Huawei for its alleged ties to Iran, significantly increased visa restrictions on Chinese nationality students and scholars and classified China as a "currency manipulator".
In the wake of the significant deterioration of relations, many political observers have warned against a new cold war between China and the U.S.
North Korea
Nuclear and missile tests conducted by North Korea in 2017 indicated that its nuclear weapons were a serious threat to the United States.
In August, Trump dramatically escalated his rhetoric against North Korea, warning that further provocation against the U.S. would be met with "fire and fury like the world has never seen".
In response, North Korean leader Kim Jong-un threatened to direct the country's next missile test toward Guam.
On June 12, 2018, Trump and Kim held their first summit in Singapore, resulting in North Korea affirming its April 2018 promise to South Korea to work toward complete denuclearization.
Six months later, North Korea said they would not cease their nuclear weapons program until the U.S. removed its nuclear threat from the Korean peninsula and the surrounding areas.
A second summit took place in February 2019, in Hanoi, Vietnam.
It ended abruptly without an agreement, both sides blaming each other and offering differing accounts of the negotiations.
On June 30, 2019, Trump and Kim held brief talks at the Korean Demilitarized Zone (DMZ), along with South Korean president Moon Jae-in, marking the first time a sitting U.S. president had set foot on North Korean soil.
They agreed to resume negotiations "in the coming weeks".
On October 6, 2019, the North Korean Foreign Ministry announced that it was withdrawing from negotiations calling them sickening and stating theat "The U.S. has actually not made any preparations for the negotiations but sought to meet its political goal of abusing the D.P.R.K.-U.S. dialogue for its domestic political interests".
Russia
During his campaign and as president, Trump repeatedly said he wants better relations with Russia, and he has praised Russian president Vladimir Putin as a strong leader.
He also said Russia could help the U.S. in its fight against ISIS.
According to Putin and some political experts and diplomats, the U.S.-Russian relations, which were already at the lowest level since the end of the Cold War, have further deteriorated since Trump took office in January 2017.
After Trump met Putin at the Helsinki Summit on July 16, 2018, Trump drew bipartisan criticism for siding with Putin's denial of Russian interference in the 2016 presidential election, rather than accepting the findings of the United States intelligence community.
Trump has made both pro- and anti-Russia statements regarding Crimea, Syria, Ukraine, North Korea, Venezuela, election meddling, and Skripal poisoning.
Trump also said U.S. oil companies, including Exxon Mobil, cannot resume oil drilling in Russia.
Cuba
In November 2017, the Trump administration tightened the rules on trade with Cuba and individual visits to the county, undoing the Obama administration's loosening of restrictions.
According to an administration official, the new rules were intended to hinder trade with businesses with ties to the Cuban military, intelligence and security services.
Venezuela
On August 11, 2017, Trump said he is "not going to rule out a military option" to confront the government of Nicolás Maduro.
In September 2018, Trump called "for the restoration of democracy in Venezuela" and said that "socialism has bankrupted the oil-rich nation and driven its people into abject poverty."
On January 23, 2019, Maduro announced that Venezuela was breaking ties with the United States following Trump's announcement of recognizing Juan Guaidó, the Venezuelan opposition leader, as the interim president of Venezuela.
NATO
As a candidate, Trump questioned whether he, as president, would automatically extend security guarantees to NATO members, and suggested that he might leave NATO unless changes are made to the alliance.
As president, he reaffirmed the U.S. commitment to NATO in March 2017.
However, he has repeatedly accused fellow NATO members of paying less than their fair share of the expenses of the alliance.
In January 2019, The New York Times quoted senior administration officials as saying Trump has privately suggested on multiple occasions that the United States should withdraw from NATO.
The next day Trump said the United States is going to "be with NATO one hundred percent" but repeated that the other countries have to "step up" and pay more.
Personnel
The Trump administration has been characterized by high turnover, particularly among White House staff.
By the end of Trump's first year in office, 34 percent of his original staff had resigned, been fired, or been reassigned.
, 61 percent of Trump's senior aides had left and 141 staffers had left in the past year.
Both figures set a record for recent presidents more change in the first 13 months than his four immediate predecessors saw in their first two years.
Notable early departures included National Security Advisor Mike Flynn (after just 25 days in office), Chief of Staff Reince Priebus, replaced by retired Marine general John F. Kelly on July 28, 2017, and Press Secretary Sean Spicer.
financier Steve Mnuchin as Secretary of the Treasury, retired Marine Corps general James Mattis as Secretary of Defense, and ExxonMobil CEO Rex Tillerson as Secretary of State.
Trump also brought on board politicians who had opposed him during the presidential campaign, such as neurosurgeon Ben Carson as Secretary of Housing and Urban Development, and South Carolina governor Nikki Haley as Ambassador to the United Nations.
Two of Trump's 15 original cabinet members were gone within 15 months: Health and Human Services Secretary Tom Price was forced to resign in September 2017 due to excessive use of private charter jets and military aircraft, and Trump replaced Secretary of State Rex Tillerson with Mike Pompeo in March 2018 over disagreements on foreign policy.
EPA Administrator Scott Pruitt resigned in July 2018 amidst multiple investigations into his conduct, while Interior Secretary Ryan Zinke resigned five months later as he also faced multiple investigations.
Trump has been slow to appoint second-tier officials in the executive branch, saying that many of the positions are unnecessary.
, there were hundreds of sub-cabinet positions without a nominee.
By January 8, 2019, of 706 key positions, 433 had been filled (61%) and Trump had no nominee for 264 (37%).
Dismissal of James Comey
On May 9, 2017, Trump dismissed FBI director James Comey.
He first attributed this action to recommendations from Attorney General Jeff Sessions and Deputy AG Rod Rosenstein, which criticized Comey's conduct in the investigation about Hillary Clinton's emails.
On May 11, Trump said he was concerned with the ongoing "Russia thing" and that he had intended to fire Comey earlier, regardless of DOJ advice.
According to a Comey memo of a private conversation on February 14, 2017, Trump said he "hoped" Comey would drop the investigation into Michael Flynn.
In March and April, Trump had told Comey the ongoing suspicions formed a "cloud" impairing his presidency, and asked him to publicly state that he was not personally under investigation.
He also asked intelligence chiefs Dan Coats and Michael Rogers to issue statements saying there was no evidence that his campaign colluded with Russia during the 2016 election.
Both refused, considering this an inappropriate request, although not illegal.
Comey eventually testified on June 8 that while he was director, the FBI investigations did not target Trump himself.
Public profile
Approval ratings
Presidential approval polls taken during the first ten months of Trump's term have shown him to be the least popular U.S. president in the history of modern opinion polls.
A Pew Research Center global poll conducted in July 2017, found "a median of just 22 percent has confidence in Trump to do the right thing when it comes to international affairs".
This compares to a median of 64 percent rate of confidence for his predecessor Barack Obama.
Trump received a higher rating in only two countries: Russia and Israel.
An August 2017 Politico/Morning Consult poll found on some measures "that majorities of voters have low opinions of his character and competence".
By December 2018, Trump's approval ratings, averaged over many polls, stood at roughly 42%, two points below Obama's at the same time in his presidency, and one point above Ronald Reagan's.
Trump's two-year average Gallup approval rating was the lowest of any president since World War II.
Trump is the only elected president who did not place first on Gallup's poll of Americans' most admired men in his first year in office, coming in second behind Obama.
The Gallup poll near the end of Trump's second year in office named him the second most admired man in America behind Obama for the fourth consecutive year.
The statements have been documented by fact-checkers; academics and the media have widely described the phenomenon as unprecedented in American politics.
This trait of his was similarly observed when he was a presidential candidate.
His falsehoods have also become a distinctive part of his political identity.
By the Posts tally, it took Trump 601 days to reach 5,000 false or misleading statements and another 226 days to reach the 10,000 mark.
For the seven weeks leading up to the midterm elections, it rose to an average of thirty per day from 4.9 during his first hundred days in office.
The Posts reported tally is 13,435 as of October 9, 2019.
Racial views
Trump has made numerous comments and taken certain actions that have been characterized as racially charged or racist, both by those within the U.S. and by those abroad.
Trump has repeatedly denied he is a racist.
Many of his supporters say the way he speaks reflects his general rejection of political correctness, while others accept it simply because they share such beliefs.
Several studies and surveys have found that racist attitudes fueled Trump's political ascendance and have been more important than economic factors in determining the allegiance of Trump voters.
In a June 2018 Quinnipiac University poll, 49 percent of respondents believed he was racist, while 47 percent believed he was not.
Additionally, 55 percent said he "has emboldened people who hold racist beliefs to express those beliefs publicly".
Trump has asserted "I am the least racist person there is anywhere in the world."
In 1975, he settled a 1973 Department of Justice lawsuit that alleged housing discrimination against black renters.
He has also been accused of racism for insisting a group of black and Latino teenagers were guilty of raping a white woman in the 1989 Central Park jogger case, even after they were exonerated by DNA evidence in 2002.
He maintained his position on the matter into 2019.
Trump launched his political career in 2011 as a leading proponent of "birther" conspiracy theories alleging that Barack Obama, the first black U.S. president, was born in Kenya.
In April 2011, Trump claimed credit for pushing the White House to publish the "long-form" birth certificate, which he considered fraudulent, and later stated that his stance had made him "very popular".
In September 2016, he acknowledged that Obama was born in the U.S.
According to an analysis in Political Science Quarterly, Trump made "explicitly racist appeals to whites" during his 2016 presidential campaign.
In particular, his campaign launch speech drew widespread criticism for saying Mexican immigrants were "bringing drugs, they're bringing crime, they're rapists".
His later comments about a Mexican-American judge presiding over a civil suit regarding Trump University were also criticized as racist.
Trump's comments in reaction to the 2017 Charlottesville far-right rally were interpreted as implying a moral equivalence between white supremacist marchers and counter-protesters.
In a January 2018 Oval Office meeting to discuss immigration legislation, he reportedly referred to El Salvador, Haiti, Honduras, and African nations as "shithole countries".
His remarks were condemned as racist worldwide, as well as by many members of Congress.
In July 2019, Trump tweeted that four Democratic members of Congress all of whom are women of color and three of whom are native-born Americans should "go back" to the countries they came from.
Two days later the House of Representatives voted 240-187, mostly along party lines, to condemn his "racist comments".
White nationalist publications and social media sites praised his remarks, which continued over the following days.
Allegations of sexual misconduct
Twenty-two women have publicly accused Trump of sexual misconduct .
There were allegations of rape, violence, being kissed and groped without consent, looking under women's skirts, and walking in on naked women.
In 2016, he denied all accusations, calling them "false smears", and alleged there was a conspiracy against him.
In October 2016, two days before the second presidential debate, a 2005 recording surfaced in which Trump was recorded bragging about forcibly kissing and groping women.
The hot mic recording was captured on a studio bus in which Trump and Billy Bush were preparing to film an episode of Access Hollywood.
In the tape, Trump said: "I just start kissing them ...
I don't even wait.
And when you're a star, they let you do it, you can do anything ... grab 'em by the pussy."
During the recording, Trump also spoke of his efforts to seduce a married woman, saying he "moved on her very heavily".
and caused outrage across the political spectrum, resulting in a group of GOP senators and representatives withdrawing their support for his candidacy, some requesting that he step aside.
In addition to the two women who had previously alleged sexual misconduct against Trump, fifteen more came forward in 2016, during the aftermath of the tape's release with new accusations of sexual misconduct, including unwanted kissing and groping.
Trump publicly apologized for his inappropriate boasting on the tape but also defended it as "locker room talk", and instead deflected his actions by asserting allegations of inappropriate behavior by Bill and Hillary Clinton.
Allegations of inciting violence
Some research suggests Trump's rhetoric causes an increased incidence of hate crimes.
During the 2016 campaign, he sometimes urged or praised physical attacks against protesters or reporters.
Since then, some individuals or their attorneys have cited Trump's rhetoric as a defense for their hate speech or violent actions.
In August 2019 it was reported that a man who allegedly assaulted a minor for perceived disrespect toward the national anthem had cited Trump's rhetoric in his own defense.
It was also reported in August 2019 that a nationwide review conducted by ABC News had identified at least 36 criminal cases where Trump was invoked in direct connection with violence or threats of violence.
Of these, 29 were based around someone echoing presidential rhetoric, while the other seven were someone protesting it or not having direct linkage.
Relationship with the press
Throughout his career, Trump has sought media attention.
His interactions with the press turned into what some sources called a "love-hate" relationship.
Trump began promoting himself in the press in the 1970s.
Fox News anchor Bret Baier and former House speaker Paul Ryan have characterized Trump as a "troll" who makes controversial statements to see people's "heads explode".
Throughout his 2016 presidential campaign and his presidency, Trump has repeatedly accused the press of intentionally misinterpreting his words and of being biased, calling them "fake news media" and "the enemy of the people".
In the campaign, Trump benefited from a record amount of free media coverage, elevating his standing in the Republican primaries.
Chozick quoted Brent Montgomery, the creator of the reality TV show Pawn Stars, saying "Part of what he's doing that makes it feel like a reality show is that he is feeding you something every night.
You can't afford to miss one episode or you're left behind."
Into his presidency, Trump has described negative media coverage as "fake news".
Trump has privately and publicly mused about taking away critical reporters' White House press credentials.
In 2019, a member of the foreign press reported many of the same concerns as those of media in the U.S., expressing concern that a normalization process by reporters and media results in an inaccurate characterization of Trump.
Popular culture
Trump has been the subject of comedians, Flash cartoon artists, and online caricature artists.
He has been parodied regularly on Saturday Night Live by Phil Hartman, Darrell Hammond, and Alec Baldwin, and in South Park as Mr. Garrison.
The Simpsons episode "Bart to the Future", written during his 2000 campaign for the Reform party, anticipated a future Trump presidency.
A dedicated parody series called The President Show debuted in April 2017 on Comedy Central, while another one called Our Cartoon President debuted on Showtime in February 2018.
Trump's wealth and lifestyle had been a fixture of hip-hop lyrics since the 1980s, as he was named in hundreds of songs, most often in a positive tone.
Mentions of Trump turned negative and pejorative after he ran for office in 2015.
Social media
Trump's presence on social media has attracted attention worldwide since he joined Twitter in March 2009.
He communicated heavily on Twitter during the 2016 election campaign, and has continued to use this channel during his presidency.
The attention on Trump's Twitter activity has significantly increased since he was sworn in as president.
As of May 2019, he is in the top 15 for most Twitter followers at over 60 million.
Trump has frequently used Twitter as a direct means of communication with the public, sidelining the press.
Many of the assertions he tweeted have been proven false.
Recognition
In 1983, Trump received the Jewish National Fund Tree of Life Award, after he helped fund the building of two playgrounds, a park, and a reservoir in Israel.
In 1986, he received the Ellis Island Medal of Honor in recognition of "patriotism, tolerance, brotherhood and diversity", and in 1995 was awarded the President's Medal from the Freedoms Foundation for his support of youth programs.
He received a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame in 2007, and was indicted in the WWE Hall of Fame in 2013.
Liberty University awarded Trump an honorary Doctorate of Business in 2012 and an honorary Doctor of Laws in 2017, during his first college commencement speech as president.
In 2015, Robert Gordon University revoked the honorary Doctor of Business Administration (DBA) they had granted him in 2010, stating that "Mr. Trump has made a number of statements that are wholly incompatible with the ethos and values of the university."
In December 2016, Time named Trump as its "Person of the Year", but Trump took issue with the magazine for referring to him as the "President of the Divided States of America".
In the same month, he was named Financial Times Person of the Year and was ranked by Forbes the second most powerful person in the world after Vladimir Putin.
As president, Trump received the Collar of The Order of Abdulaziz al Saud from Saudi Arabia in 2017.
Investigations
The Crossfire Hurricane FBI investigation into possible links between Russia and the Trump campaign was launched in mid-2016 during the campaign season.
Since he assumed the presidency, Trump has been the subject of increasing Justice Department and congressional scrutiny, with investigations covering his election campaign, transition and inauguration, actions taken during his presidency, along with his private businesses, personal taxes, and charitable foundation.
The New York Times reported in May 2019 that there were 29 open investigations of Trump, including ten federal criminal investigations, eight state and local investigations, and eleven Congressional investigations.
Hush payments
American Media Inc (AMI) paid $150,000 to Playboy model Karen McDougal in August 2016, and Trump's attorney Michael Cohen paid $130,000 to adult film actress Stormy Daniels in October 2016.
Both women were paid for non-disclosure agreements regarding their alleged affairs with Trump between 2006 and 2007.
Cohen pleaded guilty in 2018 to breaking campaign finance laws, stating that he had arranged the payments at the direction of Trump in order to influence the presidential election.
AMI admitted paying McDougal to prevent publication of stories that might damage Trump's electoral chances.
Trump denied the affairs, and claimed he was not aware of Cohen's payment to Daniels, but reimbursed him in 2017.
Federal prosecutors asserted that Trump had been involved in discussions regarding non-disclosure payments as early as 2014.
Court documents showed that the FBI believed Trump was directly involved in the payment to Daniels, based on calls he had with Cohen in October 2016.
The closure of the federal investigation into the matter was announced in July 2019, but days later the Manhattan District Attorney subpoenaed the Trump Organization and AMI for records related to the hush payments and in August subpoenaed eight years of tax returns for Trump and the Trump Organization.
Russian interference
In January 2017, American intelligence agencies the CIA, the FBI, and the NSA, represented by the Director of National Intelligence jointly stated with "high confidence" that the Russian government interfered in the 2016 presidential election to favor the election of Trump.
In March 2017, FBI Director James Comey told Congress that "the FBI, as part of our counterintelligence mission, is investigating the Russian government's efforts to interfere in the 2016 presidential election.
That includes investigating the nature of any links between individuals associated with the Trump campaign and the Russian government, and whether there was any coordination between the campaign and Russia's efforts."
The connections between Trump associates and Russia have been widely reported by the press.
One of Trump's campaign managers, Paul Manafort, had worked for several years to help pro-Russian politician Viktor Yanukovych win the Ukrainian presidency.
Other Trump associates, including former National Security Advisor Michael T. Flynn and political consultant Roger Stone, have been connected to Russian officials.
Russian agents were overheard during the campaign saying they could use Manafort and Flynn to influence Trump.
Members of Trump's campaign and later his White House staff, particularly Flynn, were in contact with Russian officials both before and after the November election.
On December 29, 2016, Flynn talked with Russian Ambassador Sergey Kislyak about sanctions that had been imposed the same day; Trump later fired Flynn for falsely claiming he had not discussed the sanctions.
The Washington Post reported that Trump had told Sergei Lavrov and Sergey Kislyak in May 2017 he was unconcerned about Russian interference in U.S. elections.
Special counsel investigation
On May 17, 2017, Deputy Attorney General Rod Rosenstein appointed Robert Mueller, a former director of the FBI, to serve as special counsel for the United States Department of Justice (DOJ) investigating "any links and/or coordination between Russian government and individuals associated with the campaign of President Donald Trump, and any matters that arose or may arise directly from the investigation", taking over the existing FBI investigation into the matter.
The special counsel also investigated whether Trump's dismissal of James Comey as FBI director constituted obstruction of justice, and possible campaign ties to other national governments.
Trump repeatedly denied any collusion between his campaign and the Russian government.
Mueller also investigated the Trump campaign's possible ties to Saudi Arabia, the United Arab Emirates, Turkey, Qatar, Israel, and China.
Trump sought to fire Mueller on several occasions in June 2017, December 2017, and April 2018 and close the investigation, but backed down after his staff objected or after changing his mind.
He tried repeatedly to get Attorney General Jeff Sessions to withdraw his recusal regarding Russia matters, believing Sessions would then put an end to the special counsel investigation.
On March 22, 2019, the special counsel concluded his investigation and gave his report to Attorney General William Barr.
On March 24, Barr sent a four-page letter to Congress summarizing what he said were the "principal conclusions" in the report.
He said the report did not conclude the President had committed any crimes, although it did not exonerate him for obstruction of justice.
Barr wrote on March 24 that given his authority to decide whether Trump had committed a crime, he and Rosenstein felt there was insufficient evidence to establish obstruction by Trump.
Mueller privately complained to Barr on March 27 that his summary did not accurately reflect what the report said and there was now "public confusion".
Some legal analysts said Barr's description of the report's contents was misleading.
A redacted version of the final Mueller Report was released to the public on April 18, 2019, with the first volume finding that Russia interfered to favor Trump's candidacy and hinder Clinton's.
Despite "numerous links between the Russian government and the Trump campaign", the prevailing evidence "did not establish" that Trump campaign members conspired or coordinated with Russian interference.
The evidence was incomplete due to encrypted, deleted, or unsaved communications as well as false, incomplete, or declined testimony.
The report states that Russian interference in the 2016 presidential election was illegal and occurred "in sweeping and systematic fashion" and details how Trump and his campaign "welcomed and encouraged" Russian foreign interference under the belief that they would politically benefit.ref> and details how Trump and his campaign "welcomed and encouraged" Russian foreign interference under the belief that they would politically benefit.
The second volume of the Mueller Report dealt with possible obstruction of justice by Trump.
The report did not exonerate him of obstruction, saying investigators were not confident of his innocence after examining his intent and actions.
Investigators decided they could not "apply an approach that could potentially result in a judgment that the President committed crimes", as they could not indict a sitting president per an Office of Legal Counsel (OLC) opinion, and would not accuse him of a crime when he cannot clear his name in court.
The report concluded that Congress, having the authority to take action against a president for wrongdoing, "may apply the obstruction laws".
Associates
On August 21, 2018, former Trump campaign chairman Paul Manafort was convicted on eight felony counts of false tax filing and bank fraud.
Trump said he felt very badly for Manafort and praised him for resisting the pressure to make a deal with prosecutors, saying "Such respect for a brave man!"
According to Giuliani, Trump had sought advice about pardoning Manafort but was counseled against it.
In September Manafort faced a second trial on multiple charges, but reached a plea bargain under which he pleaded guilty to conspiracy and witness tampering and agreed to cooperate fully with investigators.
In November, Mueller's office said in a court filing that Manafort had repeatedly lied to investigators, thus violating the terms of the plea agreement.
It was also revealed that Manafort, through his attorney, had been briefing White House attorneys about his interactions with the special counsel's office.
Trump publicly hinted that he might pardon Manafort, but the incoming chair of the House Judiciary Committee warned that "dangling a pardon in front of Manafort" could lead to charges of obstruction of justice.
On November 29, Trump's former attorney Michael Cohen pleaded guilty to lying to Congress about Trump's 2016 attempts to reach a deal with Russia to build a Trump Tower in Moscow.
Cohen said he had made the false statements on behalf of Trump, who was identified as "Individual-1" in the court documents.
The five Trump associates who have pleaded guilty or have been convicted in Mueller's investigation or related cases include Paul Manafort, Rick Gates, George Papadopoulos, Michael Flynn, and Michael Cohen.
On January 25, 2019, Trump adviser Roger Stone was arrested at his home in Fort Lauderdale, Florida, and indicted on seven criminal charges.
2019 congressional investigation
In March 2019, the House Judiciary Committee launched a broad investigation of Trump for possible obstruction of justice, corruption, and abuse of power.
Committee chairman Jerrold Nadler sent letters demanding documents to 81 individuals and organizations associated with Trump's presidency, business, and private life, saying it is "very clear that the president obstructed justice".
Three other committee chairmen wrote the White House and State Department requesting details of Trump's communications with Putin, including any efforts to conceal the content of those communications.
According to Senator Mark Warner, vice chairman of the Senate Intelligence Committee, there is "enormous" evidence of the Trump campaign's involvement with Russia.
Representative Adam Schiff, chairman of the House Intelligence Committee, said there is "direct evidence" of collusion between the Trump campaign and Russia.
Impeachment inquiry
During much of Trump's presidency, Democrats were divided on the question of impeachment.
Fewer than 20 representatives in the House supported impeachment by January 2019, but this number grew, after the Mueller Report was released in April and after special counsel Robert Mueller testified in July, to around 140 representatives.
In September 2019, a revelation emerged that Trump had pressured Ukrainian president Volodymyr Zelensky to investigate Democratic presidential candidate Joe Biden and his son Hunter.
In response, House Speaker Nancy Pelosi initiated a formal impeachment inquiry on September 24.
The Trump administration subsequently released a non-verbatim transcript of a July phone call between Trump and Zelensky, confirming that after Zelensky discussed the possibility of buying American anti-tank missiles to defend Ukraine, Trump then asked Zelensky to look into investigating the Bidens, and to discuss these matters with Trump's personal attorney Rudy Giuliani and Attorney General William Barr.
According to the testimony of multiple White House officials, the events were a part of a broader pressure campaign to further Trump's "personal interests" by abusing the power of the presidency.
The impeachment inquiry came in the wake of a whistleblower complaint alleging abuse of power involving the Trump-Zelensky call, as well as other allegations: that the White House attempted to "lock down" the call records in a cover-up, and that the call was part of a wider pressure campaign by Giuliani and the Trump administration to urge Ukraine to investigate the Bidens.
The whistleblower further alleged that the pressure campaign may have included Trump's canceling Vice President Mike Pence's May 2019 Ukraine trip, and Trump's withholding financial aid from Ukraine in July 2019.
Trump confirmed he had indeed temporarily withheld military aid from Ukraine, while offering contradicting reasons for his decision.
During October several State Department employees testified to Congressional committees behind closed doors regarding the Ukraine matter.
On October 22, 2019, William Taylor, the senior diplomat in Ukraine, testified that soon after arriving in Ukraine in June 2019, he found that Zelensky was being subjected to pressure from a private initiative directed by Trump and led by Giuliani.
The goal was to coerce Zelensky into making a public commitment to investigate the company that employed Hunter Biden, as well as rumors about Ukrainian involvement in the 2016 U.S. presidential election.
He said it was made clear that until Zelensky made such an announcement, the administration would not release scheduled military aid for Ukraine and not give Zelensky a coveted invitation to the White House.
As part of the impeachment inquiry, the House Judiciary Committee asked to see secret grand jury information that was used in compiling the Mueller Report.
The Department of Justice (DOJ) refused to turn it over, arguing that the secrecy of grand jury material must be preserved and that the impeachment inquiry was invalid.
On October 25, 2019, federal judge Beryl A. Howell ruled that the inquiry is valid and that the DOJ must forward the information to the committee within the week.
On October 31, the House passed a resolution, by a 232-196 vote, establishing rules for the next phase of the impeachment inquiry.
Notes
Works cited
* Paperback title: The greatest show on Earth : The deals, the downfall, the reinvention
Further reading
