Iron () is a chemical element with symbol Fe (from
An example of the importance of iron's symbolic role may be found in the German Campaign of 1813.
Frederick William III commissioned then the first Iron Cross as military decoration.
Berlin iron jewellery reached its peak production between 1813 and 1815, when the Prussian royal family urged citizens to donate gold and silver jewellery for military funding.
The inscription Gold gab ich für Eisen (I gave gold for iron) was used as well in later war efforts.
Laboratory routes
For a few limited purposes when it is needed, pure iron is produced in the laboratory in small quantities by reducing the pure oxide or hydroxide with hydrogen, or forming iron pentacarbonyl and heating it to 250 °C so that it decomposes to form pure iron powder.
Main industrial route
Nowadays, the industrial production of iron or steel consists of two main stages.
In the first stage, iron ore is reduced with coke in a blast furnace, and the molten metal is separated from gross impurities such as silicate minerals.
This stage yields an alloy -- pig iron-that contains relatively large amounts of carbon.
In the second stage, the amount of carbon in the pig iron is lowered by oxidation to yield wrought iron, steel, or cast iron.
Other metals can be added at this stage to form alloy steels.
Blast furnace processing
The blast furnace is loaded with iron ores, usually hematite or magnetite , together with coke (coal that has been separately baked to remove volatile components).
Air pre-heated to 900 °C is blown through the mixture, in sufficient amount to turn the carbon into carbon monoxide:
Direct iron reduction
Owing to environmental concerns, alternative methods of processing iron have been developed.
"Direct iron reduction" reduces iron ore to a ferrous lump called "sponge" iron or "direct" iron that is suitable for steelmaking.
Mechanical properties
The mechanical properties of iron and its alloys are extremely relevant to their structural applications.
Those properties can be evaluated in various ways, including the Brinell test, the Rockwell test and the Vickers hardness test.
The properties of pure iron are often used to calibrate measurements or to compare tests.
However, the mechanical properties of iron are significantly affected by the sample's purity: pure, single crystals of iron are actually softer than aluminium,
An increase in the carbon content will cause a significant increase in the hardness and tensile strength of iron.
Maximum hardness of 65 Rc is achieved with a 0.6% carbon content, although the alloy has low tensile strength.
Because of the softness of iron, it is much easier to work with than its heavier congeners ruthenium and osmium.
Types of steels and alloys
α-Iron is a fairly soft metal that can dissolve only a small concentration of carbon (no more than 0.021% by mass at 910 °C).
Austenite (γ-iron) is similarly soft and metallic but can dissolve considerably more carbon (as much as 2.04% by mass at 1146 °C).
This form of iron is used in the type of stainless steel used for making cutlery, and hospital and food-service equipment.
and contains varying amounts of contaminants such as sulfur, silicon and phosphorus.
Pig iron is not a saleable product, but rather an intermediate step in the production of cast iron and steel.
The reduction of contaminants in pig iron that negatively affect material properties, such as sulfur and phosphorus, yields cast iron containing 2-4% carbon, 1-6% silicon, and small amounts of manganese.
A newer variant of gray iron, referred to as ductile iron, is specially treated with trace amounts of magnesium to alter the shape of graphite to spheroids, or nodules, reducing the stress concentrations and vastly increasing the toughness and strength of the material.
with small amounts of manganese, sulfur, phosphorus, and silicon.
Alloy steels contain varying amounts of carbon as well as other metals, such as chromium, vanadium, molybdenum, nickel, tungsten, etc.
Their alloy content raises their cost, and so they are usually only employed for specialist uses.
One common alloy steel, though, is stainless steel.
Recent developments in ferrous metallurgy have produced a growing range of microalloyed steels, also termed 'HSLA' or high-strength, low alloy steels, containing tiny additions to produce high strengths and often spectacular toughness at minimal cost.
Apart from traditional applications, iron is also used for protection from ionizing radiation.
Although it is lighter than another traditional protection material, lead, it is much stronger mechanically.
The attenuation of radiation as a function of energy is shown in the graph.
The main disadvantage of iron and steel is that pure iron, and most of its alloys, suffer badly from rust if not protected in some way, a cost amounting to over 1% of the world's economy.
:Cathode: 3 O2 + 6 H2O + 12 e− → 12 OH−
:Anode: 4 Fe → 4 Fe2+ + 8 e−; 4 Fe2+ → 4 Fe3+ + 4 e−
:Overall: 4 Fe + 3 O2 + 6 H2O → 4 Fe3+ + 12 OH− → 4 Fe (OH)3 or 4 FeO (OH) + 4 H2O
The electrolyte is usually iron (II) sulfate in urban areas (formed when atmospheric sulfur dioxide attacks iron), and salt particles in the atmosphere in seaside areas.
Powdered iron in an acidic solvent was used in the Bechamp reduction the reduction of nitrobenzene to aniline.
Iron (III) oxide mixed with aluminium powder can be ignited to create a thermite reaction, used in welding large iron parts (like rails) and purifying ores.
Iron (III) oxide and oxyhidroxide are used as reddish and ocher pigments.
Iron (III) chloride finds use in water purification and sewage treatment, in the dyeing of cloth, as a coloring agent in paints, as an additive in animal feed, and as an etchant for copper in the manufacture of printed circuit boards.
It can also be dissolved in alcohol to form tincture of iron, which is used as a medicine to stop bleeding in canaries.
Iron (II) sulfate is used as a precursor to other iron compounds.
It is also used to reduce chromate in cement.
It is used to fortify foods and treat iron deficiency anemia.
Iron (III) sulfate is used in settling minute sewage particles in tank water.
Iron (II) chloride is used as a reducing flocculating agent, in the formation of iron complexes and magnetic iron oxides, and as a reducing agent in organic synthesis.
The iron-sulfur clusters are pervasive and include nitrogenase, the enzymes responsible for biological nitrogen fixation.
Iron-containing proteins participate in transport, storage and used of oxygen.
The average adult human contains about 0.005% body weight of iron, or about four grams, of which three quarters is in hemoglobin - a level that remains constant despite only about one milligram of iron being absorbed each day,
Biochemistry
Iron acquisition poses a problem for aerobic organisms because ferric iron is poorly soluble near neutral pH.
Thus, these organisms have developed means to absorb iron as complexes, sometimes taking up ferrous iron before oxidising it back to ferric iron.
After uptake in human cells, iron storage is precisely regulated.
A major component of this regulation is the protein transferrin, which binds iron ions absorbed from the duodenum and carries it in the blood to cells.
Transferrin contains Fe3+ in the middle of a distorted octahedron, bonded to one nitrogen, three oxygens and a chelating carbonate anion that traps the Fe3+ ion: it has such a high stability constant that it is very effective at taking up Fe3+ ions even from the most stable complexes.
At the bone marrow, transferrin is reduced from Fe3+ and Fe2+ and stored as ferritin to be incorporated into hemoglobin.
Metalloproteins are a group of proteins with metal ion cofactors.
Some examples of iron metalloproteins are ferritin and rubredoxin.
lipoxygenases, and IRE-BP.
Hemoglobin is an oxygen carrier that occurs in red blood cells and contributes their color, transporting oxygen in the arteries from the lungs to the muscles where it is transferred to myoglobin, which stores it until it is needed for the metabolic oxidation of glucose, generating energy.
Nutrition
Diet
Iron is pervasive, but particularly rich sources of dietary iron include red meat, oysters, lentils, beans, poultry, fish, leaf vegetables, watercress, tofu, chickpeas, black-eyed peas, and blackstrap molasses.
Iron provided by dietary supplements is often found as iron (II) fumarate, although iron (II) sulfate is cheaper and is absorbed equally well.
is often added to foods such as breakfast cereals or enriched wheat flour.
Iron is most available to the body when chelated to amino acids and is also available for use as a common iron supplement.
Glycine, the least expensive amino acid, is most often used to produce iron glycinate supplements.
Dietary recommendations
The U.S. Institute of Medicine (IOM) updated Estimated Average Requirements (EARs) and Recommended Dietary Allowances (RDAs) for iron in 2001.
The European Food Safety Authority (EFSA) refers to the collective set of information as Dietary Reference Values, with Population Reference Intake (PRI) instead of RDA, and Average Requirement instead of EAR.
AI and UL defined the same as in United States.
For women the PRI is 13 mg day for women ages 18 and up who are premenopausal and 11 mg day.
For men the PRI is 11 mg day.
The PRIs are higher than the U.S. RDAs, with the exception of pregnancy.
The EFSA reviewed the same safety question did not establish a UL.
Infants may require iron supplements if they are bottle-fed cow's milk.
Frequent blood donors are at risk of low iron levels and are often advised to supplement their iron intake.
For U.S. food and dietary supplement labeling purposes the amount in a serving is expressed as a percent of Daily Value (%DV).
For iron labeling purposes 100% of the Daily Value was 18 mg, and remained unchanged at 18 mg.
A table of all of the old and new adult Daily Values is provided at Reference Daily Intake.
The original deadline to be in compliance was July 28, 2018, but on September 29, 2017 the U.S. Food and Drug Administration released a proposed rule that extended the deadline to January 1, 2020 for large companies and January 1, 2021 for small companies.
Deficiency
Iron deficiency is the most common nutritional deficiency in the world.
When loss of iron is not adequately compensated by adequate dietary iron intake, a state of latent iron deficiency occurs, which over time leads to iron-deficiency anemia if left untreated, which is characterised by an insufficient number of red blood cells and an insufficient amount of hemoglobin.
Children, pre-menopausal women (women of child-bearing age), and people with poor diet are most susceptible to the disease.
Most cases of iron-deficiency anemia are mild, but if not treated can cause problems like fast or irregular heartbeat, complications during pregnancy, and delayed growth in infants and children.
Excess
Iron uptake is tightly regulated by the human body, which has no regulated physiological means of excreting iron.
Only small amounts of iron are lost daily due to mucosal and skin epithelial cell sloughing, so control of iron levels is primarily accomplished by regulating uptake.
Regulation of iron uptake is impaired in some people as a result of a genetic defect that maps to the HLA-H gene region on chromosome 6 and leads to abnormally low levels of hepcidin, a key regulator of the entry of iron into the circulatory system in mammals.
In these people, excessive iron intake can result in iron overload disorders, known medically as hemochromatosis.
Overdoses of ingested iron can cause excessive levels of free iron in the blood.
High blood levels of free ferrous iron react with peroxides to produce highly reactive free radicals that can damage DNA, proteins, lipids, and other cellular components.
Iron toxicity occurs when the cell contains free iron, which generally occurs when iron levels exceed the availability of transferrin to bind the iron.
Damage to the cells of the gastrointestinal tract can also prevent them from regulating iron absorption, leading to further increases in blood levels.
Iron typically damages cells in the heart, liver and elsewhere, causing adverse effects that include coma, metabolic acidosis, shock, liver failure, coagulopathy, adult respiratory distress syndrome, long-term organ damage, and even death.
Overconsumption of iron, often the result of children eating large quantities of ferrous sulfate tablets intended for adult consumption, is one of the most common toxicological causes of death in children under six.
The medical management of iron toxicity is complicated, and can include use of a specific chelating agent called deferoxamine to bind and expel excess iron from the body.
Cancer
The role of iron in cancer defense can be described as a "double-edged sword" because of its pervasive presence in non-pathological processes.
People having chemotherapy may develop iron deficiency and anemia, for which intravenous iron therapy is used to restore iron levels.
Iron overload, which may occur from high consumption of red meat, may initiate tumor growth and increase susceptibility to cancer onset, particularly for colorectal cancer.
* El Mutún in Bolivia, where 10% of the world's accessible iron ore is located
* Iron fertilization - proposed fertilization of oceans to stimulate phytoplankton growth
* Pelletising - process of creation of iron ore pellets
Bibliography
Further reading
* H.R. Schubert, History of the British Iron and Steel Industry ... to 1775 AD (Routledge, London, 1957)
* R.F. Tylecote, History of Metallurgy (Institute of Materials, London 1992).
* R.F. Tylecote, "Iron in the Industrial Revolution" in J. Day and R.F. Tylecote, The Industrial Revolution in Metals (Institute of Materials 1991), 200-60.
