is a Japanese chemist.
He is a fellow of Asahi Kasei Corporation and a professor at Meijo University in Nagoya.
He created the first safe, production-viable lithium-ion battery which became used widely in cellular phones and notebook computers.
Yoshino was awarded the Nobel Prize in Chemistry in 2019 alongside M. Stanley Whittingham and John B. Goodenough.
Early life and education
Yoshino was born in Suita, Japan, on 30 January 1948.
He graduated from Kitano High School in Osaka City (1966).
He earned a B.S. (1970) and an M.S. (1972) in engineering from Kyoto University, and earned a doctorate in engineering from Osaka University in 2005.
During his college years, Yoshino had attended a course taught by Kenichi Fukui, the first Asian to become a Nobel Laureate in chemistry.
Career
Yoshino spent his entire non-academic career at Asahi Kasei Corporation.
Immediately after graduating with his master's degree in 1972, Yoshino began working at Asahi Kasei.
Polyacetylene is the electroconductive polymer discovered by Hideki Shirakawa, who later (in 2000) would be awarded the Nobel Prize in Chemistry for its discovery.
In 1983 Yoshino fabricated a prototype rechargeable battery using lithium cobalt oxide (LiCoO) (discovered in 1979 by Godshall et al.
at Stanford University, and John Goodenough and Koichi Mizushima at Oxford University) as cathode and polyacetylene as anode.
This was the birth of the current lithium-ion battery.
Yoshino described challenges and history of the invention process in a book chapter from 2014.
Yoshino discovered that carbonaceous material with a certain crystalline structure was suitable as anode material, which formed a passivation layer to enable high cell voltage at low cost, and developed the functional separator membrane and the use of a positive temperature coefficient (PTC) device for additional safety.
Recognition
*1998 Chemical Technology Prize from the Chemical Society of Japan
*2012 : IEEE Medal for Environmental and Safety Technologies from the IEEE
