Basil II (; - 15 December 1025), nicknamed the Bulgar Slayer (), was senior Byzantine Emperor for almost 50 years (10 January 976 - 15 December 1025), having been a junior colleague to other emperors since 960.
He and his brother Constantine were named as co-rulers before their father Romanos II died in 963.
The throne went to two generals, Nikephoros Phokas (r. 963-969) then John Tzimiskes (r. 969-976), before Basil became senior emperor.
His influential great-uncle Basil Lekapenos was the de facto ruler of the Byzantine Empire until 985.
Basil II then held power for forty years.
The early years of Basil's reign were dominated by civil wars against two powerful generals from the Anatolian aristocracy; first Bardas Skleros and later Bardas Phokas, which ended shortly after Phokas' death and Skleros' submission in 989.
Basil then oversaw the stabilization and expansion of the eastern frontier of the Byzantine Empire and the complete subjugation of the First Bulgarian Empire, its foremost European foe, after a prolonged struggle.
Although the Byzantine Empire had made a truce with the Fatimid Caliphate in 987-988, Basil led a campaign against the Caliphate that ended with another truce in 1000.
He also conducted a campaign against the Khazar Khaganate that gained the Byzantine Empire part of Crimea and a series of successful campaigns against the Kingdom of Georgia.
Despite near-constant warfare, Basil distinguished himself as an administrator, reducing the power of the great land-owning families who dominated the Empire's administration and military, filling its treasury, and leaving it with its greatest expanse in four centuries.
Although his successors were largely incapable rulers, the Empire flourished for decades after Basil's death.
One of the most important decisions taken during his reign was to offer the hand of his sister Anna Porphyrogenita to Vladimir I of Kiev in exchange for military support, thus forming the Byzantine military unit known as the Varangian Guard.
The marriage of Anna and Vladimir led to the Christianization of the Kievan Rus' and the incorporation of later successor nations of Kievan Rus' within the Byzantine cultural and religious tradition.
Basil is seen as a Greek national hero but as a despised figure among Bulgarians.
Physical appearance and personality
The courtier and historian Michael Psellos, who was born towards the end of Basil's reign, gives a description of Basil in his Chronographia.
Psellos describes him as a stocky man of shorter-than-average stature who nevertheless was an impressive figure on horseback.
He had light-blue eyes, strongly arched eyebrows, luxuriant sidewhiskers-which he had a habit of rolling between his fingers when deep in thought or angry-and in later life a scant beard.
Psellos also states that Basil was not an articulate speaker and had a loud laugh that convulsed his whole frame.
Basil is described as having ascetic tastes and caring little for the pomp and ceremony of the Imperial court, typically wearing a sombre, dark-purple robe furnished with few of the gems that usually decorated imperial costumes.
He is also described as a capable administrator who left a well-stocked treasury upon his death.
Basil supposedly despised literary culture and affected scorn for the learned classes of Byzantium.
According to the 19th century historian George Finlay, Basil saw himself as "prudent, just, and devout; others considered him severe, rapacious, cruel, and bigoted.
For Greek learning he cared little, and he was a type of the higher Byzantine moral character, which retained far more of its Roman than its Greek origin".
The modern historian John Julius Norwich wrote of Basil; "No lonelier man ever occupied the Byzantine throne.
And it is hardly surprising: Basil was ugly, dirty, coarse, boorish, and almost pathologically mean.
He was in short deeply un-Byzantine.
He cared only for the greatness of his Empire.
No wonder that in his hands it reached its apogee".
Early life
Basil II was born .
He was a porphyrogennetos ("born into the purple"), as were his father Romanos II and his grandfather Constantine VII; this was the appellation used for children who were born to a reigning emperor.
Basil was the eldest son of Romanos and his Laconian Greek second wife Theophano, who was the daughter of a poor tavern-keeper named Krateros and may have originated from the city of Sparta.
He may have had an elder sister named Helena (born ).
Romanos succeeded Constantine VII as sole emperor upon the latter's death in 959.
Basil's father crowned him as co-emperor on 22 April 960, Only two days after the birth of his youngest child Anna, Romanos II died on 15 March 963 at 24 years of age.
His unexpected death was commonly thought at the time to be the result of poisoning with hemlock; the chroniclers Leo the Deacon and John Skylitzes imply that Theophano was responsible,
Basil and Constantine were too young to rule in their own right when Romanos died in 963.
Therefore, although the Byzantine Senate confirmed them as emperors with their mother as the nominal regent, de facto power passed for the time into the hands of the parakoimomenos Joseph Bringas.
-&#32;Basil's great-grandfather.
Lekapenos himself had been parakoimomenos to Constantine VII and megas baioulos to Romanos II.
Yet another enemy of Bringas was the successful and widely popular general Nikephoros Phokas, who had just returned from his conquest of the Emirate of Crete and a highly successful raid into Cilicia and Syria, which culminated in the sack of Aleppo.
Phokas was proclaimed emperor by his men in July and marched on Constantinople.
Bringas tried to bring in troops to stop his rival's advance, but the capital's populace supported Nikephoros.
Bringas fled, leaving his post to Lekapenos, and on 16 August 963 Nikephoros
Phokas was crowned emperor.
On 20 September, Phokas married Theophano, but problems resulted; it was a second marriage for each spouse and Nikephoros was thought to be the godfather of Basil or his brother, perhaps both.
Although Polyeuctus, the patriarch of Constantinople, disapproved of the marriage, the Church declared it to be valid.
With it, Nikephoros secured his legitimacy and became the guardian of Romanos' sons.
Nikephoros II and John I were brilliant military commanders but proved to be poor administrators.
Towards the end of his reign, John I had belatedly planned to curb the power of the great landowners; his death, which occurred soon after he spoke out against them, led to rumors that he had been poisoned by Lekapenos, who had illegally acquired vast estates and feared an investigation and punishment.
At the start of his reign, the failures of his immediate predecessors left Basil II with a serious problem; Bardas Skleros and Bardas Phokas, members of the wealthy military elite of Anatolia, had sufficient means to undertake open rebellion against his authority.
Skleros and Phokas, both of whom were experienced generals, wanted to assume the Imperial position that Nikephoros II and John I had held, and thus return Basil to the role of impotent cypher.
Basil, showing a penchant for ruthlessness, took to the field himself and suppressed the rebellions of both Skleros (979) and Phokas (989) with the help of 12,000 Georgians of Tornikios and David III Kuropalates of Tao.
The fall of Lekapenos occurred between the rebellions in 985; he was accused of plotting with the rebels and was punished with exile and the confiscation of his property.
According to one estimate, a Byzantine landowning farmer might expect a profit of 10.2 nomismata after paying dues for half of his best-quality land.
Basil was popular with the country farmers, the class that produced most of his army's supplies and soldiers.
To assure this continued, Basil's laws protected small agrarian property owners and lowered their taxes.
Despite the almost constant wars, Basil's reign was considered an era of relative prosperity for the class.
Seeking to protect the lower and middle classes, Basil made ruthless war upon the system of immense estates in Asia Minor -&#32; having had the longest reign among Byzantine emperors.
At the time of his death, the Empire stretched from southern Italy to the Caucasus and from the Danube to the Levant, which was its greatest territorial extent since the Muslim conquests four centuries earlier.
Basil was to be buried in the last sarcophagus available in the rotunda of Constantine I in the Church of the Holy Apostles but he later asked his brother and successor Constantine VIII to be buried in the Church of St. John the Theologian (i.e. the Evangelist) at the Hebdomon Palace complex outside the walls of Constantinople.
The epitaph on Basil's tomb celebrated his campaigns and victories.
His final resting place carried the following inscription: "From the day that the King of Heaven called upon me to become the Emperor, the great overlord of the world, no one saw my spear lie idle.
I stayed alert throughout my life and protected the children of the New Rome, valiantly campaigning both in the West and at the outposts of the East ...
O, man, seeing now my tomb here, reward me for my campaigns with your prayers".
During the pillage of 1204, Basil's grave was desecrated by the invading Crusaders of the Fourth Crusade.
Assessment
An assessment of the reign in the eyes of the subsequent generations is given by Psellos:He crushed rebellions, subdued the feudal landowners, conquered the enemies of the Empire, notably in the Danubian provinces and the East.
Everywhere the might of Roman arms was respected and feared.
The treasury was overflowing with the accumulated plunder of Basil's campaigns.
Even the lamp of learning, despite the emperor's known indifference, was burning still, if somewhat dimly.
The lot of ordinary folk in Constantinople must have been pleasant enough.
For most of them life was gay and colourful, and if the city's defensive fortifications were at some points in disrepair they had no cause to dread attacks.
Legacy
Basil II's reign is one of the most significant in Byzantine history.
His constant military campaigns led to the zenith of Byzantine power in the Middle Ages.
The restoration of the Danubian frontier helped establish a more stable and secure border for the empire in Europe, maintaining a stronger frontier against Hungarian and Pecheneg raiders.
The conquest of Bulgaria and the submission of the South Slavs created relative peace for the empire's Balkan frontier, keeping larger cities -&#32;including Constantinople -&#32;safe from the previously frequent sieges and looting.
Basil's military experience that allowed him to eventually turn the war against Bulgaria in the Byzantine Empire's favor were gained through the revolts of Phokas and Skleros in Anatolia that challenged his throne and sometimes got close to deposing him.
Basil's creation of the Varangian Guard provided him and his successors with an elite mercenary force capable of changing battle outcomes and boosting morale that became feared by the emperor's enemies.
At this time, the Macedonian Renaissance was taking effect, seeing the rise of classical scholarship being assimilated into Christian art and the study of ancient philosophy.
The studies of these subjects, and the enlargement projects of the emperors, greatly expanded the library of the University of Constantinople, which again established itself as the main source of learning for its day.
Though he was not a man of literature, Basil was a relatively pious ruler who involved himself in the construction of churches, monasteries, and to some extent cities.
Basil II lacked heirs due to the "dearth of cousins found within the Macedonian dynasty", so he was succeeded by his brother Constantine and his family, who proved to be ineffective rulers.
Nevertheless, fifty years of prosperity and intellectual growth followed because the funds of state were full, the borders were safe from intruders, and the Empire remained the most powerful political entity of the age.
At the end of Basil II's reign, the Byzantine Empire had a population of approximately 12 million people.
Although they were beneficial, Basil's achievements were reversed very quickly.
Many of the Georgian, Armenian, and Fatimid campaigns were undone after the succession crisis and eventual civil war after the Battle of Manzikert in 1071.
Because many of the empire's governors went to the capital with their soldiers to seize power after the capture of emperor Romanos IV, the Anatolian frontier was largely left undefended against the Seljuk Empire.
The Normans permanently pushed the Byzantines from Southern Italy in April 1071.
Modern views and depictions in literature
Bulgarian commentator Alexander Kiossev wrote in Understanding the Balkans: "The hero of a nation might be the villain of its neighbour ...
The Byzantine emperor Basil the Murderer of Bulgarians, a crucial Greek pantheon figure, is no less important as a subject of hatred for our national mythology".
During the 20th century in Greece, interest in Basil II led to a number of biographies and historical novels about him.
One of these is Basil Bulgaroktonus (1964) by historical fiction writer .
Written as a sequel to his previous work Theophano (1963) which focuses on Basil's mother, it examines Basil's life through three fictional narrators and has been continuously reprinted since 1964.
Rosemary Sutcliff's 1976 historical fiction novel Blood Feud depicts Basil II from the point of view of a member of his recently created Varangian Guard.
Penelope Delta's second novel Ton Kairo tou Voulgaroktonou (In the Years of the Bulgar-Slayer), is also set during the reign of Basil II.
It was inspired by correspondence with the historian Gustave Schlumberger, a renowned specialist on the Byzantine Empire, and published in the early years of the 20th century, a time when the Struggle for Macedonia again set Greeks and Bulgarians in bitter enmity with each other.
Ion Dragoumis, who was Delta's lover and was deeply involved in that struggle, in 1907 published the book Martyron kai Iroon Aima , which is resentful towards anything remotely Bulgarian.
He urges Greeks to follow the example of Basil II: "Instead of blinding so many people, Basil should have better killed them instead.
On one hand these people would not suffer as eyeless survivors, on the other the sheer number of Bulgarians would have diminished by 15 000, which is something very useful."
Later in the book, Dragoumis foresees the appearance of "new Basils" who would "cross the entire country and will look for Bulgarians in mountains, caves, villages and forests and will make them flee in refuge or kill them".
Ancestry
Notes
Bibliography
;Primary sources
;Secondary sources
