Homer (; , Hómēros) is the legendary author of the Iliad and the Odyssey, two epic poems that are the central works of ancient Greek literature.
The Iliad is set during the Trojan War, the ten-year siege of the city of Troy by a coalition of Greek kingdoms.
It focuses on a quarrel between King Agamemnon and the warrior Achilles lasting a few weeks during the last year of the war.
The Odyssey focuses on the ten-year journey home of Odysseus, king of Ithaca, after the fall of Troy.
Many accounts of Homer's life circulated in classical antiquity, the most widespread being that he was a blind bard from Ionia, a region of central coastal Anatolia in present-day Turkey.
Modern scholars consider these accounts legendary.
The Homeric Question - concerning by whom, when, where and under what circumstances the Iliad and Odyssey were composed - continues to be debated.
Broadly speaking, modern scholarly opinion falls into two groups.
One holds that most of the Iliad and (according to some) the Odyssey are the works of a single poet of genius.
The other considers the Homeric poems to be the result of a process of working and reworking by many contributors, and that "Homer" is best seen as a label for an entire tradition.
The poems are in Homeric Greek, also known as Epic Greek, a literary language which shows a mixture of features of the Ionic and Aeolic dialects from different centuries; the predominant influence is Eastern Ionic.
Most researchers believe that the poems were originally transmitted orally.
From antiquity until the present day, the influence of Homeric epic on Western civilization has been great, inspiring many of its most famous works of literature, music, art and film.
The Homeric epics were the greatest influence on ancient Greek culture and education; to Plato, Homer was simply the one who "has taught Greece" - ten Hellada pepaideuken.
Works attributed to Homer
Today only the Iliad and Odyssey are associated with the name 'Homer'.
In antiquity, a very large number of other works were sometimes attributed to him, including the Homeric Hymns, the Contest of Homer and Hesiod, the Little Iliad, the Nostoi, the Thebaid, the Cypria, the Epigoni, the comic mini-epic Batrachomyomachia ("The Frog-Mouse War"), the Margites, the Capture of Oechalia, and the Phocais.
These claims are not considered authentic today and were by no means universally accepted in the ancient world.
As with the multitude of legends surrounding Homer's life, they indicate little more than the centrality of Homer to ancient Greek culture.
Ancient biographies of Homer
Many traditions circulated in the ancient world concerning Homer, most of which are lost.
Modern scholarly consensus is that they have no value as history.
Some claims were established early and repeated often.
They include that Homer was blind (taking as self-referential a passage describing the blind bard Demodocus), that he was born in Chios, that he was the son of the river Meles and the nymph Critheïs, that he was a wandering bard, that he composed a varying list of other works (the "Homerica"), that he died either in Ios or after failing to solve a riddle set by fishermen, and various explanations for the name "Homer".
The two best known ancient biographies of Homer are the Life of Homer by the Pseudo-Herodotus and the Contest of Homer and Hesiod.
History of Homeric scholarship
Ancient
They were the first literary works taught to all students.
In 1664, contradicting the widespread praise of Homer as the epitome of wisdom, François Hédelin, abbé d'Aubignac wrote a scathing attack on the Homeric poems, declaring that they were incoherent, immoral, tasteless, and without style, that Homer never existed, and that the poems were hastily cobbled together by incompetent editors from unrelated oral songs.
Within the Analyst school were two camps: proponents of the "lay theory," which held that the Iliad and the Odyssey were put together from a large number of short, independent songs, The Neoanalysts sought to trace the relationships between the Homeric poems and other epic poems, which have now been lost, but of which modern scholars do possess some patchy knowledge.
Nearly all scholars agree that the Iliad and the Odyssey are unified poems, in that each poem shows a clear overall design, and that they are not merely strung together from unrelated songs.
Contemporary scholars continue to debate the date of the poems.
At one extreme, Richard Janko has proposed a date for both poems to the eighth century BC based on linguistic analysis and statistics.
Barry B. Powell dates the composition of the Iliad and the Odyssey to sometime between 800 and 750 BC, based on the statement from Herodotus, who lived in the late fifth century BC, that Homer lived four hundred years before his own time "and not more" (καὶ οὐ πλέοσι), and on the fact that the poems do not mention hoplite battle tactics, inhumation, or literacy.
At the other extreme, scholars such as Gregory Nagy see "Homer" as a continually evolving tradition, which grew much more stable as the tradition progressed, but which did not fully cease to continue changing and evolving until as late as the middle of the second century BC.
Historicity of the Homeric epics and Homeric society
Scholars continue to debate questions such as whether the Trojan War actually took place - and if so when and where - and to what extent the society depicted by Homer is based on his own or one which was, even at the time of the poems' composition, known only as legend.
The Homeric epics are largely set in the east and center of the Mediterranean, with some scattered references to Egypt, Ethiopia and other distant lands, in a warlike society that resembles that of the Greek world slightly before the hypothesized date of the poems' composition.
In ancient Greek chronology, the sack of Troy was dated to 1184 BC.
By the nineteenth century, there was widespread scholarly skepticism that the Trojan War had ever happened and that Troy had even existed, but in 1873 Heinrich Schliemann announced to the world that he had discovered the ruins of Homer's Troy at Hissarlik in modern Turkey.
Some contemporary scholars think the destruction of Troy VIIa circa 1220 BC was the origin of the myth of the Trojan War, others that the poem was inspired by multiple similar sieges that took place over the centuries.
Most scholars now agree that the Homeric poems depict customs and elements of the material world that are derived from different periods of Greek history.
For instance, the heroes in the poems use bronze weapons, characteristic of the Bronze Age in which the poems are set, rather than the later Iron Age during which they were composed; The decipherment of Linear B in the 1950s by Michael Ventris and continued archaeological investigation has increased modern scholars' understanding of Aegean civilisation, which in many ways resembles the ancient Near East more than the society described by Homer.
Some aspects of the Homeric world are simply made up;
Homeric style
The Homeric poems were composed in unrhymed dactylic hexameter; ancient Greek metre was quantity rather than stress-based.
Homer frequently uses set phrases such as epithets ('crafty Odysseus', 'rosy-fingered Dawn', 'owl-eyed Athena', etc.), Homeric formulae , simile, type scenes, ring composition and repetition.
These habits aid the extemporizing bard, and are characteristic of oral poetry.
For instance, the main words of a Homeric sentence are generally placed towards the beginning, whereas literate poets like Virgil or Milton use longer and more complicated syntactical structures.
Homer then expands on these ideas in subsequent clauses; this technique is called parataxis.
The so-called 'type scenes' (typischen Scenen), were named by Walter Arend in 1933.
He noted that Homer often, when describing frequently recurring activities such as eating, praying, fighting and dressing, used blocks of set phrases in sequence that were then elaborated by the poet.
The 'Analyst' school had considered these repetitions as un-Homeric, whereas Arend interpreted them philosophically.
Parry and Lord noted that these conventions are found in many other cultures.
'Ring composition' or chiastic structure (when a phrase or idea is repeated at both the beginning and end of a story, or a series of such ideas first appears in the order A, B, C... before being reversed as ...C, B, A) has been observed in the Homeric epics.
Opinion differs as to whether these occurrences are a conscious artistic device, a mnemonic aid or a spontaneous feature of human storytelling.
Both of the Homeric poems begin with an invocation to the Muse.
In the Iliad, the poet invokes her to sing of "the anger of Achilles",
Other scholars such as Gregory Nagy hold that, after the poems were formed in the eighth century, they were orally transmitted with little deviation until they were written down in the sixth century.
After textualisation, the poems were each divided into 24 rhapsodes, today referred to as books, and labelled by the letters of the Greek alphabet.
These divisions probably date from before 200 BC, and may have been made by Homer.
In antiquity, it was widely held that the Homeric poems were collected and organised in Athens in the late sixth century BC by the tyrant Peisistratos (died 528/7 BC), in what subsequent scholars have dubbed the "Peisistratean recension".
The first printed edition of Homer was produced in 1488 in Milan, Italy.
Today scholars use medieval manuscripts, papyri and other sources; some argue for a "multi-text" view, rather than seeking a single definitive text.
The nineteenth-century edition of Arthur Ludwich mainly follows Aristarchus's work, whereas van Thiel's (1991, 1996) follows the medieval vulgate.
Others, such as Martin West (1998-2000) or T.W. Allen, fall somewhere between these two extremes.
Notes
Selected bibliography
Editions
;Texts in Homeric Greek
* Demetrius Chalcondyles editio princeps, Florence, 1488
* 1st ed.
with comments, Micyllus and Camerarius, Basel, 1535, 1541 (improved text), 1551 (incl.
the Batrachomyomachia)
* La Roche (Odyssey, 1867-1868; Iliad, 1873-1876, both at Leipzig)
* Ludwich (Odyssey, Leipzig, 1889-1891; Iliad, 2 vols., 1901 and 1907)
* W. Leaf (Iliad, London, 1886-1888; 2nd ed. 1900-1902)
* William Walter Merry and James Riddell (Odyssey i-xii., 2nd ed., Oxford, 1886)
* Monro (Odyssey xiii-xxiv.
with appendices, Oxford, 1901)
* Monro and Allen (Iliad), and Allen (Odyssey, 1908, Oxford).
* D.B. Monro and T.W. Allen 1917-1920, Homeri Opera (5 volumes: Iliad
3rd edition, Odyssey
2nd edition), Oxford. , , , ,
* H. van Thiel 1991, Homeri Odyssea, Hildesheim. , 1996, Homeri Ilias, Hildesheim.
* M.L. West 1998-2000, Homeri Ilias (2 volumes), Munich Leipzig.
Interlinear translations
The Iliad of Homer a Parsed Interlinear (2008) Text
English translations
This is a partial list of translations into English of Homer's Iliad and Odyssey.
** Homer: Iliad, 2 vols., revised by William F. Wyatt, Loeb Classical Library, Harvard University Press (1999).
** Homer: Odyssey, 2 vols., revised by George E. Dimock, Loeb Classical Library, Harvard University Press (1995).
The Essential Homer, (Audiobook) Parmenides (2006)
The Essential Iliad, (Audiobook) Parmenides (2006)
** Homer's Iliad and Odyssey: The Essential Books, Oxford University Press (2014)
** Iliad, University of Oklahoma Press (2008) (soft cover)
The Odyssey, University of Michigan Press (2002)
General works on Homer
* In German, 5th updated and expanded edition, Leipzig, 2005.
In Spanish, 2003, .
In modern Greek, 2005, .
Influential readings and interpretations
Commentaries
** P.V. Jones (ed.) 2003, Homer's Iliad.
A Commentary on Three Translations, London.
** G.S. Kirk (gen. ed.) 1985-1993, The Iliad: A Commentary (6 volumes), Cambridge. , , , , ,
** J. Latacz (gen. ed.) 2002
Homers Ilias.
Gesamtkommentar.
Auf der Grundlage der Ausgabe von Ameis-Hentze-Cauer (1868-1913) (6 volumes published so far, of an estimated 15), Munich/Leipzig. ,
** N. Postlethwaite (ed.) 2000, Homer's Iliad: A Commentary on the Translation of Richmond Lattimore, Exeter.
** M.W. Willcock (ed.)
1976, A Companion to the Iliad, Chicago.
** A. Heubeck (gen. ed.) 1990-1993, A Commentary on Homer's Odyssey (3 volumes; orig.
publ.
1981-1987 in Italian), Oxford. , ,
** P. Jones (ed.) 1988, Homer's Odyssey: A Commentary based on the English Translation of Richmond Lattimore, Bristol.
** I.J.F. de Jong (ed.) 2001, A Narratological Commentary on the Odyssey, Cambridge.
Dating the Homeric poems
Further reading
