Maria Callas, Commendatore OMRI (; ; December 2, 1923 - September 16, 1977) was an American-born Greek soprano.
She was one of the most renowned and influential opera singers of the 20th century.
Many critics praised her bel canto technique, wide-ranging voice and dramatic interpretations.
Her repertoire ranged from classical opera seria to the bel canto operas of Donizetti, Bellini and Rossini and, further, to the works of Verdi and Puccini; and, in her early career, to the music dramas of Wagner.
Her musical and dramatic talents led to her being hailed as La Divina.
Born in Manhattan to Greek immigrant parents, she was raised by an overbearing mother who had wanted a son.
Maria received her musical education in Greece at age 13 and later established her career in Italy.
Forced to deal with the exigencies of 1940s wartime poverty and with near-sightedness that left her nearly blind onstage, she endured struggles and scandal over the course of her career.
She turned herself from a heavy woman into a svelte and glamorous one after a mid-career weight loss, which might have contributed to her vocal decline and the premature end of her career.
The press exulted in publicizing Callas's temperamental behavior, her supposed rivalry with Renata Tebaldi and her love affair with Greek shipping tycoon Aristotle Onassis.
Although her dramatic life and personal tragedy have often overshadowed Callas the artist in the popular press, her artistic achievements were such that Leonard Bernstein called her "the Bible of opera" and her influence so enduring that, in 2006, Opera News wrote of her: "Nearly thirty years after her death, she's still the definition of the diva as artist-and still one of classical music's best-selling vocalists."
Early life
Family life, childhood and move to Greece
The name on Callas's New York birth certificate is Sophie Cecilia Kalos.
She was born at Flower Hospital (now the Terence Cardinal Cooke Health Care Center), 1249 5th Avenue, Manhattan, on December 2, 1923, to Greek parents, George Kalogeropoulos (c. 1881-1972) and Elmina Evangelia "Litsa" (née Demes; originally Dimitriadou; c. 1894-1982), although she was christened Maria Anna Cecilia Sofia Kalogeropoulos ().
Callas's father had shortened the surname Kalogeropoulos first to "Kalos" and subsequently to "Callas" to make it more manageable.
George and Litsa Callas were an ill-matched couple from the beginning.
George was easy-going and unambitious, with no interest in the arts, while Litsa was vivacious and socially ambitious and had dreamed of a life in the arts, which her middle-class parents had stifled in her childhood and youth.
Litsa's father, Petros Dimitriadis (1852-1916), was in failing health when Litsa introduced George to her family.
Petros, distrustful of George, had warned his daughter, "You will never be happy with him.
If you marry this man, I will never be able to help you".
Litsa had ignored his warning, but soon realized that her father was right.
The situation was aggravated by George's philandering and was improved neither by the birth of a daughter, named Yakinthi (later called "Jackie"), in 1917 nor the birth of a son, named Vassilis, in 1920.
Vassilis's death from meningitis in the summer of 1922 dealt another blow to the marriage.
In 1923, after realizing that Litsa was pregnant again, George made the decision to move his family to the United States, a decision which Yakinthi recalled was greeted with Litsa "shouting hysterically" followed by George "slamming doors".
The family left for New York in July 1923, moving first into an apartment in the heavily ethnic Greek neighborhood of Astoria, Queens.
Litsa was convinced that her third child would be a boy; her disappointment at the birth of another daughter was so great that she refused to even look at her new baby for four days.
Maria was christened three years later at the Archdiocesan Cathedral of the Holy Trinity in 1926.
When Maria was 4, George Callas opened his own pharmacy, settling the family in Manhattan on 192nd Street in Washington Heights where Callas grew up.
Around the age of three, Maria's musical talent began to manifest itself, and after Litsa discovered that her youngest daughter also had a voice, she began pressing "Mary" to sing.
Callas later recalled, "I was made to sing when I was only five, and I hated it."
George was unhappy with his wife favoring their elder daughter, as well as the pressure put upon young Mary to sing and perform while Litsa was in turn increasingly embittered with George and his absences and infidelity and often violently reviled him in front of their children.
The marriage continued to deteriorate and, in 1937, Litsa decided to return to Athens with her two daughters.
Deteriorating relationship with her mother
Callas's relationship with her mother continued to erode during the years in Greece, and in the prime of her career, it became a matter of great public interest, especially after a 1956 cover story in Time magazine which focused on this relationship and later, by Litsa's book My Daughter Maria Callas (1960).
In public, Callas blamed the strained relationship with Litsa on her unhappy childhood spent singing and working at her mother's insistence, saying,
My sister was slim and beautiful and friendly, and my mother always preferred her.
I was the ugly duckling, fat and clumsy and unpopular.
It is a cruel thing to make a child feel ugly and unwanted...
I'll never forgive her for taking my childhood away.
During all the years I should have been playing and growing up, I was singing or making money.
Everything I did for them was mostly good and everything they did to me was mostly bad.
In 1957, she told Chicago radio host Norman Ross Jr., "There must be a law against forcing children to perform at an early age.
Children should have a wonderful childhood.
They should not be given too much responsibility."
Biographer asserts that Litsa's hateful treatment of George in front of their young children led to resentment and dislike on Callas's part.
According to both Callas's husband and her close friend Giulietta Simionato, Callas related to them that her mother, who did not work, pressed her to "go out with various men", mainly Italian and German soldiers, to bring home money and food during the Axis occupation of Greece during World War II.
Simionato was convinced that Callas "managed to remain untouched", but Callas never forgave her mother for what she perceived as a kind of prostitution forced on her by her mother.
Litsa herself, beginning in New York and continuing in Athens, had adopted a questionable lifestyle, that included not only pushing her daughters into degrading situations to support her financially but also entertaining Italian and German soldiers herself during the Axis occupation.
In an attempt to patch things up with her mother, Callas took Litsa along on her first visit to Mexico in 1950, but this only reawakened the old frictions and resentments, and after leaving Mexico, the two never met again.
After a series of angry and accusatory letters from Litsa lambasting Callas's father and husband, Callas ceased communication with her mother altogether.
However, when interviewed by on the French program L'invitée du dimanche, Callas attributed the development of her chest voice not to Trivella, but to her next teacher, the Spanish coloratura soprano Elvira de Hidalgo.
Callas studied with Trivella for two years before her mother secured another audition at the Athens Conservatoire with de Hidalgo.
Callas auditioned with "Ocean, Thou Mighty Monster" from Weber's Oberon.
De Hidalgo recalled hearing "tempestuous, extravagant cascades of sounds, as yet uncontrolled but full of drama and emotion".
She agreed to take her as a pupil immediately, but Callas's mother asked de Hidalgo to wait for a year, as Callas would be graduating from the National Conservatoire and could begin working.
On April 2, 1939, Callas undertook the part of Santuzza in a student production of Mascagni's Cavalleria rusticana at the Greek National Opera at the Olympia Theatre, and in the fall of the same year she enrolled at the Athens Conservatoire in Elvira de Hidalgo's class.
In 1968, Callas told Lord Harewood,
De Hildalgo had the real great training, maybe even the last real training of the real bel canto.
As a young girl-thirteen years old-I was immediately thrown into her arms, meaning that I learned the secrets, the ways of this bel canto, which of course as you well know, is not just beautiful singing.
It is a very hard training; it is a sort of a strait-jacket that you're supposed to put on, whether you like it or not.
You have to learn to read, to write, to form your sentences, how far you can go, fall, hurt yourself, put yourself back on your feet continuously.
De Hidalgo had one method, which was the real bel canto way, where no matter how heavy a voice, it should always be kept light, it should always be worked on in a flexible way, never to weigh it down.
It is a method of keeping the voice light and flexible and pushing the instrument into a certain zone where it might not be too large in sound, but penetrating.
And teaching the scales, trills, all the bel canto embellishments, which is a whole vast language of its own.
Callas herself said that she would go to "the conservatoire at 10 in the morning and leave with the last pupil ... devouring music" for 10 hours a day.
When asked by her teacher why she did this, her answer was that even "with the least talented pupil, he can teach you something that you, the most talented, might not be able to do."
Early operatic career in Greece
After several appearances as a student, Callas began appearing in secondary roles at the Greek National Opera.
De Hidalgo was instrumental in securing roles for her, allowing Callas to earn a small salary, which helped her and her family get through the difficult war years.
Callas made her professional debut in February 1941, in the small role of Beatrice in Franz von Suppé's Boccaccio.
Soprano Galatea Amaxopoulou, who sang in the chorus, later recalled, "Even in rehearsal, Maria's fantastic performing ability had been obvious, and from then on, the others started trying ways of preventing her from appearing."
Fellow singer Maria Alkeou similarly recalled that the established sopranos Nafsika Galanou and Anna (Zozó) Remmoundou "used to stand in the wings while Callas was singing and make remarks about her, muttering, laughing, and point their fingers at her".
Despite these hostilities, Callas managed to continue and made her debut in a leading role in August 1942 as Tosca, going on to sing the role of Marta in Eugen d'Albert's Tiefland at the Olympia Theatre.
Callas's performance as Marta received glowing reviews.
Critic Spanoudi declared Callas "an extremely dynamic artist possessing the rarest dramatic and musical gifts", and Vangelis Mangliveras evaluated Callas's performance for the weekly To Radiophonon:
The singer who took the part of Marta, that new star in the Greek firmament, with a matchless depth of feeling, gave a theatrical interpretation well up to the standard of a tragic actress.
About her exceptional voice with its astonishing natural fluency, I do not wish to add anything to the words of Alexandra Lalaouni: 'Kalogeropoulou is one of those God-given talents that one can only marvel at.'
Following these performances, even Callas's detractors began to refer to her as "The God-Given".
Some time later, watching Callas rehearse Beethoven's Fidelio, erstwhile rival soprano Anna Remoundou asked a colleague, "Could it be that there is something divine and we haven't realized it?"
Following Tiefland, Callas sang the role of Santuzza in Cavalleria rusticana again and followed it with (Manolis Kalomiris) at the ancient Odeon of Herodes Atticus theatre at the foot of the Acropolis.
During August and September 1944, Callas performed the role of Leonore in a Greek language production of Fidelio, again at the Odeon of Herodes Atticus.
German critic Friedrich Herzog, who witnessed the performances, declared Leonore Callas's "greatest triumph":
When Maria Kaloyeropoulou's Leonore let her soprano soar out radiantly in the untrammelled jubilation of the duet, she rose to the most sublime heights.
Here she gave bud, blossom and fruit to that harmony of sound that also ennobled the art of the prima donne.
After the liberation of Greece, de Hidalgo advised Callas to establish herself in Italy.
Callas proceeded to give a series of concerts around Greece, and then, against her teacher's advice, she returned to America to see her father and to further pursue her career.
When she left Greece on September 14, 1945, two months short of her 22nd birthday, Callas had given 56 performances in seven operas and had appeared in around 20 recitals.
Callas considered her Greek career as the foundation of her musical and dramatic upbringing, saying, "When I got to the big career, there were no surprises for me."
Main operatic career
After returning to the United States and reuniting with her father in September 1945, Callas made the round of auditions.
In December of that year, she auditioned for Edward Johnson, general manager of the Metropolitan Opera, and was favorably received: "Exceptional voice-ought to be heard very soon on stage".
Callas maintained that the Met offered her Madama Butterfly and Fidelio, to be performed in Philadelphia and sung in English, both of which she declined, feeling she was too fat for Butterfly and did not like the idea of opera in English.
Subsequently he recommended Callas to retired tenor and impresario Giovanni Zenatello.
During her audition, Zenatello became so excited that he jumped up and joined Callas in the act 4 duet.
She was engaged to sing the role of Brünnhilde in Die Walküre at the Teatro la Fenice, when Margherita Carosio, who was engaged to sing Elvira in I puritani in the same theatre, fell ill.
Unable to find a replacement for Carosio, Serafin told Callas that she would be singing Elvira in six days; when Callas protested that she not only did not know the role, but also had three more Brünnhildes to sing, he told her "I guarantee that you can.".
Franco Zeffirelli recalled, "What she did in Venice was really incredible.
You need to be familiar with opera to realize the size of her achievement.
It was as if someone asked Birgit Nilsson, who is famous for her great Wagnerian voice, to substitute overnight for Beverly Sills, who is one of the great coloratura sopranos of our time."
Scott asserts that "Of all the many roles Callas undertook, it is doubtful if any had a more far-reaching effect."
and he directed her in lavish new productions of La vestale, La traviata, La sonnambula, Anna Bolena and Iphigénie en Tauride.
Callas was notably instrumental in arranging Franco Corelli's debut at La Scala in 1954, where he sang Licinio in Spontini's La vestale opposite Callas's Julia.
The two had sung together for the first time the year previously in Rome in a production of Norma.
Anthony Tommasini wrote that Corelli had "earned great respect from the fearsomely demanding Callas, who, in Mr Corelli, finally had someone with whom she could act."
The two collaborated several more times at La Scala, singing opposite each other in productions of Fedora (1956), Il pirata (1958) and Poliuto (1960).
Their partnership continued throughout the rest of Callas's career.
The night of the day she married Meneghini in Verona, she sailed for Argentina to sing at the Teatro Colón in Buenos Aires.
Callas made her South American debut in Buenos Aires on May 20, 1949, during the European summer opera recess.
Aida, Turandot and Norma roles were directed by Serafin, supported by Mario Del Monaco, Fedora Barbieri and Nicola Rossi-Lemeni.
It was her only appearance on this world-renowned stage.
Her debut in the United States was five years later in Chicago in 1954, and "with the Callas Norma, Lyric Opera of Chicago was born."
Her Metropolitan Opera debut, opening the Met's seventy-second season on October 29, 1956, was again with Norma, but was preceded with an unflattering cover story in Time magazine, which rehashed all of the Callas clichés, including her temper, her supposed rivalry with Renata Tebaldi and especially her difficult relationship with her mother.
She further consolidated this company's standing when, in 1958, she gave "a towering performance as Violetta in La traviata, and that same year, in her only American performances of Medea, gave an interpretation of the title role worthy of Euripides."
In 1958, a feud with Rudolf Bing led to Callas's Metropolitan Opera contract being cancelled.
Impresario Allen Oxenburg realised that this situation provided him with an opportunity for his own company, the American Opera Society, and he accordingly approached her with a contract to perform Imogene in Il pirata.
She accepted and sang the role in a January 1959 performance that according to opera critic Allan Kozinn "quickly became legendary in operatic circles".
Bing and Callas later reconciled their differences, and she returned to the house in 1965 to sing the title role in two performances as Tosca opposite Franco Corelli as Cavaradossi for one performance (March 19, 1965) and Richard Tucker (March 25, 1965) with Tito Gobbi as Scarpia for her final performances at the Met.
In 1952, she made her London debut at the Royal Opera House in Norma with veteran mezzo-soprano Ebe Stignani as Adalgisa, a performance which survives on record and also features the young Joan Sutherland in the small role of Clotilde.
In 1968, Callas told Edward Downes that during her initial performances in Cherubini's Medea in May 1953, she realized that she needed a leaner face and figure to do dramatic justice to this as well as the other roles she was undertaking.
She adds,
I was getting so heavy that even my vocalizing was getting heavy.
I was tiring myself, I was perspiring too much, and I was really working too hard.
And I wasn't really well, as in health; I couldn't move freely.
And then I was tired of playing a game, for instance playing this beautiful young woman, and I was heavy and uncomfortable to move around.
In any case, it was uncomfortable and I didn't like it.
So I felt now if I'm going to do things right-I've studied all my life to put things right musically, so why don't I diet and put myself into a certain condition where I'm presentable.
Various rumors spread regarding her weight loss method; one had her swallowing a tapeworm, while Rome's Panatella Mills pasta company claimed she lost weight by eating their "physiologic pasta", prompting Callas to file a lawsuit.
Walter Legge stated that Callas possessed that most essential ingredient for a great singer: an instantly recognizable voice.
During "The Callas Debate", Italian critic Rodolfo Celletti stated, "The timbre of Callas's voice, considered purely as sound, was essentially ugly: it was a thick sound, which gave the impression of dryness, of aridity.
It lacked those elements which, in a singer's jargon, are described as velvet and varnish...
yet I really believe that part of her appeal was precisely due to this fact.
Why?
Because for all its natural lack of varnish, velvet and richness, this voice could acquire such distinctive colours and timbres as to be unforgettable."
However, in his review of Callas's 1951 live recording of I vespri siciliani, Ira Siff writes, "Accepted wisdom tells us that Callas possessed, even early on, a flawed voice, unattractive by conventional standards-an instrument that signaled from the beginning vocal problems to come.
Yet listen to her entrance in this performance and one encounters a rich, spinning sound, ravishing by any standard, capable of delicate dynamic nuance.
High notes are free of wobble, chest tones unforced, and the middle register displays none of the "bottled" quality that became more and more pronounced as Callas matured."
Nicola Rossi-Lemeni relates that Callas's mentor Serafin used to refer to her as Una grande vociaccia; he continues, "Vociaccia is a little bit pejorative-it means an ugly voice-but grande means a big voice, a great voice.
A great ugly voice, in a way."
Callas herself did not like the sound of her own voice; in one of her last interviews, answering whether or not she was able to listen to her own voice, she replies,
Yes, but I don't like it.
I have to do it, but I don't like it at all because I don't like the kind of voice I have.
I really hate listening to myself!
The first time I listened to a recording of my singing was when we were recording San Giovanni Battista by Stradella in a church in Perugia in 1949.
They made me listen to the tape and I cried my eyes out.
I wanted to stop everything, to give up singing...
Also now even though I don't like my voice, I've become able to accept it and to be detached and objective about it so I can say, "Oh, that was really well sung," or "It was nearly perfect."
Carlo Maria Giulini has described the appeal of Callas's voice:
It is very difficult to speak of the voice of Callas.
Her voice was a very special instrument.
Something happens sometimes with string instruments-violin, viola, cello-where the first moment you listen to the sound of this instrument, the first feeling is a bit strange sometimes.
But after just a few minutes, when you get used to, when you become friends with this kind of sound, then the sound becomes a magical quality.
This was Callas.
On the other hand, music critic John Ardoin has argued that Callas was the reincarnation of the 19th-century soprano sfogato or "unlimited soprano", a throwback to Maria Malibran and Giuditta Pasta, for whom many of the famous bel canto operas were written.
He avers that like Pasta and Malibran, Callas was a natural mezzo-soprano whose range was extended through training and willpower, resulting in a voice which "lacked the homogeneous color and evenness of scale once so prized in singing.
There were unruly sections of their voices never fully under control.
Many who heard Pasta, for example, remarked that her uppermost notes seemed produced by ventriloquism, a charge which would later be made against Callas".
Vocal size and range
Regarding the sheer size of Callas's instrument, Celletti says, "Her voice was penetrating.
The volume as such was average: neither small nor powerful.
But the penetration, allied to this incisive quality (which bordered on the ugly because it frequently contained an element of harshness) ensured that her voice could be clearly heard anywhere in the auditorium."
After her first performance of Medea in 1953, the critic for Musical Courier wrote that "she displayed a vocal generosity that was scarcely believable for its amplitude and resilience."
In his book, Michael Scott makes the distinction that whereas Callas's pre-1954 voice was a "dramatic soprano with an exceptional top", after the weight loss, it became, as one Chicago critic described the voice in Lucia, however, this claim is refuted by John Ardoin's review of the live recording of the performance as well as by the review of the recording in Opera News, both of which refer to the note as a high E-natural.
For Italian soprano Renata Tebaldi, "the most fantastic thing was the possibility for her to sing the soprano coloratura with this voice!
This was something really special.
absolutely!"
she considered herself foremost a musician, that is, the first instrument of the orchestra."
Victor de Sabata confided to Walter Legge , "If the public could understand, as we do, how deeply and utterly musical Callas is, they would be stunned", Callas possessed an innate architectural sense of line-proportion
In addition to her musical skills, Callas had a particular gift for language and the use of language in music.
Soprano Martina Arroyo states, "What interested me most was how she gave the runs and the cadenzas words.
That always floored me.
I always felt I heard her saying something-it was never just singing notes.
That alone is an art."
Callas was not, however, a realistic or verismo style actress:
Matthew Gurewitsch adds,
In fact the essence of her art was refinement.
The term seems odd for a performer whose imagination and means of expression were so prodigious.
She was eminently capable of the grand gesture; still, judging strictly from the evidence of her recordings, we know (and her few existing film clips confirm) that her power flowed not from excess
but from unbroken concentration, unfaltering truth in the moment.
It flowed also from irreproachable musicianship.
People say that Callas would not hesitate to distort a vocal line for dramatic effect.
In the throes of operatic passion plenty of singers snarl, growl, whine, and shriek.
Callas was not one of them.
She found all she needed in the notes.
Ewa Podleś likewise stated that "It's enough to hear her, I'm positive!
Because she could say everything only with her voice!
I can imagine everything, I can see everything in front of my eye."
This incident began the rivalry, which reached a fever pitch in the mid-1950s, at times even engulfing the two women themselves, who were said by their more fanatical followers to have engaged in verbal barbs in each other's direction.
Tebaldi was quoted as saying, "I have one thing that Callas doesn't have: a heart" However, witnesses to the interview stated that Callas only said "champagne with cognac", and it was a bystander who quipped, "No, with Coca-Cola", but the Time reporter attributed the latter comment to Callas.
Callas visited Tebaldi after a performance of Adriana Lecouvreur at the Met in 1968, and the two were reunited.
In 1978, Tebaldi spoke warmly of her late colleague and summarized this rivalry:
This rivality sic was really building from the people of the newspapers and the fans.
But I think it was very good for both of us, because the publicity was so big and it created a very big interest about me and Maria and was very good in the end.
But I don't know why they put this kind of rivality sic, because the voice was very different.
She was really something unusual.
And I remember that I was very young artist too, and I stayed near the radio every time that I know that there was something on radio by Maria.
Louise Caselotti, who worked with Callas in 1946 and 1947, prior to her Italian debut, felt that it was not the heavy roles that hurt Callas's voice, but the lighter ones.
Several singers have suggested that Callas's heavy use of the chest voice led to stridency and unsteadiness with the high notes.
In the same vein, Joan Sutherland, who heard Callas throughout the 1950s, said in a BBC interview,
Hearing Callas in Norma in 1952 was a shock, a wonderful shock.
You just got shivers up and down the spine.
It was a bigger sound in those earlier performances, before she lost weight.
I think she tried very hard to recreate the sort of "fatness" of the sound which she had when she was as fat as she was.
But when she lost the weight, she couldn't seem to sustain the great sound that she had made, and the body seemed to be too frail to support that sound that she was making.
Oh, but it was oh so exciting.
It was thrilling.
I don't think that anyone who heard Callas after 1955 really heard the Callas voice.
Michael Scott has proposed that Callas's loss of strength and breath support was directly caused by her rapid and progressive weight loss, This continual change in posture has been cited as visual proof of a progressive loss of breath support.
It was at this time that unsteady top notes first begin to appear.
Voigt herself explained how her dramatic weight loss affected her breathing and breath support:
Much of what I did with my weight was very natural, vocally.
Now I've got a different body-there's not as much of me around.
My diaphragm function, the way my throat feels, is not compromised in any way.
But I do have to think about it more now.
I have to remind myself to keep my ribs open.
I have to remind myself, if my breath starts to stack.
When I took a breath before, the weight would kick in and give it that extra Whhoomf!
Now it doesn't do that.
If I don't remember to get rid of the old air and re-engage the muscles, the breath starts stacking, and that's when you can't get your phrase, you crack high notes.
Callas herself attributed her problems to a loss of confidence brought about by a loss of breath support, even though she does not make the connection between her weight and her breath support.
In an April 1977 interview with journalist , she stated,
My best recordings were made when I was skinny, and I say skinny, not slim, because I worked a lot and couldn't gain weight back; I became even too skinny ...
I had my greatest successes - Lucia, Sonnambula, Medea, Anna Bolena - when I was skinny as a nail.
Even for my first time here in Paris in 1958 when the show was broadcast through Eurovision, I was skinny.
Really skinny."
And shortly before her death, Callas confided her own thoughts on her vocal problems to Peter Dragadze:
I never lost my voice, but I lost strength in my diaphragm. ...
Because of those organic complaints, I lost my courage and boldness.
My vocal cords were and still are in excellent condition, but my 'sound boxes' have not been working well even though I have been to all the doctors.
The result was that I overstrained my voice, and that caused it to wobble.
Whether Callas's vocal decline was due to ill health, early menopause, over-use and abuse of her voice, loss of breath-support, loss of confidence, or weight loss will continue to be debated.
Whatever the cause may have been, her singing career was effectively over by age 40, and even at the time of her death at age 53, according to Walter Legge, "she ought still to have been singing magnificently".
Scandals and later career
The latter half of Callas's career was marked by a number of scandals.
Following a performance of Madama Butterfly in Chicago in 1955, Callas was confronted by a process server who handed her papers about a lawsuit brought by Eddy Bagarozy, who claimed he was her agent.
Callas was photographed with her mouth turned in a furious snarl.
The photo was sent around the world and gave rise to the myth of Callas as a temperamental prima donna and a "Tigress".
In the same year, just before her debut at the Metropolitan Opera, Time ran a damaging cover story about Callas, with special attention paid to her difficult relationship with her mother and some unpleasant exchanges between the two.
Callas's relationship with La Scala had also started to become strained after the Edinburgh incident, and this effectively severed her major ties with her artistic home.
Later in 1958, Callas and Rudolf Bing were in discussion about her season at the Met.
She was scheduled to perform in Verdi's La traviata and in Macbeth, two very different operas which almost require totally different singers.
Callas and the Met could not reach an agreement, and before the opening of Medea in Dallas, Bing sent a telegram to Callas terminating her contract.
Headlines of "Bing Fires Callas" appeared in newspapers around the world.
Bing later said that Callas was the most difficult artist he ever worked with, "because she was so much more intelligent.
Other artists, you could get around.
But Callas you could not get around.
She knew exactly what she wanted, and why she wanted it."
In his book about his wife, Meneghini states categorically that Maria Callas was unable to bear children.
As well, various sources dismiss Gage's claim, as they note that the birth certificates Gage used to prove this "secret child" were issued in 1998, twenty-one years after Callas's death.
Still other sources claim that Callas had at least one abortion while involved with Onassis.
In 1966, Callas renounced her U.S. citizenship at the American Embassy in Paris, to facilitate the end of her marriage to Meneghini.
This was because after her renunciation, she was only a Greek citizen, and under Greek law a Greek could only legally marry in a Greek Orthodox church.
As she had married in a Roman Catholic church, this divorced her in every country except Italy.
The renunciation also helped her finances, as she no longer had to pay U.S. taxes on her income.
The relationship ended two years later in 1968, when Onassis left Callas in favor of Jacqueline Kennedy.
However, the Onassis family's private secretary, Kiki, writes in her memoir that even while Aristotle was with Jackie, he frequently met with Maria in Paris, where they resumed what had now become a clandestine affair.
A funerary liturgy was held at St. Stephen's Greek Orthodox Cathedral on rue Georges-Bizet, Paris on September 20, 1977.
She was later cremated at the Père Lachaise Cemetery and her ashes were placed in the columbarium there.
After being stolen and later recovered, they were scattered over the Aegean Sea, off the coast of Greece, according to her wish, in the spring of 1979.
During a 1978 interview, upon being asked "Was it worth it to Maria Callas?
She was a lonely, unhappy, often difficult woman," music critic and Callas's friend John Ardoin replied:
That's such a difficult question.
There are times, you know, when there are people - certain people who are blessed, and cursed, with an extraordinary gift, in which the gift is almost greater than the human being.
And Callas was one of these people.
It was almost as if her wishes, her life, her own happiness were all subservient to this incredible, incredible gift that she was given, this gift that reached out and taught us all - taught us things about music we knew very well, but showed us new things, things we never thought about, new possibilities.
I think that's why singers admire her so; I think that's why conductors admire her so; I know that's why I admire her so.
And she paid a tremendously difficult and expensive price for this career.
I don't think she always understood what she did or why she did.
She knew she had a tremendous effect on audiences and on people.
But it was not something that she could always live with gracefully or happily.
I once said to her, "It must be very enviable to be Maria Callas."
And she said, "No, it's a very terrible thing to be Maria Callas, because it's a question of trying to understand something you can never really understand."
Because she couldn't explain what she did - it was all done by instinct; it was something, incredibly, embedded deep within her.
This claim is corroborated by Iakintha (Jackie) Callas in her 1990 book Sisters, wherein she asserts that Devetzi conned Maria out of control of half of her estate, while promising to establish the Maria Callas Foundation to provide scholarships for young singers; after hundreds of thousands of dollars had allegedly vanished, Devetzi finally did establish the foundation.
In popular culture
* Terrence McNally's play Master Class, which premiered in 1995, presents Callas as a glamorous, commanding, larger-than-life, caustic, and funny pedagogue holding a voice master class.
Alternately dismayed and impressed by the students who parade before her, she retreats into recollections about the glories of her own life and career, culminating in a monologue about sacrifice taken for art.
Several selections of Callas actually singing are played during the recollections.
* In 1997, she was featured as one of 18 significant historical figures in Apple, Inc.'s Think different advertisement.
* In 2002, Franco Zeffirelli produced and directed a biopic, Callas Forever.
It was a fictionalized film in which Callas was played by Fanny Ardant.
It depicted the last months of Callas's life, when she was seduced into the making of a movie of Carmen, lip-synching to her 1964 recording of that opera.
* In 2007, Callas was posthumously awarded the Grammy Lifetime Achievement Award.
In the same year, she was voted the greatest soprano of all time by BBC Music Magazine.
The 30th anniversary of the death of Maria Callas was selected as the main motif for a high value euro collectors' coin: the €10 Greek Maria Callas commemorative coin, minted in 2007.
Her image is shown in the obverse of the coin, while on the reverse the National Emblem of Greece with her signature is depicted.
* On December 2, 2008, on the 85th anniversary of Callas's birth, a group of Greek and Italian officials unveiled a plaque in her honor at Flower Hospital (now the Terence Cardinal Cooke Health Care Center) where she was born.
Made of Carrara marble and engraved in Italy, the plaque reads, "Maria Callas was born in this hospital on December 2, 1923.
These halls heard for the first time the musical notes of her voice, a voice which has conquered the world.
To this great interpreter of universal language of music, with gratitude."
* In 2012, Callas was voted into Gramophone magazine's Hall of Fame.
* Asteroid 29834 Mariacallas was named in her memory.
* A number of non-operatic singers including Anna Calvi, Linda Ronstadt, and Patti Smith have mentioned Callas as a great musical influence.
Former opera singer turned pop singer Giselle Bellas cites Callas as an influence; her song "The Canary" from her debut album Not Ready to Grow Up is inspired by the relationship between Callas and Onassis.
Other popular musicians have paid tribute to Callas in their music:
*Enigma released the instrumental "Callas Went Away" using samples of Callas's voice, on their 1990 album MCMXC a.D.
*"La diva", on Celine Dion's 2007 French language album D'elles is about Maria Callas.
The track samples the 1956 recording of La bohème.
* In the 2018-2019 season, BASE Hologram Productions presented Callas in Concert in the United States, Puerto Rico, Mexico, and Europe.
Repertoire
Callas's stage repertoire includes the following roles:
Notable recordings
All recordings are in mono unless otherwise indicated.
Live performances are typically available on multiple labels.
In 2014, Warner Classics (formerly EMI Classics) released the Maria Callas Remastered Edition, consisting of her complete studio recordings totaling 39 albums in a boxed set remastered at Abbey Road Studios in 24-bit/96 kHz digital sound from original master tapes.
* Verdi, Nabucco, conducted by Vittorio Gui, live performance, Napoli, December 20, 1949
* Verdi, Il trovatore, conducted by Guido Picco, live performance, Mexico City, June 20, 1950.
In the aria "D'amor sull'ali rosee", Callas sings Verdi's original high D flat, likewise in her 1951 San Carlo performance.
* Wagner, Parsifal, live performance conducted by Vittorio Gui, RAI Rome, November 20/21 1950 (Italian)
* Verdi, Il trovatore, live performance conducted by Tullio Serafin, Teatro San Carlo, Naples, January 27, 1951
* Verdi, Les vêpres siciliennes, live performance conducted by Erich Kleiber, Teatro Comunale Florence, May 26, 1951 (Italian)
* Verdi, Aida, conducted by Oliviero De Fabritiis, live performance, Palacio de Bellas Artes, Mexico City, July 3, 1951
* Rossini, Armida, live performance, Tullio Serafin, Teatro Comunale Florence, April 26, 1952
Ponchielli, La Gioconda, conducted by Antonino Votto, studio recording for Fonit Cetra, September 1952
* Bellini, Norma, conducted by Vittorio Gui, live performance, Covent Garden, London, November 18, 1952
* Verdi, Macbeth, conducted by Victor de Sabata, live performance, La Scala, Milan, December 7, 1952
* Verdi Il trovatore, live performance conducted by Votto, La Scala February 23, 1953
* Bellini, I puritani, conducted by Tullio Serafin, studio recording for EMI, March-April 1953
* Cherubini, Médée, live performance conducted by Vittorio Gui, Teatro Comunale, Florence, May 7, 1953 (Italian)
* Mascagni, Cavalleria rusticana, conducted by Tullio Serafin, studio recording for EMI, August 1953
* Puccini, Tosca (Sabata recording), conducted by Victor de Sabata, studio recording for EMI, August 1953.
* Verdi, La traviata, conducted by Gabriele Santini, studio recording for Fonit Cetra, September 1953
* Cherubini, Médée, conducted by Leonard Bernstein, live performance, La Scala, Milan, December 10, 1953 (Italian)
* Bellini, Norma , conducted by Tullio Serafin, studio recording for EMI, April May 1954
* Gluck, Alceste, Carlo Maria Giulini, La Scala, Milan, April 4, 1954 (Italian)
* Leoncavallo, Pagliacci, conducted by Tullio Serafin, studio recording for EMI, June 1954
* Rossini, Il turco in Italia, conducted by Gianandrea Gavazzeni, studio recording for EMI, August-September 1954
* Spontini, La vestale, conducted by Antonino Votto, live performance, La Scala, Milan, December 7, 1954 (Italian)
* Verdi, La traviata, conducted by Carlo Maria Giulini, live performance, La Scala, Milan, May 28, 1955
* Puccini, Madama Butterfly, conducted by Herbert von Karajan, studio recording for EMI, August 1955
* Verdi, Aida, conducted by Tullio Serafin, studio recording for EMI, August 1955
* Verdi, Rigoletto, conducted by Tullio Serafin, studio recording for EMI, September 1955
* Donizetti, Lucia di Lammermoor, conducted by Herbert von Karajan, live performance, Berlin, September 29, 1955
* Bellini, Norma, conducted by Antonino Votto, live performance, La Scala, Milan, December 7, 1955.
* Verdi, Il trovatore, conducted by Herbert von Karajan, studio recording for EMI, August 1956
* Puccini, La bohème, conducted by Antonino Votto, studio recording for EMI, August-September 1956.
Like her later recording of Carmen, this was her only performance of the complete opera, as she never appeared onstage in it.
* Verdi, Un ballo in maschera, conducted by Antonino Votto, studio recording for EMI, September 1956
* Rossini, Il barbiere di Siviglia, conducted by Alceo Galliera, studio recording for EMI in stereo, February 1957
* Bellini, La sonnambula, conducted by Antonino Votto, studio recording for EMI, March 1957
* Donizetti, Anna Bolena, conducted by Gianandrea Gavazzeni, live performance, La Scala, Milan, April 14, 1957
* Gluck, Iphigénie en Tauride, La Scala Milan, Sanzogno, June 1, 1957 (Italian)
* Bellini, La sonnambula, conducted by Antonino Votto, live performance, Cologne, July 4, 1957
* Puccini, Turandot, conducted by Tullio Serafin, studio recording for EMI, July 1957
* Cherubini, Médée, conducted by Tullio Serafin, studio recording for Ricordi in stereo, September 1957 (Italian)
* Verdi, Un ballo in maschera, conducted by Gianandrea Gavazzeni, live performance, La Scala, Milan, December 7, 1957
* Verdi, La traviata, conducted by Franco Ghione, live performance, Lisbon, March 27, 1958
* Verdi, La traviata, conducted by Nicola Rescigno, live performance, London, June 20, 1958; considered by many critics to be Callas's most notable recording of Verdi's famous opera.
Music critic John Ardoin wrote that in this performance "Callas' use of her voice to expressive ends amounts to an amalgamation of the best in previous Traviatas.
For even though her voice betrays her at times, her intellect and spirit have now conquered the part in a manner that outdistances all others."
* Mad Scenes (excerpts from Anna Bolena, Bellini's Il pirata and Ambroise Thomas's Hamlet), conducted by Nicola Rescigno, studio recording for EMI in stereo, September 1958
* Cherubini, Médée conducted by Nicola Rescigno, live performance at the Dallas Civic Opera November 6, 1958; considered to be Callas's most notable performance of Cherubini's opera.
Ponchielli, La Gioconda, conducted by Antonino Votto, studio recording for EMI in stereo, September 1959
* Puccini, Tosca, conducted by Carlo Felice Cillario, live performance, London, January 24, 1964
* Bizet, Carmen, conducted by Georges Prêtre, studio recording for EMI in stereo, July 1964.
It is her only performance of the role, and her only performance of the complete opera; she never appeared in it onstage.
The recording used the recitatives added after Bizet's death.
Callas's performance caused critic Harold C. Schonberg to speculate in his book The Glorious Ones that Callas perhaps should have sung mezzo roles instead of simply soprano ones.
* Puccini, Tosca, conducted by Georges Prêtre, studio recording for EMI in stereo, December 1964.
Sources
* (2001).
The Unknown Callas: The Greek Years.
Amadeus Press , issue 14 of opera biography series, foreword by George Lascelles
Further reading
* Gagelmann, Rainer Benedict, http:/ International Maria Callas Bibliography (includes almost 1,000 publications)
* Salazar, Philippe-Joseph, "Le Mausolée Callas", Liberation, September 26, 1977.
* Seletsky, Robert E. (2004), "The Performance Practice of Maria Callas: Interpretation and Instinct", The Opera Quarterly, 20/4, pp. 587-602.
* Seletsky, Robert E., "Callas at EMI: Remastering and Perception"; "A Callas Recording Update"; "A Callas Recording Update...updated", The Opera Quarterly (2000), 16 2 (2005), pp.
387-391; 21/3, pp.
545-546 (2005).
* Stancioff, Nadia, Maria: Callas Remembered.
An Intimate Portrait of the Private Callas, New York: E. P. Dutton, 1987, .
