Measles is a highly contagious infectious disease caused by the measles virus.
Symptoms usually develop 10-12 days after exposure to an infected person and last 7-10 days.
Initial symptoms typically include fever, often greater than , cough, runny nose, and inflamed eyes.
Common complications include diarrhea (in 8% of cases), middle ear infection (7%), and pneumonia (6%).
Less commonly seizures, blindness, or inflammation of the brain may occur.
Both rubella, also known as "German measles", and roseola are different diseases caused by unrelated viruses.
Measles is an airborne disease which spreads easily through the coughs and sneezes of infected people.
Most people do not get the disease more than once.
Once a person has become infected, no specific treatment is available, It is one of the leading vaccine-preventable disease causes of death.
In 1980, 2.6 million people died of it, Despite these trends, rates of disease and deaths increased from 2017 to 2019 due to a decrease in immunization.
The risk of death among those infected is about 0.2%, Fever is common and typically lasts for about one week; the fever seen with measles is often as high as .
Recognizing these spots before a person reaches their maximum infectiousness can help reduce the spread of the disease.
The characteristic measles rash is classically described as a generalized red maculopapular rash that begins several days after the fever starts.
It starts on the back of the ears and, after a few hours, spreads to the head and neck before spreading to cover most of the body, often causing itching.
The measles rash appears two to four days after the initial symptoms and lasts for up to eight days.
The rash is said to "stain", changing color from red to dark brown, before disappearing.
Overall, measles usually resolves after about three weeks.
acute brain inflammation (and very rarely subacute sclerosing panencephalitis), and corneal ulceration (leading to corneal scarring).
In addition, measles can suppress the immune system for weeks to months, and this can contribute to bacterial superinfections such as otitis media and bacterial pneumonia.
The death rate in the 1920s was around 30% for measles pneumonia.
People who are at high risk for complications are infants and children aged less than 5 years; and those who are malnourished Complications are usually more severe in adults who catch the virus.
Between 1987 and 2000, the case fatality rate across the United States was three deaths per 1,000 cases attributable to measles, or 0.3%.
In underdeveloped nations with high rates of malnutrition and poor healthcare, fatality rates have been as high as 28%.
Even in previously healthy children, measles can cause serious illness requiring hospitalization.
Measles is so contagious that if one person has it, 90% of nearby non-immune people will also become infected.
immunosuppression following receipt of an organ or a stem cell transplant, alkylating agents, or corticosteroid therapy, regardless of immunization status; Measles virus uses a protein on its surface called hemagglutinin (H protein), to bind to a target receptor on the host cell, which could be CD46, which is expressed on all nucleated human cells, CD150, aka signaling lymphocyte activation molecule or SLAM, which is found on immune cells like B or T cells, and antigen-presenting cells, or nectin-4, a cellular adhesion molecule.
Once bound, the fusion, or F protein helps the virus fuse with the membrane and ultimately get inside the cell.
Within days, the measles virus spreads through local tissue and is picked up by dendritic cells and alveolar macrophages, and carried from that local tissue in the lungs to the local lymph nodes.
Laboratory testing
Laboratory diagnosis of measles can be done with confirmation of positive measles IgM antibodies or isolation of measles virus RNA from respiratory specimens.
For people unable to have their blood drawn, saliva can be collected for salivary measles-specific IgA testing.
Positive contact with other people known to have measles adds evidence to the diagnosis.
Prevention
Mothers who are immune to measles pass antibodies to their children while they are still in the womb, especially if the mother acquired immunity through infection rather than vaccination.
Such antibodies will usually give newborn infants some immunity against measles, but these antibodies are gradually lost over the course of the first nine months of life.
In developing countries where measles is common, the World Health Organization (WHO) recommends two doses of vaccine be given, at six and nine months of age.
The vaccine should be given whether the child is HIV-infected or not.
The vaccine is less effective in HIV-infected infants than in the general population, but early treatment with antiretroviral drugs can increase its effectiveness.
Measles vaccination programs are often used to deliver other child health interventions as well, such as bed nets to protect against malaria, antiparasite medicine and vitamin A supplements, and so contribute to the reduction of child deaths from other causes.
The Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP) recommends that all adult international travelers who do not have positive evidence of previous measles immunity receive two doses of MMR vaccine before traveling.
Those born in the United States before 1957 are presumed to be immune because they would have had the disease in their childhood before any vaccination was available.
Medications
Treatment is supportive, with ibuprofen or paracetamol (acetaminophen) to reduce fever and pain and, if required, a fast-acting medication to dilate the airways for cough.
As for aspirin, some research has suggested a correlation between children who take aspirin and the development of Reye syndrome.
The use of vitamin A during treatment is recommended to decrease the risk of blindness; however, it does not prevent or cure the disease.
A systematic review of trials into its use found no reduction in overall mortality, but it did reduce mortality in children aged under two years.
It is unclear if zinc supplementation in children with measles affects outcomes as it has not been sufficiently studied.
Prognosis
Most people survive measles, though in some cases, complications may occur.
About 1 in 4 individuals will be hospitalized and 1-2 in 1000 will die.
Complications are more likely in children under age 5 and adults over age 20.
Possible consequences of measles virus infection include laryngotracheobronchitis, sensorineural hearing loss, and-in about 1 in 10,000 to 1 in 300,000 cases-panencephalitis, which is usually fatal.
Acute measles encephalitis is another serious risk of measles virus infection.
It typically occurs two days to one week after the measles rash breaks out and begins with very high fever, severe headache, convulsions and altered mentation.
A person with measles encephalitis may become comatose, and death or brain injury may occur.
For people having had measles, it is rare to ever have a symptomatic reinfection.
The measles virus can kill cells that make antibodies and weaken the immune system for several years.
Epidemiology
for measles per 100,000 inhabitants in 2004
Measles is extremely infectious and its continued circulation in a community depends on the generation of susceptible hosts by birth of children.
In communities that generate insufficient new hosts the disease will die out.
This concept was first recognized in measles by Bartlett in 1957, who referred to the minimum number supporting measles as the critical community size (CCS).
Analysis of outbreaks in island communities suggested that the CCS for measles is around 250,000.
To achieve herd immunity, more than 95% of the community must be vaccinated due to the ease with which measles is transmitted from person to person.
As of 2018, measles remains a leading cause of vaccine-preventable deaths in the world.
In developed countries the mortality rate is lower, for example in England and Wales from 2007-2017 death occurred between two to three cases out of 10,000.
In children one to two cases out of every 1,000 die in the United States (0.1-0.2%).
In populations with high levels of malnutrition and a lack of adequate healthcare, mortality can be as high as 10%.
In cases with complications, the rate may rise to 20-30%.
In 2012, the number of deaths due to measles was 78% lower than in 2000 due to increased rates of immunization among UN member states.
Estimates for 2008 indicate deaths fell further to 164,000 globally, with 77% of the remaining measles deaths in 2008 occurring within the Southeast Asian region.
Cases reported in the first three months of 2019 were 300% higher than in the first three months of 2018, with outbreaks in every region of the world, even in countries with high overall vaccination coverage where it spread among clusters of unvaccinated people.
Europe
In 2013-14, there were almost 10,000 cases in 30 European countries.
Most cases occurred in unvaccinated individuals and over 90% of cases occurred in Germany, Italy, Netherlands, Romania, and United Kingdom.
In 2017, numbers continued to increase in Europe to 21,315 cases, with 35 deaths.
In preliminary figures for 2018, reported cases in the region increased 3-fold to 82,596 in 47 countries, with 72 deaths; Ukraine had the most cases (53,218), with the highest incidence rates being in Ukraine (1209 cases per million), Serbia (579), Georgia (564) and Albania (500).
The previous year (2017) saw an estimated measles vaccine coverage of 95% for the first dose and 90% for the second dose in the region, the latter figure being the highest-ever estimated second-dose coverage.
In the first 6 months of 2019 90,000 cases occurred in Europe.
However, there were cases again in 2017, 2018 and 2019 in this region.
Before immunization in the United States, between three and four million cases occurred each year.
Occasional measles outbreaks persist, however, because of cases imported from abroad, of which more than half are the result of unvaccinated U.S. residents who are infected abroad and infect others upon return to the United States.
In 2014, an outbreak was initiated in Ohio when two unvaccinated Amish men harboring asymptomatic measles returned to the United States from missionary work in the Philippines.
Their return to a community with low vaccination rates led to an outbreak that rose to include a total of 383 cases across nine counties.
Of the cases 48% were unvaccinated and 38% were unsure of their vaccination status.
The initial exposure to the virus was never identified.
In 2015, a U.S. woman in Washington state died of pneumonia, as a result of measles.
She was the first fatality in the U.S. from measles since 2003.
The woman had been vaccinated for measles and was taking immunosuppressive drug for another condition.
The drugs suppressed the woman's immunity to measles, and the woman became infected with measles; she did not develop a rash, but contracted pneumonia, which caused her death.
In June 2017, the Maine Health and Environmental Testing Laboratory confirmed a case of measles in Franklin County.
This instance marks the first case of measles in 20 years for the state of Maine.
In 2018 one case occurred in Portland, Oregon, with 500 people exposed; 40 of them lacked immunity to the virus and were being monitored by county health officials as of 2 July 2018.
There were 273 cases of measles reported throughout the United States in 2018, including an outbreak in Brooklyn with more than 200 reported cases from October 2018 to February 2019.
The outbreak was tied with population density of the Orthodox Jewish community, with the initial exposure from an unvaccinated child that caught measles while visiting Israel.
A resurgence of measles occurred during 2019, which has been generally tied to parents choosing not to have their children vaccinated as most of the reported cases have occurred in people 19 years old or younger.
This led state governor Jay Inslee to declare a state of emergency, and the state's congress to introduce legislation to disallow vaccination exemption for personal or philosophical reasons.
In April 2019 Bill de Blasio declared a public health emergency because of "a huge spike" in cases of measles in New York where there were 285 cases centred on the Orthodox Jewish areas of Brooklyn in 2018, while there were only two cases in 2017.
There were 168 more in neighboring Rockland County.
Other outbreaks have included Santa Cruz County and Butte County in California, and the states of New Jersey and Michigan.
, there have been 695 cases of measles reported in 22 states.
From 1 January to 3 October 2019, 1,250 individual cases of measles have been confirmed in 31 states.
This is the greatest number of cases reported in the U.S. since 1992.
This last case was in the state of Ceará.
Brazil won a measles elimination certificate by the Pan American Health Organization in 2016, but the Ministry of Health has proclaimed that the country has struggled to keep this certificate, since two outbreaks had already been identified in 2018, one in the state of Amazonas and another one in Roraima, in addition to cases in other states (Rio de Janeiro, Rio Grande do Sul, Pará, São Paulo and Rondônia), totaling 1053 confirmed cases until 1 August 2018.
In these outbreaks, and in most other cases, the contagion was related to the importation of the virus, especially from Venezuela.
as of 30 May, 21,639 suspected measles cases had been reported, with 142 measles-related fatalities.
In the Naga Self-Administered Zone in a remote northern region of Myanmar, at least 40 children died during a measles outbreak in August 2016 that was probably caused by lack of vaccination in an area of poor health infrastructure.
Following the 2019 Philippines measles outbreak, 23,563 measles cases have been reported in the country with 338 fatalities.
A measles outbreak also happened among the Malaysian Orang Asli sub-group of Batek people in the state of Kelantan from May 2019, causing the deaths of 15 from the tribe.
History
Estimates based on modern molecular biology place the emergence of measles as a human disease sometime after 500 AD Given what is now known about the evolution of measles, Rhazes' account is remarkably timely, as recent work that examined the mutation rate of the virus indicates the measles virus emerged from rinderpest (cattle plague) as a zoonotic disease between 1100 and 1200 AD, a period that may have been preceded by limited outbreaks involving a virus not yet fully acclimated to humans.
This agrees with the observation that measles requires a susceptible population of >500,000 to sustain an epidemic, a situation that occurred in historic times following the growth of medieval European cities.
Between roughly 1855 and 2005, measles has been estimated to have killed about 200 million people worldwide.
Measles killed 20 percent of Hawaii's population in the 1850s.
In 1875, measles killed over 40,000 Fijians, approximately one-third of the population.
In the 19th century, the disease killed 50% of the Andamanese population.
Seven to eight million children are thought to have died from measles each year before the vaccine was introduced.
In 1954, the virus causing the disease was isolated from a 13-year-old boy from the United States, David Edmonston, and adapted and propagated on chick embryo tissue culture.
To date, 21 strains of the measles virus have been identified.
While at Merck, Maurice Hilleman developed the first successful vaccine.
Licensed vaccines to prevent the disease became available in 1963.
An improved measles vaccine became available in 1968.
Measles as an endemic disease was eliminated from the United States in 2000, but continues to be reintroduced by international travelers.
Society and culture
German anti-vaccination campaigner and HIV/AIDS denialist Stefan Lanka posed a challenge on his website in 2011, offering a sum of €100,000 for anyone who could scientifically prove that measles is caused by a virus and determine the diameter of the virus.
He posits that the illness is psychosomatic and that the measles virus does not exist.
When provided with overwhelming scientific evidence from various medical studies by German physician David Bardens, Lanka did not accept the findings, forcing Bardens to appeal in court.
The legal case ended with the ruling that Lanka was to pay the prize.
The case received wide international coverage that prompted many to comment on it, including neurologist, well-known skeptic and science-based medicine advocate Steven Novella, who called Lanka "a crank".
As outbreaks easily occur in under-vaccinated populations, the disease is seen as a test of sufficient vaccination within a population.
Alternative names
Other names include morbilli, rubeola, red measles, and English measles.
Results from additional studies that show the measles virus can kill cells that make antibodies were published in November 2019.
