Herman Melville (born Melvill; August 1, 1819 - September 28, 1891) was an American novelist, short story writer, and poet of the American Renaissance period.
Among his best-known works are Typee (1846), a romantic account of his experiences of Polynesian life, and his magnum opus, Moby-Dick (1851).
Melville was born in New York City, the third child of a merchant.
Typee, his first book, was followed by a sequel, Omoo (1847).
Both were successful and gave him the financial basis to marry Elizabeth "Lizzie" Shaw, a daughter of a prominent Boston family.
His first novel not based on his own experiences, Mardi (1849), was not well received.
His next fictional work, Redburn (1849), and his non-fiction White-Jacket (1850) were given better reviews but did not provide financial security.
Moby-Dick (1851), although now considered one of the great American novels, was not well received among contemporary critics.
His psychological novel, .
In 1867, his eldest child Malcolm died at home from a self-inflicted gunshot. "
with critics rediscovering his work and his major novels starting to become recognized as world classics of prominent importance to contemporary world literature.
Biography
Early life
Herman Melville was born in New York City on August 1, 1819, to Allan Melvill (1782-1832) and Maria (Gansevoort) Melvill (1791-1872).
Herman was the third of eight children in a family of Dutch extraction.
His siblings, who played important roles in his career as well as in his emotional life, were Gansevoort (1815-1846); Helen Maria (1817-1888); Augusta (1821-1876); Allan (1823-1872); Catherine (1825-1905); Frances Priscilla (1827-1885); and Thomas (1830-1884), who eventually became a governor of Sailors Snug Harbor.
Part of a well-established and colorful Boston family, Allan Melvill spent much time out of New York and in Europe as a commission merchant and an importer of French dry goods.
Both of Melville's grandfathers were heroes of the Revolutionary War.
Major Thomas Melvill (1751-1832) had taken part in the Boston Tea Party, and his maternal grandfather, General Peter Gansevoort (1749-1812), was famous for having commanded the defense of Fort Stanwix in New York in 1777.
Melville found satisfaction in his "double revolutionary descent".
Major Melvill sent his son Allan (Herman's father) to France instead of college at the turn of the nineteenth century, where he spent two years in Paris and learned to speak and write French fluently.
In 1814, Allan, who subscribed to his father's Unitarianism, married Maria Gansevoort, who was committed to the Dutch Reformed version of the Calvinist creed of her family.
The severe Protestantism of the Gansevoort's tradition ensured she was well versed in her Bible in English as well as in Dutch, the language she had grown up speaking with her parents.
On August 19, almost three weeks after his birth, Herman Melville was baptized at home by a minister of the South Reformed Dutch Church.
During the 1820s, Melville lived a privileged, opulent life in a household with three or more servants at a time.
At four-year intervals, the family would move to more spacious and elegant quarters, finally settling on Broadway in 1828.
Allan Melvill lived beyond his means and on large sums he borrowed from both his father and his wife's widowed mother.
Although his wife's opinion of his financial conduct is unknown, biographer Hershel Parker suggests Maria "thought her mother's money was infinite and that she was entitled to much of her portion" while her children were young.
In 1830, Maria's family finally lost patience and their support came to a halt, at which point Allan's total debt to both families exceeded $20,000 ().
The felicity of Melville's early childhood, biographer Newton Arvin writes, depended not so much on wealth as on the "exceptionally tender and affectionate spirit in all the family relationships, especially in the immediate circle".
Arvin describes Allan as "a man of real sensibility and a particularly warm and loving father," while Maria was "warmly maternal, simple, robust, and affectionately devoted to her husband and her brood".
Herman and his older brother, Gansevoort, were sent to the New York Male High School.
In 1826, the same year that Herman contracted scarlet fever, Allan Melvill described him as "very backwards in speech & somewhat slow in comprehension" at first, but his development increased its pace and Allan was surprised "that Herman proved the best Speaker in the introductory Department".
In 1829, both Gansevoort and Herman were transferred to Columbia Grammar & Preparatory School, and Herman enrolled in the English Department on September 28.
Emotionally unstable and behind on paying the rent for the house on Broadway, Herman's father tried to recover from his setbacks by moving his family to Albany in 1830 and going into the fur business.
Herman attended the Albany Academy from October 1830 to October 1831, where he took the standard preparatory course, studying reading and spelling; penmanship; arithmetic; English grammar; geography; natural history; universal, Greek, Roman and English history; classical biography; and Jewish antiquities.
Parker speculates that he left the Academy in October 1831 because "even the tiny tuition fee seemed too much to pay".
His brothers Gansevoort and Allan continued their attendance a few months longer, Gansevoort until March the next year.
In December, Herman's father returned from New York City by steamboat, but ice forced him to travel the last seventy miles over two days and two nights in an open horse carriage at , causing him to become ill.
In early January, he began to show "signs of delirium," and his situation grew worse until his wife felt his suffering deprived him of his intellect.
Two months before reaching fifty, Allan Melvill died on January 28, 1832.
As Herman was no longer attending school, he likely witnessed these scenes.
Twenty years later he described a similar death in Pierre.
1832-1838:
After his father's death
The death of Allan caused many major shifts in the family's material and spiritual circumstances.
One result was the greater influence of his mother's religious beliefs.
Maria sought consolation in her faith and in April was admitted as a member of the First Reformed Dutch Church.
Herman's saturation in orthodox Calvinism is for Arvin "surely the most decisive intellectual and spiritual influence of his early life".
Biographers cite a passage from Redburn His paternal grandmother died almost exactly seven months later.
Melville did his job well at the bank; though he was only fourteen in 1834, the bank considered him competent enough to be sent to Schenectady on an errand.
Not much else is known from this period, except that he was very fond of drawing.
The visual arts became a lifelong interest.
Around May 1834, the Melvilles moved to another house in Albany, a three-story brick house.
That same month a fire destroyed Gansevoort's skin-preparing factory, which left him with personnel he could neither employ nor afford.
Instead he pulled Melville out of the bank to man the cap and fur store.
In September of the following year Herman was back in Albany Academy in the Latin course.
He also participated in debating societies, in an apparent effort to make up as much as he could for his missed years of schooling.
In this period he read Shakespeare-at least Macbeth, whose witch scenes gave him the chance to teasingly scare his sisters.
In March 1837, he was again withdrawn from Albany Academy.
Gansevoort served as a role model and support for Melville in many ways throughout his life, at this time particularly in forming a self-directed educational plan.
In early 1834 Gansevoort had become a member of Albany's Young Men's Association for Mutual Improvement, and in January 1835 Melville joined.
Gansevoort also had copies of John Todd's Index Rerum, a blank register for indexing remarkable passages from books one had read for easy retrieval.
Among the sample entries was "Pequot, beautiful description of the war with," with a short title reference to the place in Benjamin Trumbull's A Complete History of Connecticut (Volume I in 1797, and Volume II in 1898) where the description could be found.
The two surviving volumes of Gansevoort's are the best evidence for Melville's reading in this period.
Gansevoort's entries include books Melville used for Moby-Dick and Clarel, such as "Parsees-of India-an excellent description of their character, & religion & an account of their descent-East India Sketch Book p. 21".
Other entries are on Panther, the pirate's cabin, and storm at sea from James Fenimore Cooper's The Red Rover, Saint-Saba.
The Panic of 1837 forced Gansevoort to file for bankruptcy in April.
In June, Maria told the younger children they must leave Albany for somewhere cheaper.
Gansevoort began studying law in New York City while Herman managed the farm before getting a teaching position at Sikes District School near Lenox, Massachusetts.
He taught about 30 students of various ages, including some his own age.
The semester over, he returned to his mother in 1838.
In February he was elected president of the Philo Logos Society, which Peter Gansevoort invited to move into Stanwix Hall for no rent.
In the Albany Microscope in March, Melville published two polemical letters about issues in vogue in the debating societies.
Historians Leon Howard and Hershel Parker suggest the motive behind the letters was a youthful desire to have his rhetorical skills publicly recognized.
In May, the Melvilles moved to a rented house in Lansingburgh, almost 12 miles north of Albany.
Nothing is known about what Melville did or where he went for several months after he finished teaching at Sikes.
On November 12, five days after arriving in Lansingburgh, Melville paid for a term at Lansingburgh Academy to study surveying and engineering.
In an April 1839 letter recommending Herman for a job in the Engineer Department of the Erie Canal, Peter Gansevoort says his nephew "possesses the ambition to make himself useful in a business which he desires to make his profession," but no job resulted.
Just weeks after this failure, Melville's first known published essay appeared.
Using the initials "L.A.V"., Herman contributed "Fragments from a Writing Desk" to the weekly newspaper Democratic Press and Lansingburgh Advertiser, which printed it in two installments, the first on May 4.
According to Merton Sealts, his use of heavy-handed allusions reveals familiarity with the work of William Shakespeare, John Milton, Walter Scott, Richard Brinsley Sheridan, Edmund Burke, Samuel Taylor Coleridge, Lord Byron, and Thomas Moore.
Parker calls the piece "characteristic Melvillean mood-stuff" and considers its style "excessive enough ... to indulge his extravagances and just enough overdone to allow him to deny that he was taking his style seriously".
1839-1844: Years at sea
On May 31, 1839, Gansevoort, then living in New York City, wrote that he was sure Herman could get a job on a whaler or merchant vessel.
The next day, he signed aboard the merchant ship St. Lawrence as a "boy" (a green hand), which cruised from New York to Liverpool; he arrived back in New York October 1. to see if his Uncle Thomas could help them find work.
Unsuccessful, he and his friend returned home in autumn, very likely by way of St. Louis and up the Ohio River.
Probably inspired by his reading of Richard Henry Dana, Jr.'s new book Two Years Before the Mast, and by Jeremiah N. Reynolds's account in the May 1839 issue of The Knickerbocker magazine of the hunt for a great white sperm whale named Mocha Dick, Melville and Gansevoort traveled to New Bedford, where Melville signed up for a whaling voyage aboard a new ship, the Acushnet.
Built in 1840, the ship measured some 104 feet in length, almost 28 feet in breadth, and almost 14 feet in depth.
She measured slightly less than 360 tons, had two decks and three masts, but no galleries.
When he signed the crew list the next day he was advanced $84.
Melville slept with some twenty others in the forecastle; Captain Valentine Pease, the mates, and the skilled men slept aft.
Whales were found near The Bahamas, and in March 150 barrels of oil were sent home from Rio de Janeiro.
Cutting in and trying-out (boiling) a single whale took about three days, and a whale yielded approximately one barrel of oil per foot of length and per ton of weight (the average whale weighed 40 to 60 tons).
The oil was kept on deck for a day to cool off, and was then stowed down; scrubbing the deck completed the labor.
An average voyage meant that some forty whales were killed to yield some 1600 barrels of oil.
On April 15, the Acushnet sailed around Cape Horn, and traveled to the South Pacific, where the crew sighted whales without catching any.
Then up the coast of Chile to the region of Selkirk Island and on 7 May, near Juan Fernández Islands, she had 160 barrels.
On June 23 the ship anchored for the first time since Rio, in Santa Harbor.
The cruising grounds the Acushnet was sailing attracted much traffic, and Captain Pease not only paused to visit other whalers, but at times hunted in company with them.
From July 23 into August the Acushnet regularly gammed with the Lima from Nantucket, and Melville met William Henry Chase, the son of Owen Chase, who gave him a copy of his father's account of his adventures aboard the Essex.
Ten years later Melville wrote in his other copy of the book: "The reading of this wondrous story upon the landless sea, & close to the very latitude of the shipwreck had a surprising effect upon me".
On September 25 the ship reported 600 barrels of oil to another whaler, and in October 700 barrels.
On October 24 the Acushnet crossed the equator to the north, and six or seven days later arrived at the Galápagos Islands.
This short visit would be the basis for The Encantadas.
On November 2, the Acushnet and three other American whalers were hunting together near the Galápagos Islands; Melville later exaggerated that number in Sketch Fourth of The Encantadas.
From November 19 to 25 the ship anchored at Chatham's Isle, and on December 2 reached the coast of Peru and anchored at Tombez near Paita, with 570 barrels of oil on board.
On December 27 the Acushnet sighted Cape Blanco, off Ecuador, Point St. Elena was sighted the next day, and on January 6, 1842 the ship approached the Galápagos Islands from the southeast.
From February 13 to 7 May, seven sightings of sperm whales were recorded but none killed.
From early May to early June the Acushnet gammed several times with the Columbus of New Bedford, which also took letters from Melville's ship; the two ships were in the same area just south of the Equator.
On June 16 she carried 750 barrels, and sent home 200 on the Herald the Second.
On June 23, the Acushnet reached the Marquesas Islands, and anchored at Nuku Hiva.
A time of some emotional turbulence for Melville ensued over the next summer months.
On July 9, 1842, Melville and his shipmate Richard Tobias Greene jumped ship at Nukahiva Bay and ventured into the mountains to avoid capture.
Melville's first book, Typee (1845), is loosely based on his stay in or near the Taipi Valley.
Scholarly research starting in the 1930s and extending into the twenty-first century has increasingly shown that much if not all of this account was either taken from Melville's readings or exaggerated to dramatize a contrast between idyllic native culture and Western civilization.
On August 9, Melville boarded the Australian whaler Lucy Ann, bound for Tahiti, where on arrival he took part in a mutiny and was briefly jailed in the native Calabooza Beretanee.
Melville's wander-years created what biographer Arvin calls "a settled hatred of external authority, a lust for personal freedom" and a "growing and intensifying sense of his own exceptionalness as a person," along with "the resentful sense that circumstance and mankind together had already imposed their will upon him in a series of injurious ways".
Scholar Robert Milder believes the encounter with the wide ocean, where he was seemingly abandoned by God, led Melville to experience a "metaphysical estrangement" and influenced his social views in two ways: first, that he belonged to the genteel classes but sympathized with the "disinherited commons" he had been placed among; and second that experiencing the cultures of Polynesia let him view the West from an outsider's perspective.
1845-1850: Successful writer
Upon his return, Melville regaled his family and friends with his adventurous tales and romantic experiences, and they urged him to put them into writing.
Melville completed Typee, his first book, in the summer of 1845 while living in Troy.
His brother Gansevoort found a publisher for it in London, where it was published in February 1846 by John Murray and became an overnight bestseller, then in New York on March 17 by Wiley & Putnam.
Milder calls Typee "an appealing mixture of adventure, anecdote, ethnography, and social criticism presented with a genial latitudinarianism that gave novelty to a South Sea idyll at once erotically suggestive and romantically chaste".
At about the same time, prior to Melville being introduced to Hawthorne, Melville wrote a review of Hawthorne's "Power of Blackness" stating: Whether Hawthorne has simply availed himself of this mystical blackness as a means to the wondrous effects he makes it to produce in his lights and shades; or whether there really lurks in him, perhaps unknown to himself, a touch of Puritanic gloom-this, I cannot altogether tell.
Certain it is, however, that this power of blackness in him derives its force from its appeals to that Calvinistic sense of Innate Depravity and Original Sin, from whose visitations, in some shape or another, no deeply thinking mind is always and wholly freed.
Pleased but slightly bemused by the adulation of his new public, years later Melville expressed concern that he would "go down to posterity ... as a ‘man who lived among the cannibals'!"
The book brought Melville back into contact with his friend Greene, Toby in the book, who wrote confirming Melville's account in newspapers.
The two corresponded until 1863, and sustained a bond for life: in his final years Melville "traced and successfully located his old friend".
In March 1847, Omoo, a sequel to Typee was published by Murray in London, and in May by Harper in New York.
Typee and Omoo gave Melville overnight renown as a writer and adventurer, and he often entertained by telling stories to his admirers.
As the writer and editor Nathaniel Parker Willis wrote, "With his cigar and his Spanish eyes, he talks Typee and Omoo, just as you find the flow of his delightful mind on paper".
In 1847 Melville tried unsuccessfully to find a "government job" in Washington.
Lizzie's father had been a close friend of Melville's father and aunt Nancy, and his friendship with the Melvilles continued after Allan's death.
Arvin suggests that Melville's interest in Lizzie may have been stimulated by "his need of Judge Shaw's paternal presence".
She wanted to be married in church, but they had a private wedding ceremony at home to avoid possible crowds hoping to see the celebrity.
The couple honeymooned in Canada, and traveled to Montreal.
They settled in a house on Fourth Avenue in New York City (now called Park Avenue).
According to scholars Joyce Deveau Kennedy and Frederick James Kennedy, Lizzie brought the following qualities to their marriage: a sense of religious obligation in marriage, an intent to make a home with Melville regardless of place, a willingness to please her husband by performing such "tasks of drudgery" as mending stockings, an ability to hide her agitation, and a desire "to shield Melville from unpleasantness".
The Kennedys conclude their assessment with:
If the ensuing years did bring regrets to Melville's life, it is impossible to believe he would have regretted marrying Elizabeth.
In fact he must have realized that he could not have borne the weight of those years unaided-that without her loyalty, intelligence, and affection, his own wild imagination would have had no "port or haven".
Biographer Robertson-Lorant cites "Lizzie's adventurous spirit and abundant energy," and she suggests that "her pluck and good humor might have been what attracted Melville to her, and vice versa".
An example of such good humor appears in a letter about her not yet used to being married: "It seems sometimes exactly as if I were here for a visit.
The illusion is quite dispelled however when Herman stalks into my room without even the ceremony of knocking, bringing me perhaps a button to sew on, or some equally romantic occupation".
On February 16, 1849, the Melvilles' first child, Malcolm, was born.
In March 1848, Mardi was published by Richard Bentley in London, and in April by Harper in New York.
Biographer Robertson-Lorant regards the work as a deliberate attempt for popular appeal: "Melville modeled each episode almost systematically on every genre that was popular with some group of antebellum readers," combining elements of "the picaresque novel, the travelogue, the nautical adventure, the sentimental novel, the sensational French romance, the gothic thriller, temperance tracts, urban reform literature, and the English pastoral".
His next novel, White-Jacket, was published by Bentley in London in January 1850, and in March by Harper in New York.
From August 4 to 12, 1850, the Melvilles, Sarah Morewood, Evert Duyckinck, Oliver Wendell Holmes, and other literary figures from New York and Boston came to Pittsfield to enjoy a period of parties, picnics, dinners, and the like.
Nathaniel Hawthorne and his publisher James T. Fields joined the group while Hawthorne's wife stayed at home to look after the children.
Hawthorne and Melville had a deep, private conversation about Hawthorne's short story collection Mosses from an Old Manse.
Hawthorne invited Melville to stay for a few days, which was unusual because Hawthorne typically felt overnight guests prevented him from working.
The following days, Melville wrote the essay "Hawthorne and His Mosses," a review of Hawthorne's Mosses from an Old Manse that appeared in two installments, on August 17 and 24, in The Literary World.
Melville wrote that these stories revealed a dark side to Hawthorne, "shrouded in blackness, ten times black".
Later that summer, Duyckinck sent Hawthorne copies of Melville's three latest books.
Hawthorne read them, as he wrote to Duyckinck on August 29, "with a progressive appreciation of their author".
He thought Melville in Redburn and White-Jacket put the reality "more unflinchingly" before his reader than any writer, and he thought Mardi was "a rich book, with depths here and there that compel a man to swim for his life.
It is so good that one scarcely pardons the writer for not having brooded long over it, so as to make it a great deal better".
In September 1850, Melville borrowed three thousand dollars from his father-in-law Lemuel Shaw to buy a 160-acre farm in Pittsfield.
Melville called his new home Arrowhead because of the arrowheads that were dug up around the property during planting season.
That winter, Melville paid Hawthorne an unexpected visit, only to discover he was working and "not in the mood for company".
Hawthorne's wife Sophia gave him copies of Twice-Told Tales and, for Malcolm, The Grandfather's Chair.
Melville invited them to visit Arrowhead soon, hoping to "discuss the Universe with a bottle of brandy & cigars" with Hawthorne, but Hawthorne would not stop working on his new book for more than one day and they did not come.
After a second visit from Melville, Hawthorne surprised him by arriving at Arrowhead with his daughter Una.
According to Robertson-Lorant, "The handsome Hawthorne made quite an impression on the Melville women, especially Augusta, who was a great fan of his books".
They spent the day mostly "smoking and talking metaphysics".
In Robertson-Lorant's assessment of the friendship, Melville was "infatuated with Hawthorne's intellect, captivated by his artistry, and charmed by his elusive personality," and though the two writers were "drawn together in an undeniable sympathy of soul and intellect, the friendship meant something different to each of them," with Hawthorne offering Melville "the kind of intellectual stimulation he needed".
They may have been "natural allies and friends," yet they were also "fifteen years apart in age and temperamentally quite different" and Hawthorne "found Melville's manic intensity exhausting at times".
Melville wrote ten letters to Hawthorne, "all of them effusive, profound, deeply affectionate".
Melville was inspired and encouraged by his new relationship with Hawthorne during the period that he was writing Moby-Dick.
Melville dedicated the work to Hawthorne: "In token of my admiration for his genius, this book is inscribed to Nathaniel Hawthorne".
On October 18, 1851, The Whale was published in Britain in three volumes, and on November 14 Moby-Dick appeared in the United States as a single volume.
In between these dates, on October 22, 1851, the Melvilles' second child, Stanwix, was born.
In December, Hawthorne told Duyckinck, "What a book Melville has written!
It gives me an idea of much greater power than his preceding ones."
In early December 1852, Melville visited the Hawthornes in Concord and discussed the idea of the "Agatha" story he had pitched to Hawthorne.
This was the last known contact between the two writers before Melville visited Hawthorne in Liverpool four years later.
1852-1857: Unsuccessful writer
Melville had high hopes that his next book would please the public and restore his finances.
In April 1851 he told his British publisher, Richard Bentley, that his new book had "unquestionable novelty" and was calculated to have wide appeal with elements of romance and mystery.
In fact, accidents, told us that it appeared to be composed of the ravings and reveries of a madman.
We were somewhat startled at the remark, but still more at learning, a few days after, that Melville was really supposed to be deranged, and that his friends were taking measures to place him under treatment.
We hope one of the earliest precautions will be to keep him stringently secluded from pen and ink.
On May 22, 1853, Melville's third child and first daughter Elizabeth (Bessie) was born, and on or about that day Herman finished work on the Agatha story, Isle of the Cross.
Melville traveled to New York to discuss a book, presumably Isle of the Cross, with his publisher, but later wrote that Harper & Brothers was "prevented" from publishing his manuscript because it was lost.
After the commercial and critical failure of Pierre, Melville had difficulty finding a publisher for his follow-up novel, Israel Potter.
Instead, this narrative of a Revolutionary War veteran was serialized in Putnam's Monthly Magazine in 1853.
From November 1853 to 1856, Melville published fourteen tales and sketches in Putnam's and Harpers magazines.
In December 1855 he proposed to Dix & Edwards, the new owners of Putnam's, that they publish a selective collection of the short fiction.
The collection, The Piazza Tales, was named after a new introductory story Melville wrote for it, "The Piazza".
It also contained five previously published stories, including "Bartleby, the Scrivener" and "Benito Cereno".
On March 2, 1855, the Melvilles' fourth child, Frances (Fanny), was born.
In this period his book Israel Potter was published.
The writing of The Confidence-Man put great strain on Melville, leading Sam Shaw, a nephew of Lizzie, to write to his uncle Lemuel Shaw, "Herman I hope has had no more of those ugly attacks"-a reference to what Robertson-Lorant calls "the bouts of rheumatism and sciatica that plagued Melville".
Melville's father-in-law apparently shared his daughter's "great anxiety about him" when he wrote a letter to a cousin, in which he described Melville's working habits: "When he is deeply engaged in one of his literary works, he confines himself to hard study many hours in the day, with little or no exercise, & this specially in winter for a great many days together.
He probably thus overworks himself & brings on severe nervous affections".
Shaw advanced Melville $1,500 from Lizzie's inheritance to travel four or five months in Europe and the Holy Land.
Melville made a six-month Grand Tour of the British Isles and the Mediterranean.
While in England, in November he spent three days with Hawthorne, who had taken an embassy position there.
At the seaside village of Southport, amid the sand dunes where they had stopped to smoke cigars, they had a conversation which Hawthorne later described in his journal:
QTEMPLATE |Melville, as he always does, began to reason of Providence and futurity, and of everything that lies beyond human ken, and informed me that he "pretty much made up his mind to be annihilated"; but still he does not seem to rest in that anticipation; and, I think, will never rest until he gets hold of a definite belief.
It is strange how he persists-and has persisted ever since I knew him, and probably long before-in wandering to-and-fro over these deserts, as dismal and monotonous as the sand hills amid which we were sitting.
He can neither believe, nor be comfortable in his unbelief; and he is too honest and courageous not to try to do one or the other.
If he were a religious man, he would be one of the most truly religious and reverential; he has a very high and noble nature, and better worth immortality than most of us.
Melville's subsequent visit to the Holy Land inspired his epic poem Clarel.
On April 1, 1857, Melville published his last full-length novel, The Confidence-Man.
This novel, subtitled His Masquerade, has won general acclaim in modern times as a complex and mysterious exploration of issues of fraud and honesty, identity and masquerade.
But, when it was published, it received reviews ranging from the bewildered to the denunciatory.
1857-1876: Poet
To repair his faltering finances, Melville took up public lecturing from late 1857 to 1860.
He embarked upon three lecture tours Melville's lectures, which mocked the pseudo-intellectualism of lyceum culture, were panned by contemporary audiences.
On May 30, 1860, Melville boarded the clipper Meteor for California, with his brother Thomas at the helm.
After a shaky trip around Cape Horn, Melville returned to New York alone via Panama in November.
Later that year, he submitted a poetry collection to a publisher but it was not accepted.
In 1863, he bought his brother's house at 104 East 26th Street in New York City and moved there.
In 1864, Melville visited the Virginia battlefields of the American Civil War.
Only 525 copies were sold over the next ten years out of a print run of 1200, and it was generally ignored by reviewers.
In 1866, Melville became a customs inspector for New York City.
He held the post for 19 years and had a reputation for honest in a notoriously corrupt institution.
Unbeknownst to him, his position was sometimes protected by Chester A. Arthur, at that time a customs official who admired Melville's writing but never spoke to him.
During this time, Melville was short-tempered because of nervous exhaustion, physical pain, and drinking.
He would sometimes mistreat his family and servants in his unpredictable mood swings.
Robertson-Lorant compared Melville's behavior to the "tyrannical captains he had portrayed in his novels".
In 1867, his oldest son died at home at the age of 18 from a self-inflicted gun shot.
Historians and psychologists disagree on if it was intentional or accidental.
In May 1867, Lizzie's brother plotted to help her leave Melville without suffering the consequences divorce carried at the time, particularly the loss of all claim to her children.
His plan was for Lizzie to visit Boston, and friends would inform Melville she would not come back.
To get a divorce, she would then have to bring charges against Melville, believing her husband to be insane.
Though Melville's professional writing career had ended, he remained dedicated to his writing.
He spent years on what Milder called "his autumnal masterpiece" in 1925 "with its pages uncut".
1877-1891: Final years
In 1884, a legacy received by Lizzie enabled Melville to spend $25 () on books and prints each month.
Melville retired on December 31, 1885, In 1889 Melville became a member of the New York Society Library.
He was interred in the Woodlawn Cemetery in The Bronx, New York City.
A common story recounts that his The New York Times obituary called him "Henry Melville," implying that he was unknown and unappreciated at his time of death, but the story is not true.
A later article was published on October 6 in the same paper, referring to him as "the late Hiram Melville," but this appears to have been a typesetting error.
Lizzie edited the novella Melville was working on at his death and added notes to it.
The manuscript sat until 1919, when it was found by Melville's first biographer, Raymond Weaver.
Weaver transcribed and edited it into a full text, which he published in 1924 as Billy Budd, Sailor.
It was an immediate critical success in England, then in the United States.
It was adapted as a stage play on Broadway in 1951, then an opera, and in 1961 as a film.
A revised version of the novella was published in 1962, after two scholars studied the papers for several years.
Another volume of poetry, Weeds and Wildings, and a sketch, "Daniel Orme", were also left unpublished at the time of Melville's death.
As early as "Fragments from a Writing Desk", written when Melville was 20, scholar Sealts sees "a number of elements that anticipate Melville's later writing, especially his characteristic habit of abundant literary allusion".
Typee and Omoo were documentary adventures that called for a division of the narrative in short chapters.
Such compact organization bears the risk of fragmentation when applied to a lengthy work such as Mardi, but with Redburn and White Jacket, Melville turned the short chapter into a concentrated narrative.
Some chapters of Moby-Dick are no more than two pages in standard editions, and an extreme example is , consisting of a single paragraph of 36 words (including the thrice-repeated "Um, um, um.")
The skillful handling of chapters in Moby-Dick is one of the most fully developed Melvillean signatures, and is a measure of "his manner of mastery as a writer".
Individual chapters have become "a touchstone for appreciation of Melville's art and for explanation" of his themes.
In contrast, the chapters in Pierre, called Books, are divided into short numbered sections, seemingly an "odd formal compromise" between Melville's natural length and his purpose to write a regular romance that called for longer chapters.
As satirical elements were introduced, the chapter arrangement restores "some degree of organization and pace from the chaos".
in style, and with Moby-Dick Melville's vocabulary had grown superabundant.
Bezanson calls it an "immensely varied style".
A third characteristic is the presence of a participial modifier to emphasize and to reinforce the already established expectations of the reader, as the words "preluding" and "foreshadowing" ("so still and subdued and yet somehow preluding was all the scene ..."
"In this foreshadowing interval ...").
QTEMPLATE box|width
30em|bgcolor
#c6dbf7|align
left|quote
I tell you it will be more tolerable for the Feegee that salted down a lean missionary in his cellar against a coming famine; it will be more tolerable for that provident Feegee, I say, in the day of judgment, than for thee, civilized and enlightened gourmand, who nailest geese to the ground and feastest on their bloated livers in thy paté-de-foie-gras.|source=- Melville paraphrases the Bible in "The Whale as a Dish", Moby-Dick
After his use of hyphenated compounds in Pierre, Melville's writing gives Berthoff the impression of becoming less exploratory and less provocative in his choices of words and phrases.
Instead of providing a lead "into possible meanings and openings-out of the material in hand," the vocabulary now served "to crystallize governing impressions," tended to give way to "static enumeration".
The verbal music and kinetic energy of Moby-Dick seem "relatively muted, even withheld" in the later works.
Over time Melville's paragraphs became shorter as his sentences grew longer, until he arrived at the "one-sentence paragraphing characteristic of his later prose".
Berthoff points to the opening chapter of The Confidence-Man for an example, as it counts fifteen paragraphs, seven of which consist of only one elaborate sentence, and four that have only two sentences.
The use of similar technique in Billy Budd contributes in large part, Berthoff says, to its "remarkable narrative economy".
QTEMPLATE box|width
30em|bgcolor
#c6dbf7|align
right|quote
Verily I say unto you, It shall be more tolerable for the land of Sodom and Gomorrah in the day of judgment, than for that city.
|source=-Matthew 10:15
Style and literary allusion
In Nathalia Wright's view, Melville's sentences generally have a looseness of structure, easy to use for devices as catalogue and allusion, parallel and refrain, proverb and allegory.
The length of his clauses may vary greatly, but the "torterous" writing in Pierre and The Confidence-Man is there to convey feeling, not thought.
Unlike Henry James, who was an innovator of sentence ordering to render the subtlest nuances in thought, Melville made few such innovations.
His domain is the mainstream of English prose, with its rhythm and simplicity influenced by the King James Bible.
Another important characteristic of Melville's writing style is in its echoes and overtones.
Melville's imitation of certain distinct styles is responsible for this.
His three most important sources, in order, are the Bible, Shakespeare, and Milton.
Scholar Nathalia Wright has identified three stylistic categories of Biblical influence.
Direct quotation from any of the sources is slight; only one sixth of his Biblical allusions can be qualified as such.
First, far more unmarked than acknowledged quotations occur, some favorites even numerous times throughout his whole body of work, taking on the nature of refrains.
Examples of this idiom are the injunctions to be 'as wise as serpents and as harmless as doves,' 'death on a pale horse,' 'the man of sorrows', the 'many mansions of heaven;' proverbs 'as the hairs on our heads are numbered,' 'pride goes before a fall,' 'the wages of sin is death;' adverbs and pronouns as 'verily, whoso, forasmuch as; phrases as come to pass, children's children, the fat of the land, vanity of vanities, outer darkness, the apple of his eye, Ancient of Days, the rose of Sharon.'
Second, there are paraphrases of individual and combined verses.
Redburn's "Thou shalt not lay stripes upon these Roman citizens" makes use of language of the Ten Commandments in Ex.20, and Pierre's inquiry of Lucy: "Loveth she me with the love past all understanding?" combines John 21:15-17 and Philippians 4:7 Third, certain Hebraisms are used, such as a succession of genitives ("all the waves of the billows of the seas of the boisterous mob"), the cognate accusative ("I dreamed a dream," "Liverpool was created with the Creation"), and the parallel ("Closer home does it go than a rammer; and fighting with steel is a play without ever an interlude").
A passage from Redburn shows how all these different ways of alluding interlock and result in a fabric texture of Biblical language, though there is very little direct quotation:
QTEMPLATE box|bgcolor
#c6dbf7|quote
The other world beyond this, which was longed for by the devout before Columbus' time, was found in the New; and the deep-sea land, that first struck these soundings, brought up the soil of Earth's Paradise.
Not a Paradise then, or now; but to be made so at God's good pleasure, and in the fulness and mellowness of time.
The seed is sown, and the harvest must come; and our children's children, on the world's jubilee morning, shall all go with their sickles to the reaping.
Then shall the curse of Babel be revoked, a new Pentecost come, and the language they shall speak shall be the language of Britain.
Frenchmen, and Danes, and Scots; and the dwellers on the shores of the Mediterranean, and in the regions round about; Italians, and Indians, and Moors; there shall appear unto them cloven tongues as of fire.|source=-
The American melting pot described in Redburns Biblical language, with Nathalia Wright's glosses.
In addition to this, Melville successfully imitates three Biblical strains: he sustains the apocalyptic for a whole chapter of Mardi; the prophetic strain is expressed in Moby-Dick, most notably in Father Mapple's sermon; and the tradition of the Psalms is imitated at length in The Confidence-Man.
Melville owned an edition of Shakespeare's works by 1849, and his reading of it greatly influenced the style of his next book, Moby-Dick (1851).
The critic F. O. Matthiessen found that the language of Shakespeare far surpasses other influences upon the book, in that it inspired Melville to discover his own full strength.
On almost every page, debts to Shakespeare can be discovered.
The "mere sounds, full of Leviathanism, but signifying nothing" at the end of "Cetology" (Ch.32) echo the famous phrase in Macbeth: "Told by an idiot, full of sound and fury/ Signifying nothing".
Through Shakespeare, Melville infused Moby-Dick with a power of expression he had not previously possessed.
Reading Shakespeare had been "a catalytic agent" for Melville, one that transformed his writing from merely reporting to "the expression of profound natural forces".
Melville's diction depended upon no source, and his prose is not based on anybody else's verse but on an awareness of "speech rhythm".
Melville's mastering of Shakespeare, Matthiessen finds, supplied him with verbal resources that enabled him to create dramatic language through three essential techniques.
First, the use of verbs of action creates a sense of movement and meaning.
The effective tension caused by the contrast of "thou launchest navies of full-freighted worlds" and "there's that in here that still remains indifferent" in "The Candles" (Ch. 119) makes the last clause lead to a "compulsion to strike the breast," which suggests "how thoroughly the drama has come to inhere in the words;" Second, Melville took advantage of the Shakespearean energy of verbal compounds, as in "full-freighted".
Third, Melville employed the device of making one part of speech act as another - for example, 'earthquake' as an adjective, or turning an adjective into a noun, as in "placeless".
Melville's style, in Nathalia Wright's analysis, seamlessly flows over into theme, because all these borrowings have an artistic purpose, which is to suggest an appearance "larger and more significant than life" for characters and themes that are in fact unremarkable.
The allusions suggest that beyond the world of appearances another world exists, one that influences this world, and where ultimate truth can be found.
Moreover, the ancient background thus suggested for Melville's narratives - ancient allusions being next in number to the Biblical ones - invests them with a sense of timelessness.
His popularity declined dramatically after his success with travelogues based on voyages to the South Seas and his stories based on misadventures in the merchant marine and navy.
By 1876, all of his books were out of print.
He was viewed as a minor figure in American literature in the later years of his life and during the years immediately after his death.
Melville revival and Melville studies
The "Melville Revival" of the late 1910s and 1920s brought about a reassessment of his work.
The centennial of his birth was in 1919.
Carl Van Doren's 1917 article on Melville in a standard history of American literature was the start of renewed appreciation.
Van Doren also encouraged Raymond Weaver, who wrote the author's first full-length biography, Herman Melville:
Mariner and Mystic (1921).
Discovering the unfinished manuscript of Billy Budd, among papers shown to him by Melville's granddaughter, Weaver edited it and published it in a new collected edition of Melville's works.
Other works that helped fan the flames for Melville were Carl Van Doren's The American Novel (1921), D. H. Lawrence's Studies in Classic American Literature (1923), Carl Van Vechten's essay in The Double Dealer (1922), and Lewis Mumford's biography, Herman Melville: A Study of His Life and Vision (1929).
Starting in the mid-1930s, the Yale University scholar Stanley Thomas Williams supervised more than a dozen dissertations on Melville that were eventually published as books.
Where the first wave of Melville scholars focused on psychology, Williams' students were prominent in establishing Melville Studies as an academic field concerned with texts and manuscripts, tracing Melville's influences and borrowings (even plagiarism), and exploring archives and local publications.
Jay Leyda, known for his work in film, spent more than a decade in archives and small-town libraries gathering documents and records for a day by day record, published as Melville Log (1951).
Sparked by Leyda, the second phase of the Melville Revival emphasized research rather than accepting Melville's early books as reliable accounts.
The postwar scholars tended to think that Weaver, Harvard psychologist Henry Murray, and Mumford favored Freudian interpretations which read Melville's fiction too literally as autobiography; exaggerated his suffering in the family; and inferred a homosexual attachment to Hawthorne.
They saw a different arc to Melville's writing career.
The first biographers saw a tragic withdrawal after the cold critical reception for his prose works and largely dismissed his poetry.
A new view emerged of Melville's turn to poetry as a conscious choice that placed him among the most important American poets.
Other post-war studies, however, continued the broad imaginative and interpretive style.
Charles Olson's Call Me Ishmael (1947) presented Ahab as a Shakespearean tragic hero, and Newton Arvin's critical biography, Herman Melville (1950), won the National Book Award for non-fiction in 1951.
Hershel Parker published his two-volume Herman Melville: A Biography, in 1996 and 2002, based on extensive original research and his involvement as editor of the Northwestern-Newberry Melville edition.
Critical editions
In the 1960s, Northwestern University Press, in alliance with the Newberry Library and the Modern Language Association, organized a project to edit and published reliable critical texts of Melville's complete works, including unpublished poems, journals, and correspondence.
The aim of the editors was to present a text "as close as possible to the author's intention as surviving evidence permits".
The volumes have extensive appendices, including textual variants from each of the editions published in Melville's lifetime, an historical note on the publishing history and critical reception, and related documents.
In many cases, it was not possible to establish a "definitive text", but the edition supplies all evidence available at the time.
Because the texts were prepared with financial support from the United States Department of Education, no royalties are charged, and they have been widely reprinted.
The Melville Society
In 1945, The Melville Society was founded, a non-profit organisation dedicated to the study of Melville's life and works.
Between 1969 and 2003 it published 125 issues of Melville Society Extracts, which are now freely available on the society's website.
Since 1999 it publishes Leviathan: A Journal of Melville Studies, currently three issues a year, published by Johns Hopkins University Press.
Melville's poetry
Melville did not publish poetry until late in life, and his reputation as a poet was not high until late in the 20th century.
Melville, says recent literary critic Lawrence Buell, "is justly said to be nineteenth-century America's leading poet after Whitman and Dickinson, yet his poetry remains largely unread even by many Melvillians".
True, Buell concedes, even more than most Victorian poets, Melville turned to poetry as an "instrument of meditation rather than for the sake of melody or linguistic play".
It is also true that he turned from fiction to poetry late in life.
Yet he wrote twice as much poetry as Dickinson and probably as many lines as Whitman, and he wrote distinguished poetry for a quarter of a century, twice as long as his career publishing prose narratives.
The three novels of the 1850s which Melville worked on most seriously to present his philosophical explorations, Moby-Dick, Pierre, and The Confidence Man, seem to make the step to philosophical poetry a natural one rather than simply a consequence of commercial failure.
In 2000, the Melville scholar Elizabeth Renker wrote "a sea change in the reception of the poems is incipient".
Some critics now place him as the first modernist poet in the United States; others assert that his work more strongly suggests what today would be a postmodern view.
Henry Chapin wrote in an introduction to John Marr and Other Sailors (1888), a collection of Melville's late poetry, "Melville's loveable freshness of personality is everywhere in evidence, in the voice of a true poet".
The poet and novelist Robert Penn Warren was a leading champion of Melville as a great American poet.
Warren issued a selection of Melville's poetry prefaced by an admiring critical essay.
The poetry critic Helen Vendler remarked of Clarel: "What it cost Melville to write this poem makes us pause, reading it.
Alone, it is enough to win him, as a poet, what he called 'the belated funeral flower of fame.'"
Gender studies
Melville's writings did not attract the attention of women's studies scholars of the 1970s and 1980s, though his preference for sea-going tales that involved almost only males has been of interest to scholars in men's studies and especially gay and queer studies.
Melville was remarkably open in his exploration of sexuality of all sorts.
For example, Alvin Sandberg claimed that the short story "The Paradise of Bachelors and the Tartarus of Maids" offers "an exploration of impotency, a portrayal of a man retreating to an all-male childhood to avoid confrontation with sexual manhood," from which the narrator engages in "congenial" digressions in heterogeneity.
In line with this view, Warren Rosenberg argues the homosocial "Paradise of Bachelors" is shown to be "superficial and sterile".
David Harley Serlin observes in the second half of Melville's diptych, "The Tartarus of Maids", the narrator gives voice to the oppressed women he observes:
QTEMPLATE |As other scholars have noted, the "slave" image here has two clear connotations.
One describes the exploitation of the women's physical labor, and the other describes the exploitation of the women's reproductive organs.
Of course, as models of women's oppression, the two are clearly intertwined.
In the end Serlin says that the narrator is never fully able to come to terms with the contrasting masculine and feminine modalities.
Issues of sexuality have been observed in other works as well.
Rosenberg notes Taji, in Mardi, and the protagonist in Pierre "think they are saving young 'maidens in distress' (Yillah and Isabel) out of the purest of reasons but both are also conscious of a lurking sexual motive".
In Pierre, the motive of the protagonist's sacrifice for Isabel is admitted: "womanly beauty and not womanly ugliness invited him to champion the right".
Rosenberg argues,
QTEMPLATE |This awareness of a double motive haunts both books and ultimately destroys their protagonists who would not fully acknowledge the dark underside of their idealism.
The epistemological quest and the transcendental quest for love and belief are consequently sullied by the erotic.
Rosenberg notes that critics say that "Ahab's pursuit of the whale, which they suggest can be associated with the feminine in its shape, mystery, and in its naturalness, represents the ultimate fusion of the epistemological and sexual quest".
Vere immediately convenes a court-martial, at which, after serving as sole witness and as Billy's de facto counsel, Vere urges the court to convict and sentence Billy to death.
The trial is recounted in , the longest chapter in the book.
It has become the focus of scholarly controversy; was Captain Vere a good man trapped by bad law, or did he deliberately distort and misrepresent the applicable law to condemn Billy to death?
According to scholar Nathalia Wright, Melville's characters are all preoccupied by the same intense, superhuman and eternal quest for "the absolute amidst its relative manifestations," an enterprise central to the Melville canon: "All Melville's plots describe this pursuit, and all his themes represent the delicate and shifting relationship between its truth and its illusion".
In 1985, the New York City Herman Melville Society gathered at 104 East 26th Street to dedicate the intersection of Park Avenue South and 26th Street as Herman Melville Square.
This is the street where Melville lived from 1863 to 1891 and where, among other works, he wrote Billy Budd.
Melville's house in Lansingburgh, New York, houses the Lansingburgh Historical Society.
In 2010, a species of extinct giant sperm whale, Livyatan melvillei, was named in honor of Melville.
The paleontologists who discovered the fossil were fans of Moby-Dick and dedicated their discovery to the author.
Selected bibliography
* White-Jacket; or, The World in a Man-of-War (1850)
* Isle of the Cross (1853 unpublished, and now lost)
* Battle-Pieces and Aspects of the War (1866) (poetry collection)
* John Marr and Other Sailors (1888) (poetry collection)
* Billy Budd, Sailor (An Inside Narrative) (1891 unfinished, published posthumously in 1924; authoritative edition in 1962)
Notes
Sources
* Online: http:/ ~ehrlich melville_arvin-bio.html Herman Melville.
* Bercaw, Mary K. (1987).
Melville's Sources.
Evanston, Illinois:
Northwestern University Press.
* Special Issue: Melville in the Marquesas.
Guest Editor: Henry Hughes.
* Berthoff, Warner.
(1962).
The Example of Melville.
Reprinted 1972, New York: W.W. Norton & Company.
* Bezanson, Walter E. (1986).
"Moby-Dick: Document, Drama, Dream".
In Bryant 1986.
* Branch, Watson G. (ed.)
(1974).
Melville: The Critical Heritage.
Edited by Watson G. Branch.
Published as paperback 1985, London and Boston: Routledge & Kegan Paul.
* Cheever, Susan. (2006).
American Bloomsbury: Louisa May Alcott, Ralph Waldo Emerson, Margaret Fuller, Nathaniel Hawthorne, and Henry David Thoreau; Their Lives, Their Loves, Their Work.
Detroit: Thorndike Press.
* Kennedy, Joyce Deveau & Frederick James (1978a).
http:/ John_L_Bryant Volume%2033 John_L_Bryant Volume%2034/extracts034_may78_pg03.html "Elizabeth and Herman ".
Melville Society Extracts 34, May 1978, 3-8.
* Matthiessen, F. O. (1941).
American Renaissance: Art and Expression in the Age of Emerson and Whitman.
Tenth Printing, 1966, New York, London and Toronto: Oxford University Press.
* Milder, Robert. (1988).
"Herman Melville".
Emory Elliott (General Editor), Columbia Literary History of the United States.
New York: Columbia University Press.
* Olsen-Smith, Steven (2015).
"Introduction" and "Chronology".
https:/ books?id
OCv2CAAAQBAJ&pg
PA193 Melville in His Own Time: A Biographical Chronicle of His Life, Drawn from Recollection, Interviews, and Memoirs by Family, Friends, and Associates.
Edited by Steven Olsen-Smith.
Iowa City: University of Iowa Press.
* Sealts, Merton M., Jr. (1987).
"Historical Note".
https:/ books?id
SN1fGPgKweYC&pg
PA542 Herman Melville, The Piazza Tales and Other Prose Pieces 1839-1860.
Eds.
Harrison Hayford, Alma A. MacDougall, G. Thomas Tanselle and others.
Evanston and Chicago: Northwestern University Press and The Newberry Library.
* --- (1988).
Melville's Reading.
Revised and Enlarged Edition.
University of South Carolina Press.
* Titus, David K. (1980).
http:/ John_l_Bryant Volume%2042/extracts042_may80_pg01.html
"Herman Melville at the Albany Academy", Melville Society Extracts, May 1980, no. 42, pp.
1, 4-10.
Retrieved December 3, 2013.
Wright, Nathalia. (1940).
https:/ discover 2920476?uid
3738736&uid
2&uid
4&sid
21104087484591 "Biblical Allusion in Melville's Prose".
American Literature, May 1940, 185-199.
Wright, Nathalia. (1949).
Melville's Use of the Bible.
Durham, North Carolina: Duke University Press.
Further reading
* Gale, Robert L. (1995).
https:/ books?id
M7Fo3O4f9PkC&printsec
frontcover&hl
nl#v
onepage&q&f=false A Herman Melville Encyclopediae.
Westport, Connecticut: Greenwood Press.
* Kelley, Wyn (ed.).
(2006).
A Companion to Herman Melville.
Blackwell Publishing.
* Lepore, Jill, "Ahab at Home: Two hundred years of Herman Melville" The New Yorker, July 29, 2019, pp.
About the life and works of Herman Melville, on the bicentennial of his birth in 1819.
* Pardes, Ilana.
Melville's Bibles.
University of California Press, 2008.
* Talley, Sharon.
(2007).
https:/ books?id
sOgfAgAAQBAJ&printsec
frontcover&hl
nl#v
onepage&q&f=false Student Companion to Herman Melville.
Westport, Connecticut: Greenwood Press.
