Headache is the symptom of pain anywhere in the region of the head or neck.
It can occur as a migraine, tension-type headache, or cluster headache.
Treatment of a headache depends on the underlying cause, but commonly involves pain medication.
A headache is one of the most commonly experienced of all physical discomforts.
About half of adults have a headache in a given year.
Tension headaches are the most common, affecting about 1.6 billion people (21.8% of the population) followed by migraine headaches which affect about 848 million (11.7%).
Cause
There are more than 200 types of headaches.
Some are harmless and some are life-threatening.
The description of the headache and findings on neurological examination, determine whether additional tests are needed and what treatment is best.
Headaches are broadly classified as "primary" or "secondary".
Primary headaches are benign, recurrent headaches not caused by underlying disease or structural problems.
For example, migraine is a type of primary headache.
While primary headaches may cause significant daily pain and disability, they are not dangerous.
Secondary headaches are caused by an underlying disease, like an infection, head injury, vascular disorders, brain bleed or tumors.
Secondary headaches can be harmless or dangerous.
Certain "red flags" or warning signs indicate a secondary headache may be dangerous.
Primary
90% of all headaches are primary headaches.
Primary headaches usually first start when people are between 20 and 40 years old.
The most common types of primary headaches are migraines and tension-type headaches.
Other very rare types of primary headaches include: The treatment of the gastrointestinal disorders may lead to a remission or improvement of headaches.
Pial arteries, rather than pial veins are responsible for pain production.
Previously, migraines were thought to be caused by a primary problem with the blood vessels in the brain.
This vascular theory, which was developed in the 20th century by Wolff, suggested that the aura in migraines is caused by constriction of intracranial vessels (vessels inside the brain), and the headache itself is caused by rebound dilation of extracranial vessels (vessels just outside the brain).
Dilation of these extracranial blood vessels activates the pain receptors in the surrounding nerves, causing a headache.
The vascular theory is no longer accepted.
Studies have shown migraine head pain is not accompanied by extracranial vasodilation, but rather only has some mild intracranial vasodilation.
Currently, most specialists think migraines are due to a primary problem with the nerves in the brain.
followed by a period of depressed activity.
Some people think headaches are caused by the activation of sensory nerves which release peptides or serotonin, causing inflammation in arteries, dura and meninges and also cause some vasodilation.
Triptans, medications which treat migraines, block serotonin receptors and constrict blood vessels.
People who are more susceptible to experience migraines without headache are those who have a family history of migraines, women, and women who are experiencing hormonal changes or are taking birth control pills or are prescribed hormone replacement therapy.
Tension headaches are thought to be caused by activation of peripheral nerves in the head and neck muscles
Cluster headaches involve overactivation of the trigeminal nerve and hypothalamus in the brain, but the exact cause is unknown.
Diagnostic approach
Most headaches can be diagnosed by the clinical history alone.
The first step to diagnosing a headache is to determine if the headache is old or new.
Headaches that are possibly dangerous require further lab tests and imaging to diagnose.
The American College for Emergency Physicians published criteria for low-risk headaches.
They are as follows:
* no high-risk comorbid conditions (for example, HIV)
* no new concerning history or physical examination findings
A number of characteristics make it more likely that the headache is due to potentially dangerous secondary causes which may be life-threatening or cause long-term damage.
These "red flag" symptoms means that a headache warrants further investigation with neuroimaging and lab tests.
* Previous headache history (first, worst, or different headache)
Other red flag symptoms include:
Old headaches
Old headaches are usually primary headaches and are not dangerous.
They are most often caused by migraines or tension headaches.
Migraines are often unilateral, pulsing headaches accompanied by nausea or vomiting.
There may be an aura (visual symptoms, numbness or tingling) 30-60 minutes before the headache, warning the person of a headache.
Migraines may also not have auras.
Cluster headaches are relatively rare (1 in 1000 people) and are more common in men than women.
They present with sudden onset explosive pain around one eye and are accompanied by autonomic symptoms (tearing, runny nose and red eye).
New headaches
New headaches are more likely to be dangerous secondary headaches.
They can, however, simply be the first presentation of a chronic headache syndrome, like migraine or tension-type headaches.
One recommended diagnostic approach is as follows.
If any urgent red flags are present such as visual loss, new seizures, new weakness, new confusion, further workup with imaging and possibly a lumbar puncture should be done (see red flags section for more details).
If the headache is sudden onset (thunderclap headache), a computed tomography test to look for a brain bleed (subarachnoid hemorrhage) should be done.
If the CT scan does not show a bleed, a lumbar puncture should be done to look for blood in the CSF, as the CT scan can be falsely negative and subarachnoid hemorrhages can be fatal.
If there are signs of infection such as fever, rash, or stiff neck, a lumbar puncture to look for meningitis should be considered.
If there is jaw claudication and scalp tenderness in an older person, a temporal artery biopsy to look for temporal arteritis should be performed and immediate treatment should be started.
Neuroimaging
Old headaches
The US Headache Consortium has guidelines for neuroimaging of non-acute headaches.
Most old, chronic headaches do not require neuroimaging.
If a person has the characteristic symptoms of a migraine, neuroimaging is not needed as it is very unlikely the person has an intracranial abnormality.
If the person has neurological findings, such as weakness, on exam, neuroimaging may be considered.
New headaches
All people who present with red flags indicating a dangerous secondary headache should receive neuroimaging.
Lumbar puncture
A lumbar puncture is a procedure in which cerebral spinal fluid is removed from the spine with a needle.
A lumbar puncture is necessary to look for infection or blood in the spinal fluid.
A lumbar puncture can also evaluate the pressure in the spinal column, which can be useful for people with idiopathic intracranial hypertension (usually young, obese women who have increased intracranial pressure), or other causes of increased intracranial pressure.
In most cases, a CT scan should be done first.
The third edition of the International Headache Classification was published in 2013 in a beta version ahead of the final version.
This classification is accepted by the WHO.
Other classification systems exist.
One of the first published attempts was in 1951.
The US National Institutes of Health developed a classification system in 1962.
ICHD-2
The International Classification of Headache Disorders (ICHD) is an in-depth hierarchical classification of headaches published by the International Headache Society.
It contains explicit (operational) diagnostic criteria for headache disorders.
The first version of the classification, ICHD-1, was published in 1988.
The current revision, ICHD-2, was published in 2004.
The classification uses numeric codes.
The top, one-digit diagnostic level includes 14 headache groups.
The first four of these are classified as primary headaches, groups 5-12 as secondary headaches, cranial neuralgia, central and primary facial pain and other headaches for the last two groups.
The ICHD-2 classification defines migraines, tension-types headaches, cluster headache and other trigeminal autonomic headache as the main types of primary headaches.
Migraines
Migraine can be somewhat improved by lifestyle changes, but most people require medicines to control their symptoms.
Possible therapies include beta blockers, antidepressants, anticonvulsants and NSAIDs.
Tension-type headaches
Tension-type headaches can usually be managed with NSAIDs (ibuprofen, naproxen, aspirin), or acetaminophen.
Amitriptyline is a medication which treats depression and also independently treats pain.
It works by blocking the reuptake of serotonin and norepinephrine, and also reduces muscle tenderness by a separate mechanism.
Overall, they show that acupuncture is probably not helpful for tension-type headaches.
Cluster headaches
Abortive therapy for cluster headaches includes subcutaneous sumatriptan (injected under the skin) and triptan nasal sprays.
High flow oxygen therapy also helps with relief.
How it may work is still being looked into.
Most of these headaches are not dangerous.
Only approximately 1-5% of people who seek emergency treatment for headaches have a serious underlying cause.
More than 90% of headaches are primary headaches.
Most of these primary headaches are tension headaches.
If a young child is fussy, they may have a headache.
Approximately 1% of emergency department visits for children are for headache.
Most of these headaches are not dangerous.
The most common type of headache seen in pediatric emergency rooms is headache caused by a cold (28.5%).
Other headaches diagnosed in the emergency department include post-traumatic headache (20%), headache related to a problem with a ventriculoperitoneal shunt (a device put into the brain to remove excess CSF and reduce pressure in the brain) (11.5%) and migraine (8.5%).
The most common serious headaches found in children include brain bleeds (subdural hematoma, epidural hematoma), brain abscesses, meningitis and ventriculoperitoneal shunt malfunction.
Only 4-6.9% of kids with a headache have a serious cause.
If a child with a recurrent headache has a normal physical exam, neuroimaging is not recommended.
Guidelines state children with abnormal neurologic exams, confusion, seizures and recent onset of worst headache of life, change in headache type or anything suggesting neurologic problems should receive neuroimaging.
Some measures can help prevent headaches in children.
Drinking plenty of water throughout the day, avoiding caffeine, getting enough and regular sleep, eating balanced meals at the proper times, and reducing stress and excess of activities may prevent headaches.
Treatments for children are similar to those for adults, however certain medications such as narcotics should not be given to children.
In another study of people with chronic daily headache, 75% did not have chronic daily headaches two years later, and 88% did not have chronic daily headaches eight years later.
