Mars is the fourth planet from the Sun and the second-smallest planet in the Solar System after Mercury.
In English, Mars carries a name of the Roman god of war and is often referred to as the Red Planet.
The latter refers to the effect of the iron oxide prevalent on Mars' surface, which gives it a reddish appearance distinctive among the astronomical bodies visible to the naked eye.
similar to 5261 Eureka, a Mars trojan.
There are ongoing investigations assessing the past habitability potential of Mars, as well as the possibility of extant life.
Future astrobiology missions are planned, including the Mars 2020 and Rosalind Franklin rovers.
Liquid water cannot exist on the surface of Mars due to low atmospheric pressure, which is less than 1% of the Earth's, except at the lowest elevations for short periods.
Mars can easily be seen from Earth with the naked eye, as can its reddish coloring.
Its apparent magnitude reaches −2.94,
Internal structure
Like Earth, Mars has differentiated into a dense metallic core overlaid by less dense materials.
This is a very high concentration and makes the Martian soil toxic .
Streaks are common across Mars and new ones appear frequently on steep slopes of craters, troughs, and valleys.
The streaks are dark at first and get lighter with age.
The streaks can start in a tiny area, then spread out for hundreds of metres.
They have been seen to follow the edges of boulders and other obstacles in their path.
The commonly accepted theories include that they are dark underlying layers of soil revealed after avalanches of bright dust or dust devils.
Analysis using the rover's DAN instrument provided evidence of subsurface water, amounting to as much as 4% water content, down to a depth of , during the rover's traverse from the Bradbury Landing site to the Yellowknife Bay area in the Glenelg terrain.
These observations provided confirmation of earlier hypotheses based on timing of formation and their rate of growth, that these dark streaks resulted from water flowing in the very shallow subsurface.
The streaks contain hydrated salts, perchlorates, which have water molecules in their crystal structure.
The streaks flow downhill in Martian summer, when the temperature is above −23 degrees Celsius, and freeze at lower temperatures.
Researchers suspect that much of the low northern plains of the planet were covered with an ocean hundreds of meters deep, though this remains controversial.
Near the northern polar cap is the wide Korolev Crater, where the Mars Express orbiter found it to be filled with approximately of water ice.
The crater floor lies about below the rim, and is covered by a deep central mound of permanent water ice, up to in diameter.
Polar caps
Mars has two permanent polar ice caps.
During a pole's winter, it lies in continuous darkness, chilling the surface and causing the deposition of 25-30% of the atmosphere into slabs of CO2 ice (dry ice).
The northern polar cap has a diameter of about during the northern Mars summer,
Holes
Images from the Thermal Emission Imaging System (THEMIS) aboard NASA's Mars Odyssey orbiter have revealed seven possible cave entrances on the flanks of the volcano Arsia Mons.
so the solar wind interacts directly with the Martian ionosphere, lowering the atmospheric density by stripping away atoms from the outer layer.
Both Mars Global Surveyor and Mars Express have detected ionised atmospheric particles trailing off into space behind Mars, The atmosphere is quite dusty, containing particulates about 1.5 µm in diameter which give the Martian sky a tawny color when seen from the surface.
Estimates of its lifetime range from 0.6-4 years,
Aurora
In 1994, the European Space Agency's Mars Express found an ultraviolet glow coming from "magnetic umbrellas" in the southern hemisphere.
Mars does not have a global magnetic field which guides charged particles entering the atmosphere.
Mars has multiple umbrella-shaped magnetic fields mainly in the southern hemisphere, which are remnants of a global field that decayed billions of years ago.
In late December 2014, NASA's MAVEN spacecraft detected evidence of widespread auroras in Mars's northern hemisphere and descended to approximately 20-30 degrees North latitude of Mars's equator.
The particles causing the aurora penetrated into the Martian atmosphere, creating auroras below 100 km above the surface, Earth's auroras range from 100 km to 500 km above the surface.
Magnetic fields in the solar wind drape over Mars, into the atmosphere, and the charged particles follow the solar wind magnetic field lines into the atmosphere, causing auroras to occur outside the magnetic umbrellas.
On March 18, 2015, NASA reported the detection of an aurora that is not fully understood and an unexplained dust cloud in the atmosphere of Mars.
In September 2017, NASA reported radiation levels on the surface of the planet Mars were temporarily doubled, and were associated with an aurora 25 times brighter than any observed earlier, due to a massive, and unexpected, solar storm in the middle of the month.
Climate
Of all the planets in the Solar System, the seasons of Mars are the most Earth-like, due to the similar tilts of the two planets' rotational axes.
The lengths of the Martian seasons are about twice those of Earth's because Mars's greater distance from the Sun leads to the Martian year being about two Earth years long.
Martian surface temperatures vary from lows of about at the winter polar caps to highs of up to in equatorial summer.
The wide range in temperatures is due to the thin atmosphere which cannot store much solar heat, the low atmospheric pressure, and the low thermal inertia of Martian soil.
A Martian year is equal to 1.8809 Earth years, or 1 year, 320 days, and 18.2 hours.
A 2014 analysis of the Phoenix WCL showed that the in the Phoenix soil has not interacted with liquid water of any form, perhaps for as long as 600 Myr.
If it had, the highly soluble in contact with liquid water would have formed only .
This suggests a severely arid environment, with minimal or no liquid water interaction.
Scientists have proposed that carbonate globules found in meteorite ALH84001, which is thought to have originated from Mars, could be fossilized microbes extant on Mars when the meteorite was blasted from the Martian surface by a meteor strike some 15 million years ago.
This proposal has been met with skepticism, and an exclusively inorganic origin for the shapes has been proposed.
Likewise, the glass in impact craters on Mars could have preserved signs of life if life existed at the site.
In May 2017, evidence of the earliest known life on land on Earth may have been found in 3.48-billion-year-old geyserite and other related mineral deposits (often found around hot springs and geysers) uncovered in the Pilbara Craton of Western Australia.
These findings may be helpful in deciding where best to search for early signs of life on the planet Mars.
In early 2018, media reports speculated that certain rock features at a site called Jura looked like a type of fossil, but project scientists say the formations likely resulted from a geological process at the bottom of an ancient drying lakebed, and are related to mineral veins in the area similar to gypsum crystals.
indicating that some of the building blocks for life were present.
In July 2018, scientists reported the discovery of a subglacial lake on Mars, the first known stable body of water on the planet.
It sits below the surface at the base of the southern polar ice cap and is about wide.
The lake was discovered using the MARSIS radar on board the Mars Express orbiter, and the profiles were collected between May 2012 and December 2015.
The lake is centered at 193°E, 81°S, a flat area that does not exhibit any peculiar topographic characteristics.
It is mostly surrounded by higher ground except on its eastern side, where there is a depression.
Experiments include a laser chemical sampler that can deduce the make-up of rocks at a distance of .
On February 10, 2013, the Curiosity rover obtained the first deep rock samples ever taken from another planetary body, using its on-board drill.
The same year, it discovered that Mars's soil contains between 1.5% and 3% water by mass (albeit attached to other compounds and thus not freely accessible).
The European Space Agency, in collaboration with Roscosmos, launched the ExoMars Trace Gas Orbiter and Schiaparelli lander on March 14, 2016.
While the Trace Gas Orbiter successfully entered Mars orbit on October 19, 2016, Schiaparelli crashed during its landing attempt.
In May 2018 NASA's InSight lander was launched, along with the twin MarCO CubeSats that will fly by Mars and provide a telemetry relay for the landing.
The mission arrived at Mars in November 2018.
InSight detected its first potential marsquake in April, 2019.
Future
NASA plans to launch its Mars 2020 astrobiology rover between July 17 and August 5, 2020.
The rover will cache samples for future retrieval and return to Earth.
The current concept for the Mars Sample Return mission would launch in 2026 and feature hardware built by NASA and ESA.
The European Space Agency will launch the ExoMars rover and surface platform in July 2020.
The United Arab Emirates' Mars Hope orbiter is planned for launch in 2020, reaching Mars orbit in 2021.
The probe will make a global study of the Martian atmosphere.
Several plans for a human mission to Mars have been proposed throughout the 20th century and into the 21st century, but no active plan has an arrival date sooner than the 2020s.
SpaceX founder Elon Musk presented a plan in September 2016 to, optimistically, launch space tourists to Mars in 2024 at an estimated development cost of .
In October 2016, President Barack Obama renewed U.S. policy to pursue the goal of sending humans to Mars in the 2030s, and to continue using the International Space Station as a technology incubator in that pursuit.
The NASA Authorization Act of 2017 directed NASA to get humans near or on the surface of Mars by the early 2030s.
Astronomy on Mars
With the presence of various orbiters, landers, and rovers, it is possible to practice astronomy from Mars.
Although Mars's moon Phobos appears about one-third the angular diameter of the full moon on Earth, Deimos appears more or less star-like, looking only slightly brighter than Venus does from Earth.
The apparent sizes of the moons Phobos and Deimos are sufficiently smaller than that of the Sun; thus, their partial "eclipses" of the Sun are best considered transits (see transit of Deimos and Phobos from Mars).
Viewing
The mean apparent magnitude of Mars is +0.71 with a standard deviation of 1.05.
at a distance of about .
During Sumerian times, Nergal was a minor deity of little significance, The existence of Mars as a wandering object in the night sky was recorded by the ancient Egyptian astronomers and, by 1534 BCE, they were familiar with the retrograde motion of the planet.
In the fourth century BCE, Aristotle noted that Mars disappeared behind the Moon during an occultation, indicating that the planet was farther away.
During the seventeenth century, Tycho Brahe measured the diurnal parallax of Mars that Johannes Kepler used to make a preliminary calculation of the relative distance to the planet.
The canali were independently found by other astronomers, like Henri Joseph Perrotin and Louis Thollon in Nice, using one of the largest telescopes of that time.
In culture
Mars is named after the Roman god of war.
In different cultures, Mars represents masculinity and youth.
Its symbol, a circle with an arrow pointing out to the upper right, is used as a symbol for the male gender.
The many failures in Mars exploration probes resulted in a satirical counter-culture blaming the failures on an Earth-Mars "Bermuda Triangle", a "Mars Curse", or a "Great Galactic Ghoul" that feeds on Martian spacecraft.
A comic figure of an intelligent Martian, Marvin the Martian, appeared in Haredevil Hare (1948) as a character in the Looney Tunes animated cartoons of Warner Brothers, and has continued as part of popular culture to the present.
