Haarlem (; predecessor of Harlem in the English language) is a city and municipality in the Netherlands.
It is the capital of the province of North Holland and is situated at the northern edge of the Randstad, one of the most populated metropolitan areas in Europe.
Haarlem had a population of in .
Haarlem was granted city status or stadsrechten in 1245, although the first city walls were not built until 1270.
The modern city encompasses the former municipality of Schoten as well as parts that previously belonged to Bloemendaal and Heemstede.
Apart from the city, the municipality of Haarlem also includes the western part of the village of Spaarndam.
Newer sections of Spaarndam lie within the neighbouring municipality of Haarlemmermeer.
Geography
bulb-growing district for centuries and bears its other nickname 'Bloemenstad' (flower city) for this reason.
History
Haarlem has a rich history dating back to pre-medieval times, as it lies on a thin strip of land above sea level known as the strandwal (beach ridge), which connects Leiden to Alkmaar.
The people on this narrow strip of land struggled against the waters of the North Sea from the west, and the waters of the IJ and the Haarlem Lake from the east.
Haarlem became wealthy with toll revenues that it collected from ships and travellers moving on this busy North-South route.
However, as shipping became increasingly important economically, the city of Amsterdam became the main Dutch city of North Holland during the Dutch Golden Age.
The town of Halfweg became a suburb, and Haarlem became a quiet bedroom community, and for this reason Haarlem still has many of its central medieval buildings intact.
Nowadays many of them are on the Dutch Heritage register known as Rijksmonuments.
The gives an overview of these per neighbourhood, with the majority in the old city centre.
Middle Ages
The oldest mentioning of Haarlem dates from the 10th century.
The name probably comes from "Haarlo-heim".
This name is composed of three elements: haar, lo and heim.
There is not much dispute about the meaning of lo and heim; in Old Dutch toponyms lo always refers to 'forest' and heim (heem, em or um) to 'home' or 'house'.
Haar, however, has several meanings, one of them corresponding with the location of Haarlem on a sand dune: 'elevated place'.
The name Haarlem or Haarloheim would therefore mean 'home on a forested dune'.
There was a stream called "De Beek", dug from the peat grounds west of the river Spaarne as a drainage canal.
Over the centuries the Beek was turned into an underground canal, as the city grew larger and the space was needed for construction.
Over time it began to silt up and in the 19th century it was filled in.
The location of the village was a good one: by the river Spaarne, and by a major road going south to north.
By the 12th century it was a fortified town, and Haarlem became the residence of the Counts of Holland.
In 1219 the knights of Haarlem were laurelled by Count Willem
I, because they had conquered the Egyptian port of Damietta (or Damiate in Dutch, present-day Dimyat) in the fifth crusade.
Haarlem received the right to bear the Count's sword and cross in its coat of arms.
On 23 November 1245 Count Willem II granted Haarlem city rights.
This implied a number of privileges, among which the right for the sheriff and magistrates to administer justice, instead of the Count.
This allowed for a quicker and more efficient judiciary system, more suited to the needs of the growing city.
After a siege from the surrounding area of Kennemerland in 1270 a defensive wall was built around the city.
Most likely this was an earthen wall, with wooden gates.
Originally the city started out between Spaarne, Oudegracht, Ridderstraat, Bakenessergracht and Naussaustraat.
In the 14th century the city expanded, and the Burgwalbuurt, Bakenes and the area around the Oudegracht became part of the city.
The old defenses proved not to be sufficiently strong for the expanded city, and at the end of the 14th century a 16½-metre high wall was built, complete with a 15-metre wide canal circling the city.
In 1304 the Flemish threatened the city, but they were defeated by Witte van Haemstede at Manpad.
All the city's buildings were made of wood, and fire was a great risk.
In 1328 nearly the whole city burnt down.
The Sint-Bavokerk was severely damaged, and rebuilding it would take more than 150 years.
Again on 12 June 1347 there was a fire in the city.
A third large fire, in 1351, destroyed many buildings including the Count's castle and the city hall.
The Count did not need a castle in Haarlem because his castle in Den Haag had taken over all functions.
The Count donated the ground to the city and later a new city hall was built there.
The shape of the old city was square-this was inspired by the shape of ancient Jerusalem.
After every fire the city was rebuilt quickly, an indication of the wealth of the city in those years.
The Black Death came to the city in 1381.
According to an estimate by a priest from Leiden the disease killed 5,000 people, about half the population at that time.
In the 14th century Haarlem was a major city.
It was the second largest city in historical Holland after Dordrecht and before Delft, Leiden, Amsterdam, Gouda and Rotterdam.
In 1429 the city gained the right to collect tolls, including ships passing the city on the Spaarne river.
At the end of the Middle Ages Haarlem was a flourishing city with a large textile industry, shipyards and beer breweries.
Around 1428 the city was put under siege by the army of Jacqueline, Countess of Hainaut.
Haarlem had taken side with the Cods in the Hook and Cod wars, and thus against Jacoba of Bavaria.
The entire Haarlemmerhout wood was burnt down by the enemy.
Spanish siege
When the city of Brielle was conquered by the Geuzen revolutionary army, the municipality of Haarlem started supporting the Geuzen.
King Philip II of Spain was not pleased, and sent an army north under the command of Don Fadrique (Don Frederick in Dutch), son of Fernando Álvarez de Toledo, 3rd Duke of Alba.
On 17 November 1572 all citizens of the city of Zutphen were killed by the Spanish army, and on 1 December the city of Naarden suffered the same fate.
On 11 December 1572 the Spanish army besieged Haarlem; the city's defenses were commanded by city-governor Wigbolt Ripperda.
Kenau Simonsdochter Hasselaer, a powerful widow, helped defend the city together with some three hundred other women.
During the first two months of the siege, the situation was in balance.
The Spanish army was digging tunnels to reach the city walls and blow them up; the defenders dug in turn and undermined the Spaniards' tunnels.
The situation worsened on 29 March 1573: the Amsterdam army, faithful to the Spanish king, controlled Haarlemmermeer lake, effectively blocking Haarlem from the outside world.
An attempt by the Prince of Orange to destroy the Spanish navy on the Haarlemmermeer had failed.
Hunger in the city grew, and the situation became so tense that on 27 May many (Spanish-loyal) prisoners were taken from the prison and murdered; the Spaniards had previously gibbeted their own prisoners of war.
In the beginning of July the Prince of Orange assembled an army of 5,000 soldiers near Leiden to free Haarlem.
However, he was prevented from accompanying them in person and the Spanish forces trapped them at the Manpad where they were decisively defeated.
On 13 July 1573, after seven months of siege, the city surrendered.
Many defenders were slaughtered; some were drowned in the Spaarne river.
Governor Ripperda and his lieutenant were beheaded.
The citizens were allowed to buy freedom for themselves and the city for 240,000 guilders and the city was required to host a Spanish garrison.
Don Fadrique thanked God for his victory in the Sint-Bavo Church.
However, the terms of the treaty were not kept, with the Spanish soldiery plundering the townspeople's property.
Despite Haarlem's ultimate fall, the fact that the Haarlemers had been able to stand for seven months against the whole Spanish array inspired the rest of Holland to resist the invaders, and their prolonged resistance allowed the Prince of Orange to prepare and arm the rest of the country for war.
Some 12,000 of the Spanish army had fallen during the siege.
Great fire
The city suffered a large fire in the night from 22 October to 23 October 1576.
The fire started in brewery het Ankertje, near the weighhouse at the Spaarne, which was used by mercenaries as a guarding place.
When they were warming themselves at a fire it got out of control.
The fire was spotted by farmers, who sailed their ships on the river.
However, the soldiers turned down all help, saying that they would put out the fire themselves.
This failed, and the fire destroyed almost 500 buildings, among them St-Gangolf's church and St-Elisabeth's hospital.
Most of the mercenaries were later arrested, and one of them was hanged on the Grote Markt in front of a large audience.
Maps from that era clearly show the damage done by the fire: a wide strip through the city was destroyed.
The combined result of the siege and the fire was that about a third of the city was destroyed.
Golden age
The fire and the long siege had taken their toll on the city.
The Spanish left in 1577 and under the Agreement of Veere, Protestants and Catholics were given equal rights, though in government the Protestants clearly had the upper hand and Catholic possessions once seized were never returned.
To restore the economy and attract workers for the brewing and bleaching businesses (Haarlem was known for these, thanks to the clean water from the dunes), the Haarlem council decided to promote the pursuit of arts and history, showing tolerance for diversity among religious beliefs.
This attracted a large influx of Flemish and French immigrants (Catholics and Hugenots alike) who were fleeing the Spanish occupation of their own cities.
Expansion plans soon replaced plans of rebuilding the destroyed city walls.
Just like the rest of the country, the Golden Age in the United Provinces had started.
Linen and silk
The new citizens had a lot of expertise in linen and silk manufacture and trading, and the city's population grew from 18,000 in 1573 to around 40,000 in 1622.
At one point, in 1621, over 50% of the population was Flemish-born.
Haarlem's linen became notable and the city flourished.
Today an impression of some of those original textile tradesmen can be had from the Book of Trades document created by Jan Luyken and his son.
Infrastructure
In 1632 a tow canal between Haarlem and Amsterdam, the Haarlemmertrekvaart was opened, the first tow canal in the country.
The empty areas in the city that were a result of the fire of 1576 were filled with new houses and buildings.
Even outside the city wall buildings were constructed-in 1643 about 400 houses were counted outside the wall.
Having buildings outside the city walls was not a desirable situation to the city administration.
Not only because these buildings would be vulnerable in case of an attack on the city, but there was also less control over taxes and city regulations outside the walls.
Therefore, a major project was initiated in 1671: expanding the city northwards.
Two new canals were dug, and a new defensive wall was constructed (the current Staten en Prinsenbolwerk).
Two old city gates, the Janspoort and Kruispoort, were demolished.
The idea that a city had to be square-shaped was abandoned.
Cultural life
After the fall of Antwerp, many artists and craftsmen migrated to Haarlem and received commissions from the Haarlem council to decorate the city hall.
The paintings commissioned were meant to show Haarlem's glorious history as well as Haarlem's glorious products.
Haarlem's cultural life prospered, with painters like Frans Hals and Jacob van Ruisdael, the architect Lieven de Key and Jan Steen who made many paintings in Haarlem.
The Haarlem councilmen became quite creative in their propaganda promoting their city.
On the Grote Markt, the central market square, there's a statue of Laurens Janszoon Coster who is allegedly the inventor of the printing press.
This is actually the second and larger statue to him on the square; the original stands behind the city hall in the little garden known as the Hortus (where today the Stedelijk Gymnasium school is located).
Most scholars agree that the scarce evidence seems to point to Johann Gutenberg as the first European inventor of the printing press, but Haarlem children were taught about Lau as he is known, well into the 20th century.
This legend served the printers of Haarlem well, however, and it is probably for that reason the most notable Dutch history books from the Dutch Golden Age period were published in Haarlem; by Hadrianus Junius (Batavia), Dirck Volkertszoon Coornhert (Works), Karel van Mander (Schilderboeck), Samuel Ampzing (Description and Ode to Haarlem), Petrus Scriverius (Batavia Illustrata), and Pieter Christiaenszoon Bor (Origin of the Dutch wars).
Beer brewing
Beer brewing was a very important industry in Haarlem.
Until the 16th century the water for the beer was taken from the canals in the city.
These were, through the Spaarne and the IJ, connected to seawater.
However, the water in the canals was getting more and more polluted, and no longer suitable for brewing beer.
A place south-west of the city was then used to take fresh water in.
However, the quality of that water was not good enough either.
From the 17th century a canal (Santvaert) was used to transport water from the dunes to the city.
The water was transported in barrels on ships.
The location where the water was taken is called the Brouwerskolkje, and the canal to there still exists, and is now called the Brewers' Canal .
Haarlem was a major beer producer in the Netherlands.
The majority of the beer it produced was consumed in North Holland.
During the Spanish siege there were about 50 brewing companies in the city; while 45 years later in 1620 the city numbered about one hundred breweries.
There was another epidemic of the Black Death in 1657, which took a heavy toll in the six months it ravaged the city.
From the end of the 17th century the economic situation in the city turned sour, for a long time.
In 1752 there were only seven beer breweries left, and in 1820 no breweries were registered in the city anymore.
In the 1990s the Stichting Haarlems Biergenootschap revived some of the old recipes under the new Jopen beer brand, that is marketed as a "Haarlem bier".
In 2010 Jopen opened a brewery in a former church in central Haarlem called the Jopenkerk.
In 2012 Haarlem gained a new local brewery with Uiltje Bar in the Zijlstraat, which specializes in craft beers.
Tulip centre
From the 1630s until present day, Haarlem has been a major trading centre for tulips, and it was at the epicentre during tulip mania, when outrageous prices were paid for tulip bulbs.
From the time that the Leiden-Haarlem canal Leidsevaart was opened in 1656, it became popular to travel from Rotterdam to Amsterdam by passenger boat rather than by coach.
The canals were dug for passenger service only, and were comfortable though slow.
The towpath led these passengers through the bulb fields south of Haarlem.
Haarlem was an important stopover for passengers from the last half of the 17th century and through the 18th century until the building of the first rail tracks along the routes of former passenger canal systems.
As Haarlem slowly expanded southwards, so did the bulb fields, and even today rail travelers between Rotterdam and Amsterdam will see beautifully blooming bulb fields on the stretch between Leiden and Haarlem in Spring.
18th century
As the centre of trade gravitated towards Amsterdam, Haarlem declined in the 18th century.
The Golden age had created a large upper middle class of merchants and well-to-do small business owners.
Taking advantage of the reliability of the trekschuit connection between Amsterdam and Haarlem, many people had a business address in Amsterdam and a weekend or summer home in Haarlem.
Haarlem became more and more a bedroom community as the increasingly dense population of Amsterdam caused the canals to smell in the summer.
Many well-to-do gentlemen moved their families to summer homes in the Spring and commuted between addresses.
Popular places for summer homes were along the Spaarne in southern Haarlem.
Pieter Teyler van der Hulst and Henry Hope built summer homes there, as well as many Amsterdam merchants and councilmen.
Today, it is still possible to travel by boat along the Spaarne and this has turned into a popular form of tourism in the summer months.
In the 18th century Haarlem became the seat of a suffragan diocese of the Old Catholic Church of Utrecht.
French rule
At the end of the 18th century a number of anti-Orange commissions were founded.
On 18 January 1795 the "Staatse" army was defeated near Woerden.
During the night preceding the 19th, the same night that stadtholder William V of Orange fled the country, the various commissions gathered and implemented a revolution.
The commissions changed the city's administrators in a bloodless revolution, and the next morning the city was 'liberated' of the tyranny of the House of Orange.
The revolution was peaceful and the Orange-loyal people were not harmed.
The Batavian Republic was then proclaimed.
The French army entered the liberated city two days later, on the 20 January.
An army of 1,500 soldiers was provided with food and clothing by the citizens.
The new national government was strongly centralised, and the role and influence of the cities was reduced.
The Batavian Republic had signed a mutual defense pact with France, and was thus automatically at war with England.
The strong English presence at sea severely reduced the trading opportunities, and the Dutch economy suffered accordingly.
19th century
The textile industry, which had always been an important pillar of Haarlem's economy, was in a bad shape at the beginning of the 19th century.
Strong international competition, and revolutionary new production methods based on steam engines already in use in England, dealt a striking blow to Haarlem's industry.
In 1815 the city's population was about 17,000 people, a large percentage of whom were poor.
The foundation of the United Kingdom of the Netherlands in that year gave hope to many, who believed that under a new government the economy would pick up, and that export-oriented economic activities such as the textile industry would recover.
In the beginning of the 19th century the defense walls had lost their function, and architect Zocher Jr. planned a park on the location of the former defense line.
The city walls and gates were demolished and the bricks were reused for construction of workers homes and factories.
Haarlem became the provincial capital of North Holland province in the early 19th century.
In the mid-19th century the city's economy slowly started to improve.
New factories were opened, and a number of large industrial companies were founded in Haarlem by Thomas Wilson, Guillaume Jean Poelman, J.B.T. Prévinaire, J.J. Beijnes, Hendrik Figee, Gerardus Johannes Droste and G.P.J. Beccari.
Cotton mills
The Nederlandsche Handel-Maatschappij (NHM or Dutch Trade Company) was founded by King Willem I to create employment opportunities.
As one of the cities in the western part of the Netherlands with the worst economical situation, three cotton mills were created in Haarlem under the NHM-program in the 1830s.
These were run by experts from the Southern Netherlands, whom the NHM considered better at mechanical weaving through the local expertise of Lieven Bauwens.
The lucky contract winners were Thomas Wilson, whose factory was situated north of what is today the Wilsonplein, Guillaume Jean Poelman, who was in business with his nephew Charles Vervaecke from Ghent and had a factory on what today is the Phoenixstraat, and Jean Baptiste Theodore Prévinaire, who had a factory on the Garenkokerskade and whose son Marie Prosper Theodore Prévinaire created the Haarlemsche Katoenmaatschappij in 1875.
These cotton factories produced goods for export, and because the Dutch government levied heavy taxes on foreign cotton producers this was a profitable business for the NHM-factories, especially for export to the Dutch East Indies.
The programme started in the 1830s, and was initially successful, but after 1839 when Belgium was split away from the United Kingdom of the Netherlands, the protectionist measures for the Dutch East Indian market were removed and the business began to flounder.
When the American Civil War reduced the import of raw cotton significantly after 1863, the business went sour.
Only Prévinaire was able to survive through specialisation with his "Turkish Red" dye.
The Prévinaire "toile Adrinople" was popular.
Prévinaire's son went on to create the Haarlemsche Katoenmaatschappij, which made a kind of imitation batik cloth called "La Javanaise" that became popular in Belgian Congo.
and it owns a number of works by Michelangelo and Rembrandt.
Another museum is the Frans Hals Museum of fine arts, with its main location housing Dutch master paintings, and its exhibition halls on the Grote Markt housing a gallery for modern art called De Hallen.
Also on the Grote Markt, in the cellar of the Vleeshal is the Archeologisch Museum Haarlem, while across the square on Saturdays, the Hoofdwacht building is open with exhibitions on Haarlem history.
Other museums are the Barrel Organ Museum Haarlem, Het Dolhuys (a museum of psychiatry), the Ten Boom Museum (a hiding place for Jews in World War II) and the Historisch Museum Haarlem, across from the Frans Hals Museum.
Theater, film and cultural centres
The city contains several theatres, cinemas and other cultural attractions .
The Philharmonie is a concert hall in the centre of the city near the Grote Markt.
Next to it is the Toneelschuur theatre, which also has some movie theatres (often referred to as the Filmschuur).
The Stadsschouwburg on the Wilsonsplein reopened in 2008 after a major renovation and can seat 698.
There used to be two more cinemas in Haarlem, but both of them closed recently.
Cinema Palace was established in 1915 and was one of the oldest cinemas in the Netherlands.
It closed definitively on 15 January 2011.
The other was the Brinkmann cinema, located on the Grote Markt, which closed on 1 February 2012.
Nowadays, the only other cinema in Haarlem is Pathé Haarlem, located in the newly built Raaks shopping mall.
This new cinema opened on 5 July 2011.
The Patronaat is a pop music hall, one of the largest in the Netherlands of its kind.
It is a popular night spot among many of the city's residents and others.
Festivals
Every year in April the bloemencorso (flower parade) takes place.
Floats decorated with flowers drive from Noordwijk to Haarlem, where they are exhibited for one day.
In the same month there is also a funfair organised on the Grote Markt and the Zaanenlaan in Haarlem-Noord.
Other festivals are held on the Grote Markt as well, in particular the annual Haarlem Jazz & More (formerly known as Haarlem Jazzstad), a music festival, and Haarlem Culinair, a culinary event, as well as the biannual Haarlemse Stripdagen (Haarlem comic days).
Bevrijdingspop is a music festival to celebrate the Dutch liberation from the Nazis after World War II.
It is held every year on 5 May, the day that the Netherlands were liberated in 1945, at the Haarlemmerhout.
At the same location, the Haarlemmerhoutfestival is also held every year, which is a music and theatre festival.
Sports
Haarlem is home to many different sport clubs practicing a great diversity of sports.
There are several amateur association football clubs.
Haarlem also had a professional football club, HFC Haarlem, which went bankrupt in January 2010.
Another Haarlem based football club still in existence is Koninklijke HFC (Royal Haarlemsche Football Club).
It was founded by Pim Mulier in 1879 as the first football club in the Netherlands, making it the oldest club in Dutch history.
Tennis club HLTC Haarlem, founded in 1884, and judo association Kenamju, founded in 1948, are also the oldest Dutch clubs in their sports.
Haarlem is known for hosting several international sports tournaments as well: the Haarlemse Honkbalweek (Haarlem Baseball Week), a baseball event held every two years at the Pim Mulier Stadium (named after Pim Mulier), and the Haarlem Basketball Classic, a basketball event.
Haarlem also hosted the 2014 Women's Softball World Championship.
The first international bandy match was played between Haarlem and Bury Fen Bandy Club in 1891.
Some rink bandy exists today.
Cultural references
The story of a boy who saved the city with his finger in a leaking dike is known as the "Hero of Haarlem."
* Folk singer Al Stewart mentions Haarlem in his song "Amsterdam".
The train station of Haarlem was part of a set during the movie Ocean's Twelve portraying Amsterdam Central Station.
The book Confessions of an Ugly Stepsister by Gregory Maguire is set in Haarlem.
The book The Black Tulip by Alexandre Dumas, père has several scenes in Haarlem, most notably the ending, and it is the Horticultural Society of Haarlem that offers a reward for a black tulip.
In 1628 a chemist in Haarlem goes broke, and decides to join the VOC to sail to the East.
His name, Jeronimus Cornelisz, will always be connected with the Batavia ship.
* Panoramic views of the Haarlem skyline became so popular in the 17th century that a specific term was used to describe them: a Haerlempje.
The most famous Haerlempjes were painted by Jacob van Ruisdael, for instance View of Haarlem with Bleaching Fields.
* Famous Dutch radio DJ Giel Beelen was born in Haarlem.
He started his career at the local radiostation Haarlem 105.
He currently still lives in Haarlem.
Buildings and locations
Since the 18th century, Haarlem has historically had more museums per inhabitant than any other city of the Netherlands.
It also has the highest number of defunct museums per inhabitant.
The city is notable for its many ; many open to the public on weekdays.
Many hofjes are still owned by the original foundations, and are still mainly used for single elderly women.
** the Vleeshal or meat market (home to two museums)
* Stadsbibliotheek Haarlem, the Haarlem Public Library, an historic landmark
The Janskerk has an exhibition area in the former choir
* The Teylers Museum is the oldest museum of the Netherlands
The monumental buildings of the Stedelijk Gymnasium Haarlem Latin School of Haarlem, also host of the Haarlem Model United Nations
Transport
Haarlem is served by two railway stations of the Nederlandse Spoorwegen (Dutch Railways).
From Haarlem railway station there are 8 trains an hour to Amsterdam, with a journey time of 15 to 20 minutes, 6 trains an hour to Leiden and The Hague (two stations), and 2 trains an hour to Zandvoort aan Zee.
On the east of Haarlem, there is Haarlem Spaarnwoude, which has 4 trains per hour to Amsterdam.
The city is also served by several bus lines of Connexxion.
These buses traverse a large region around Haarlem, including Amsterdam.
There is a special bus rapid transit too, called the Zuidtangent which is operated by Connexxion.
This bus goes from Haarlem to Amsterdam South East via Schiphol Airport.
Local government
The municipal council of Haarlem consists of 39 seats, which are divided as follows:
Police and law enforcement
The police services in Haarlem are provided by the Kennemerland police corps.
The city of Haarlem also employs uniformed municipal enforcement officers, their duties consist of parking, sanitation, traffic, permit enforcement, and patrols throughout the city.
Miscellaneous
Local beer
Beer brewing has been a very important industry for Haarlem going back to the 15th century, when there were no fewer than 100 breweries in the city.
When the town's 750th anniversary was celebrated in 1995 a group of enthusiasts re-created an original Haarlem beer and brewed it again.
The beer is called Jopenbier, or Jopen for short, named after an old type of beer barrel.
Harlem, Manhattan
In 1658, Peter Stuyvesant, the Director-General of the Dutch colony of Nieuw Nederland (New Netherland), founded the settlement of Nieuw Haarlem in the northern part of Manhattan Island as an outpost of Nieuw Amsterdam (New Amsterdam) at the southern tip of the island.
After the English capture of New Netherland in 1664, the new English colonial administration renamed both the colony and its principal city "New York," but left the name of Haarlem more or less unchanged.
The spelling changed to Harlem in keeping with contemporary English usage, and the district grew into the vibrant centre of African American culture in New York City and the United States generally by the 20th century.
"Lautje", Statue on the Grote Markt
On the main square, the Grote Markt, stands a statue of Laurens Janszoon Coster, nicknamed 'Lautje' by locals.
Laurens Janszoon Coster is credited with being the inventor of a printing press using movable type, since he's said to have invented it simultaneously with Johannes Gutenberg, but only some people believe this.
In the past the statue was moved a couple of times.
It once stood at the other side of the square and even perched at the Riviervismarkt near the Philharmonie.
Twin cities
Haarlem is twinned with:
References
Notes
Bibliography
* Ach lieve tijd: 750 jaar Haarlem, de Haarlemmers en hun rijke verleden, F.W.J.Koorn (red), Vrieseborch, Zwolle 1984 ()
* Deugd boven geweld: een geschiedenis van Haarlem, 1245-1995, G.F. van der Ree-Scholtens (red), Uitgeverij Verloren, Hilversum 1995 ()
* Geschiedenis en beschrijving van Haarlem, van de vroegste tijden tot op onze dagen, F. Allan, J. J. van Brederode, Haarlem 1874
