Anteater is a common name for the four extant mammal species of the suborder Vermilingua (meaning "worm tongue") commonly known for eating ants and termites.
The individual species have other names in English and other languages.
Together with the sloths, they are within the order Pilosa.
The name "anteater" is also colloquially applied to the unrelated aardvark, numbat, echidnas, pangolins and some members of the Oecobiidae.
Extant species are the giant anteater Myrmecophaga tridactyla, about long including the tail; the silky anteater Cyclopes didactylus, about long; the southern tamandua or collared anteater Tamandua tetradactyla, about long; and the northern tamandua Tamandua mexicana of similar dimensions.
Taxonomy
Classification
The anteaters are more closely related to the sloths than they are to any other group of mammals.
Their next closest relations are armadillos.
There are four extant species in three genera:
* Northern (Tamandua mexicana) and southern tamandua (Tamandua tetradactyla)
There are several extinct genera as well.
Order Pilosa
Evolution
Anteaters are one of three surviving families of a once diverse group of mammals that occupied South America while it was geographically isolated from an invasion of animals from North America, the other two being the sloths and the armadillos.
At one time, anteaters were assumed to be related to aardvarks and pangolins because of their physical similarities to those animals, but these similarities have since been determined to be not a sign of a common ancestor, but of convergent evolution.
All have evolved powerful digging forearms, long tongues, and toothless, tube-like snouts to subsist by raiding termite mounds.
This similarity is the reason aardvarks are also commonly called "anteaters"; the pangolin has been called the "scaly anteater"; and the word "antbear" is a common term for both the aardvark and the giant anteater.
Physical characteristics
All anteaters have elongated snouts equipped with a thin tongue that can be extended to a length greater than the length of the head; their tube-shaped mouths have lips but no teeth.
They use their large, curved foreclaws to tear open ant and termite mounds and for defense, while their dense and long fur protects them from attacks from the insects.
All species except the giant anteater have a long prehensile tail.
Behaviour
Anteaters are mostly solitary mammals prepared to defend their 1.0- to 1.5-mi2 (2.6- to 3.9-km2) territories.
They do not normally enter a territory of another anteater of the same sex, but males often enter the territory of associated females.
When a territorial dispute occurs, they vocalize, swat, and can sometimes sit on or even ride the back of their opponents.
and can tolerate greater fluctuations in body temperature than most mammals.
Its daily energy intake from food is only slightly greater than its energy need for daily activities, and anteaters probably coordinate their body temperatures so they keep cool during periods of rest, and heat up during foraging.
The silky anteater (Cyclopes didactylus) is a native of the hottest parts of South and Central America, and about the size of a cat, of a general yellowish color, and exclusively arboreal in its habits.
Notes
0lzxwyshjsgdhufs6wmrnvr01619gv5
