The Charioteer of Delphi, also known as Heniokhos (, the rein-holder), is one of the best-known statues surviving from Ancient Greece, and is considered one of the finest examples of ancient bronze sculptures.
The life-size (1.8m) statue of a chariot driver was found in 1896 at the Sanctuary of Apollo in Delphi.
to commemorate the victory of the tyrant Polyzalus of Gela in Sicily and his chariot in the Pythian Games of 470 BC, which were held at Delphi in honor of Pythean Apollo.
It has also been suggested that the complex was actually commemorating the victory of Polyzalos' brother, Hieron, at the Pythian Games of 470 BC in analogy to his ex voto after his victory at the Olympic Games.
It was originally part of a larger group of statuary, including the chariot, at least four horses and possibly two grooms.
Some fragments of the horses were found with the statue.
The masterpiece has been associated with the sculptor Pythagoras of Samos who lived and worked in Sicily, as well as with the sculptor Calamis.
The Sicilian cities were very wealthy compared with most of the cities of mainland Greece and their rulers could afford the most magnificent offerings to the gods, also the best horses and drivers.
It is unlikely, however, the statue itself comes from Sicily.
The name of the sculptor is unknown, but for stylistic reasons it is believed that the statue was cast in Athens.
It has certain similarities of detail to the statue known as the Piraeus Apollo, which is known to be of Athenian origin.
An inscription on the limestone base of the statue shows that it was dedicated by Polyzalus, Although the Charioteer is the last remaining bronze sculpture from Delphi, the figure exhibited a similar bluish appearance which after a century of indoor exposure turned greenish.
The lower torso still preserves a bluish coloration.
The Charioteer is almost intact except that his left forearm and some details on the head are missing including the copper inlays on the lips and most of the silver eyelashes and headband.
Unusually for this era, the Charioteer is clothed head to foot.
Most athletes at this time would have competed, and been depicted nude.
The young man would certainly have been of a lower status than his master Polyzalos, and Honour and Fleming have speculated that he may have been a household slave whom it was not appropriate to depict in the nude. .
The statue is more naturalistic than the kouroi of the Archaic period, but the pose is still very rigid when compared with later works of the Classical period.
One departure from the Archaic style is that the head is inclined slightly to one side.
The naturalistic rendering of his feet was greatly admired in ancient times.
The introverted expression does away with the old 'Archaic smile'.
The Delphos gown
In about 1907, some ten years after the discovery of the Charioteer, Mariano Fortuny y Madrazo, a Spanish artist-designer based in Venice, created a finely pleated silk dress that he named the Delphos gown after the statue, whose robes it closely resembled.
These gowns are considered important pieces of early 20th century fashion and art objects in their own right.
A Delphos gown was, in 2003, the only fashion garment in the collection of the Museum of Modern Art, New York.
Gallery
File:Charioteer of Delphi - detail of head.jpg|Detail of the statue's head, showing the inlaid eyes.
File:Cherioteer Fragments.jpg|Fragments and drawing of Charioteer.
File:Charioteer of Delphi-2.jpg|Detail of the statue's head and arm.
File:Aurige_back.jpg|Back view of the Charioteer.
File:Delphi - Museum.jpg|Position in the museum
