Londinium was a settlement established on the current site of the City of London around 43.
Its bridge over the River Thames turned the city into a road nexus and major port, serving as a major commercial centre in Roman Britain until its abandonment during the 5th century.
Following its foundation in the mid-1st century, early Londinium occupied the relatively small area of , roughly equivalent to the size of present-day Hyde Park, with a fortified garrison on one of its hills.
In the year 60 or 61, the rebellion of the Iceni under Boudica forced the garrison to abandon the settlement, which was then razed.
Following the defeat of Boudica by the Roman governor Gaius Suetonius Paulinus, the city was rebuilt as a planned Roman town and recovered within about a decade.
During the later decades of the 1st century, Londinium expanded rapidly, becoming Great Britain's largest city.
By the turn of the century, Londinium had grown to perhaps 30,000 or 60,000 people, almost certainly replacing Camulodunum (Colchester) as the provincial capital and by the mid-2nd century, Londinium was at its height.
Its forum and basilica were one of the largest structures north of the Alps when the Emperor Hadrian visited Londinium in 122.
Excavations have discovered evidence of a major fire that destroyed most of the city shortly thereafter, but the city was again rebuilt.
By the second half of the 2nd century, Londinium appears to have shrunk in both size and population.
Although Londinium remained important for the rest of the Roman period, no further expansion resulted.
Londinium supported a smaller but stable settlement population as archaeologists have found that much of the city after this date was covered in dark earth-the by-product of urban household waste, manure, ceramic tile, and non-farm debris of settlement occupation, which accumulated relatively undisturbed for centuries.
Sometime between 190 and 225, the Romans built a defensive wall around the landward side of the city.
Along with Hadrian's Wall and the road network, this wall was one of the largest construction projects carried out in Roman Britain.
The London Wall survived for another 1,600 years and broadly defined the perimeter of the old City of London.
Name
The etymology of the name Londinium is unknown.
Following Geoffrey of Monmouth's pseudohistorical History of the Kings of Britain,
Location
The site guarded the Romans' bridgehead on the north bank of the Thames and a major road nexus.
It centered on Cornhill and the River Walbrook, but expanded west to Ludgate Hill and east to Tower Hill.
Just prior to the Roman conquest, the area had been contested by the Catuvellauni based to its west and the Trinovantes based to its east; it bordered the realm of the Cantiaci on the south bank of the Thames.
The Roman city ultimately covered at least the area of the City of London, whose boundaries are largely defined by its former wall.
Londinium's waterfront on the Thames ran from around Ludgate Hill in the west to the present site of the Tower in the east, around .
The northern wall reached Bishopsgate and Cripplegate near the Museum of London, a course now marked by the street "London Wall".
Cemeteries and suburbs existed outside the city proper.
A round temple has been located west of the city, although its dedication remains unclear.
Substantial suburbs existed at St Martin-in-the-Fields in Westminster and around the southern end of the Thames bridge in Southwark, where inscriptions suggest a temple of Isis was located.
Status
The status of Londinium is uncertain.
It seems to have been founded as a mere vicus and remained as such even after its recovery from Boudica's revolt.
Ptolemy lists it as one of the cities of the Cantiacs, but Durovernum (Roman Canterbury) was their tribal capital ().
Starting as a small fort guarding the northern end of the new bridge across the River Thames, Londinium grew to become an important port for trade between Britain and the Roman provinces on the continent.
The initial lack of private Roman villas (plentiful elsewhere) suggests military or even Imperial ownership.
Tacitus wrote that, at the time of the uprising of Boudica, "Londinium... though undistinguished by the name of 'colony', was much frequented by a number of merchants and trading vessels.
"{{refnaround the year 120.
By this time, Britain's provincial administration had also almost certainly been moved to Londinium from Camulodunum (Colchester in Essex).
The precise date of this change is unknown and no surviving source explicitly states that Londinium was "the capital of Britain" but there are several strong indications of this status: 2nd-century roofing tiles have been found marked by the "Procurator" or "Publican of the Province of Britain at Londinium", the remains of a governor's palace and tombstones belonging to the governor's staff have been discovered, and the city was well defended and armed, with a new military camp erected at the beginning of the 2nd century, despite being far from any frontier.
Despite some corruption to the text, the list of bishops for the 314 Council of Arles indicates that either Restitutus or Adelphius came from Londinium.
The city seems to have been the seat of the diocesan vicar and one of the provincial governors following the Diocletian Reforms around the year 300; it had been renamed Augusta-a common epithet of provincial capitals-by 368.
History
Founding
Unlike many cities of Roman Britain, Londinium was not placed on the site of a Celtic oppidum.
Prior to the arrival of the Roman legions, the area was almost certainly lightly rolling open countryside traversed by numerous streams now underground.
Archaeologist Lacey Wallace notes that "Because no LPRIA settlements or significant domestic refuse have been found in London, despite extensive archaeological excavation, arguments for a purely Roman foundation of London are now common and uncontroversial."
The city's Latin name now seems to have derived from an originally Brittonic one.
However, significant pre-Roman finds in the Thames, especially the Battersea Shield (Chelsea Bridge, perhaps 4th-century BC) and the Wandsworth Shield (perhaps 1st-century BC), both assumed to be votive offerings deposited a couple of miles upstream of Londinium, suggest the general area was busy and significant.
It has been suggested that the area was where a number of territories met.
There was probably a ford in that part of the river; other Roman and Celtic finds suggest this was perhaps where the opposed crossing Julius Caesar describes in 54 BC took place.
Londinium grew up around the point on the River Thames narrow enough for the construction of a Roman bridge but still deep enough to handle the era's seagoing ships.
Its placement on the Tideway permitted easier access for ships sailing upstream against the current.
but archaeological excavations undertaken since the 1970s by the Department of Urban Archaeology at the Museum of London (now MOLAS) have suggested the early settlement was largely the product of private enterprise.
A timber drain by the side of the main Roman road excavated at No 1 Poultry has been dated by dendrochronology to 47, which is likely to be the foundation date.
Following its foundation in the mid-1st century, early Roman London occupied a relatively small area, about or roughly the area of present-day Hyde Park.
Archaeologists have uncovered numerous goods imported from across the Roman Empire in this period, suggesting that early Roman London was a highly cosmopolitan community of merchants from across the Empire and that local markets existed for such objects.
Roads
Of the fifteen British routes recorded in the 2nd- or 3rd-century Antonine Itinerary, seven ran to or from Londinium.
The roads are now known by Welsh or Old English names, as their original Roman names have been entirely lost due to the lack of written and inscribed sources.
The road from the Kentish ports of Rutupiae (Richborough), Dubris (Dover), and Lemanis (Lympne) via Durovernum (Canterbury) seems to have first crossed the Thames at a natural ford near Westminster before being diverted north to the new bridge at London.
The Romans enabled the road to cross the marshy terrain without subsidence by laying down substrates of one to three layers of oak logs.
This route, now known as Watling Street, then passed through the town from the bridgehead in a straight line to reconnect with its northern extension towards Viroconium (Wroxeter) and the legionary base at Deva Victrix (Chester).
The Great Road ran northeast across Old Ford to Camulodunum (Colchester) and thence northeast along Pye Road to Venta Icenorum (Caistor St Edmund).
Ermine Street ran north from the city to Lindum (Lincoln) and Eboracum (York).
The Devil's Highway connected Londinium to Calleva (Silchester) and its roads to points west over the bridges near modern Staines.
A minor road led southwest to the city's main cemetery and the old routes to the ford at Westminster.
Stane Street to Noviomagus (Chichester) did not reach Londinium proper but ran from the bridgehead in the southern suburb at Southwark.
These roads varied from wide.
while the main north-south street (interrupted by the forum north of its intersection with the Via Decumana) is known as the Via Principalis .
or may have assisted the Romans against his tribesmen during that revolt.
His will had divided his wealth and lands between Rome and his two daughters, but Roman law forbade female inheritance and it had become common practice to treat allied kingdoms as life estates that were annexed upon the ruler's death, as had occurred in Bithynia and Galatia.
Roman financiers including Seneca called in all the king's outstanding loans at once and the provincial procurator confiscated the property of both the king and his nobles.
Tacitus records that, when the king's wife Boudica objected, the Romans flogged her, raped her two daughters, and enslaved their nobles and kinsmen.
Boudica then led a failed revolt against Roman rule.
Two hundred ill-equipped men were sent to defend the provincial capital and Roman colony at Camulodunum, probably from the garrison at Londinium.
The Iceni and their allies overwhelmed them and razed the city.
The 9th Legion under Q. Petillius Cerialis, coming south from the Fosse Way, was ambushed and annihilated.
The procurator, meanwhile, escaped with his treasure to Gaul, probably via Londinium.
1st century
After being sacked, the city was rebuilt as a planned Roman town, its streets generally adhering to a grid skewed by major roads passing from the bridgehead and by changes in alignment produced by crossings over the local streams.
It recovered after about a decade.
A fortified enclosure was erected at Plantation Place on Cornhill.
The first forum was constructed in the 70s or 80s Forums elsewhere typically had a civic temple constructed within the enclosed market area; British sites usually did not, instead placing a smaller shrine for Roman services somewhere within the basilica.
The first forum in Londinium seems to have had a full temple, but placed outside just west of the forum.
During the later decades of the 1st century, Londinium expanded rapidly and quickly became Roman Britain's largest city, although most of its houses continued to be made of wood.
By the turn of the century, Londinium was perhaps as large as 60,000 people, and had replaced Camulodunum (Colchester) as the provincial capital.
A large building discovered near Cannon Street Station has had its foundation dated to this era and is assumed to have been the governor's palace.
It boasted a garden, pools, and several large halls, some of which were decorated with mosaic floors.
It stood on the east bank of the now-covered Walbrook, near where it joins the Thames.
London Stone may originally have been part of the palace's main entrance.
Another site dating to this era is the bathhouse () at Huggin Hill, which remained in use prior to its demolition around the year 200.
Brothels were legal but taxed.
Port
The bulk of the Roman port was quickly rebuilt after Boudicca's rebellion when the waterfront was extended with gravel to permit a sturdy wharf to be built perpendicular to the shore.
The port was built in four sections, starting upstream of the London Bridge and working down towards the Walbrook at the center of Londinium.
Expansion of the flourishing port continued into the 3rd century.
Scraps of armour, leather straps, and military stamps on building timbers suggest that the site was constructed by the city's legionaries.
Major imports included fine pottery, jewelry, and wine.
and a "fairly-sophisticated" drainage system.
The gubernatorial palace was rebuilt the marketplace itself rivaled those in Rome and was the largest in the north before Augusta Treverorum (Trier, Germany) became an imperial capital.
The city's temple of Jupiter was renovated, public and private bathhouses were erected, and a fort () was erected around the year 120 that maintained the city garrison northwest of town.
When the ancient Romans left in the 4th century the amphitheatre lay derelict for hundreds of years.
In the 11th century the area was reoccupied and by the 12th century the first Guildhall was built next to it.
A large port complex on both banks near London Bridge was discovered during the 1980s.
A temple complex with two Romano-British temples was excavated at Empire Square, Long Lane, Southwark in 2002/2003.
A large house there may have been a guesthouse.
A marble slab with a dedication to the god Mars was discovered in the temple complex.
The inscription mentions the Londoners, the earliest known reference naming the people of London.
By the second half of the 2nd century, Londinium had many large, well-equipped stone buildings, some of which were richly adorned with wall paintings and floor mosaics, and had subfloor hypocausts.
The Roman house at Billingsgate was built next to the waterfront and had its own bath.
In addition to such structures reducing the city's building density, however, Londinium also seems to have shrunk in both size and population in the second half of the 2nd century.
The cause is uncertain but plague is considered likely, as the Antonine Plague is recorded decimating other areas of Western Europe between 165 and 190.
The end of imperial expansion in Britain after Hadrian's decision to build his wall may have also damaged the city's economy.
Although Londinium remained important for the rest of the Roman period, no further expansion occurred.
Londinium remained well populated as archaeologists have found that much of the city after this date was covered in dark earth, one that accumulated relatively undisturbed for centuries.
London Wall
Some time between 190 and 225, the Romans built the London Wall, a defensive ragstone wall around the landward side of the city.
Along with Hadrian's Wall and the road network, the London Wall was one of the largest construction projects carried out in Roman Britain.
The wall was originally about long, high, and thick.
Its dry moat () was about deep and wide.
In the 19th century, Smith estimated its length from the Tower west to Ludgate at about one mile () and its breadth from the northern wall to the bank of the Thames at around half that.
In addition to small pedestrian postern gates like the one by Tower Hill, it had four main gates: Bishopsgate and Aldgate in the northeast at the roads to Eboracum (York) and to Camulodunum (Colchester) and Newgate and Ludgate in the west along at the road that divided for travel to Viroconium (Wroxeter) and to Calleva (Silchester) and at another road that ran along the Thames to the city's main cemetery and the old ford at Westminster.
The wall partially utilized the army's existing fort, strengthening its outer wall with a second course of stone to match the rest of the course.
Others link it with Clodius Albinus, the British governor who attempted to usurp Septimius Severus in the 190s.
The wall survived another 1,600 years and still roughly defines the City of London's perimeter.
3rd century
Septimius Severus defeated Albinus in 197 and shortly afterwards divided the province of Britain into Upper and Lower halves, with the former controlled by a new governor in Eboracum (York).
Despite the smaller administrative area, the economic stimulus provided by the Wall and by Septimius Severus's campaigns in Caledonia somewhat revived London's fortunes in the early 3rd century.
The northwest fort was abandoned and dismantled when it was erected on the east bank at the head of navigation on the now-covered River Walbrook about from the Thames.
From about 255 onwards, raiding by Saxon pirates led to the construction of a riverside wall as well.
It ran roughly along the course of present-day Thames Street, which then roughly formed the shoreline.
Large collapsed sections of this wall were excavated at Blackfriars and the Tower in the 1970s.
The event was commemorated by the golden "Trier Medallion", Chlorus on one side and, on the other, a woman kneeling at the city wall welcoming a mounted Roman soldier.
Another memorial to the return of Londinium to Roman control was the construction of a new set of forum baths around the year 300.
The structures were modest enough that they were previously identified as parts of the forum and market but are now recognized as elaborate and luxurious baths including a with two southern pools and an eastern swimming pool.
4th century
Following the revolt, the Diocletian Reforms saw the British administration restructured.
Londinium is universally supposed to have been the capital of one of them, but it remains unclear where the new provinces were, whether there were initially three or four in total, and whether Valentia represented a fifth province or a renaming of an older one.
In the 12th century, Gerald of Wales listed "Londonia" as the capital of Flavia, having had Britannia Prima (Wales) and Secunda (Kent) severed from the territory of Upper Britain.
Modern scholars more often list Londinium as the capital of Maxima Caesariensis on the assumption that the presence of the diocesan vicar in London would have required its provincial governor to outrank the others.
The gubernatorial palace It was probably dedicated to St Paul.
From 340 onwards, northern Britain was repeatedly attacked by Picts and Gaels.
In 360, a large-scale attack forced the emperor Julian the Apostate to send troops to deal with the problem.
Large efforts were made to improve Londinium's defenses around the same time.
At least 22 semi-circular towers were added to the city walls to provide platforms for ballistae and the present state of the river wall suggested hurried repair work around this time.
It may have been at this point that one of the existing provinces was renamed Valentia, although the account of Theodosius's actions describes it as a province recovered from the enemy.
In 382, Magnus Maximus organized all of the British-based troops and attempted to establish himself as emperor over the west.
The event was obviously important to the Britons, as "Macsen Wledig" would remain a major figure in Welsh folklore and several medieval Welsh dynasties claimed descent from him.
He was probably responsible for London's new church in the 370s or 380s.
its large church on Tower Hill burnt to the ground.
Demographics
The population of Londinium is estimated to have peaked around 100 AD when it was still the capital of Britannia; at this point estimates for the population vary between about 30,000, or about 60,000 people.
Londonium was an ethnically diverse city with inhabitants from across the Roman Empire, including those with backgrounds from Britannia, continental Europe, the Middle East, and , 23
November 2015 Recent research of human remains in Roman cemeteries states that the "presence of people born in London with African ancestry is not an unusual or atypical result for Londinium."
A 2016 study of the isotope analysis of 20 bodies from various periods suggested that at least 12 had grown up locally, with four being immigrants, and the last four unclear.
Excavation
Many ruins remain buried beneath London, although understanding them can be difficult.
Owing to London's own geology, which consists of a Taplow Terrace deep bed of brickearth, sand, and gravel over clay, Roman gravel roads can only be identified as such if they were repeatedly relayered or if the spans of gravel can be traced across several sites.
The minimal remains from wooden structures are easy to miss and stone buildings may leave foundations, but-as with the great forum-they were often dismantled for stone during the Middle Ages and early modern period.
that it had been built over a Roman temple to the goddess Diana.
The extensive rebuilding of London in the 19th century and following the German bombing campaign during World War II also allowed for large parts of old London to be recorded and preserved while modern updates were made.
The construction of the London Coal Exchange led to the discovery of the Roman house at Billingsgate in 1848.
In the 1860s, excavations by General Rivers uncovered a large number of human skulls and almost no other bones in the bed of the Walbrook.
The discovery recalls a passage in Geoffrey of Monmouth's pseudohistorical History of the Kings of Britain where Asclepiodotus besieged the last remnants of the usurper Allectus's army at "Londonia".
Having battered the town's walls with siegeworks constructed by allied Britons, Asclepiodotus accepted the commander's surrender only to have the Venedotians rush upon them, ritually decapitating them and throwing the heads into the river "Gallemborne".
These merged after 1965 into the present Museum of London near the Barbican Centre.
Museum of London Docklands, a separate branch dealing with the history of London's ports, opened on the Isle of Dogs in 2003.
Other finds from Roman London continue to be held by the British Museum.
Parts of the amphitheatre are on display at the Guildhall Art Gallery.
The southwestern tower of the Roman fort northwest of town can still be seen at Noble Street.
Occasionally, Roman sites are incorporated into the foundations of new buildings for future study, but these are not generally available to the public.
Notes
* Brigham, Trevor.
“The Port of Roman London.”
In Roman London Recent Archeological Work, edited by B. Watson, 23-34.
Michigan: Cushing-Malloy Inc. Paper read at a seminar held at The Museum of London, 16 November.
* Hall, Jenny, and Ralph Merrifield.
Roman London.
London: HMSO Publications, 1986.
* Haverfield, F. "Roman London."
The Journal of Roman Studies 1 (1911): 141-72.
* Hingley, Richard, Londinium: A Biography: Roman London from its Origins to the Fifth Century, 2018, Bloomsbury Publishing, , 9781350047310
* John Wacher: The Towns of Roman Britain, London/New York 1997, p. 88-111.
* Gordon Home: Roman London: A.D. 43-457 Illustrated with black and white plates of artefacts.
diagrams and plans.
Published by Eyre and Spottiswoode (London) in 1948 with no ISBN.
* Milne, Gustav.
The Port of Roman London.
London: B.T. Batsford, 1985.
*Sheppard, Francis, London: A History, 2000, Oxford University Press, , 9780192853691, https:/ books?id
M9qvtYYhRtAC&pg
PA36 google books
Further reading
*Wallace, Lacey M., The Origin of Roman London, 2014, Cambridge Classical Studies, Cambridge University Press, , 9781107047570
