The papaya (, ) (from Carib via Spanish), papaw () or pawpaw , and its skin has attained an amber to orange hue.
Origin and distribution
Native to Mexico and northern South America,
Cultivation
Papaya plants grow in three sexes: male, female, and hermaphrodite.
The male produces only pollen, never fruit.
The female produces small, inedible fruits unless pollinated.
The hermaphrodite can self-pollinate since its flowers contain both male stamens and female ovaries.
Almost all commercial papaya orchards contain only hermaphrodites.
Originally from southern Mexico , Central America, and northern South America,
Production
In 2017, global production of papayas was 13.2 million tonnes, led by India with 45% of the world total (table).
Global papaya production grew significantly over the early 21st century, mainly as a result of increased production in India and demand by the United States.
Cultivars
Two kinds of papayas are commonly grown.
One has sweet, red or orange flesh, and the other has yellow flesh; in Australia, these are called "red papaya" and "yellow papaw", respectively.
Either kind, picked green, is called a "green papaya".
The large-fruited, red-fleshed 'Maradol', 'Sunrise', and 'Caribbean Red' papayas often sold in U.S. markets are commonly grown in Mexico and Belize.
In 2011, Philippine researchers reported that by hybridizing papaya with Vasconcellea quercifolia, they had developed conventionally bred, nongenetically engineered papaya resistant to papaya ringspot virus (PRV).
Genetically engineered cultivars
Carica papaya was the first transgenic fruit tree to have its genome sequenced.
In response to the papaya ringspot virus outbreak in Hawaii, in 1998, genetically altered papaya were approved and brought to market (including 'SunUp' and 'Rainbow' varieties.)
Varieties resistant to PRV have some DNA of this virus incorporated into the DNA of the plant.
As of 2010, 80% of Hawaiian papaya plants were genetically modified.
The modifications were made by University of Hawaii scientists, who made the modified seeds available to farmers without charge.
Diseases and pests
Viruses
Papaya ringspot virus is a well-known virus within plants in Florida.
The papaya mosaic virus destroys the plant until only a small tuft of leaves are left.
The virus affects both the leaves of the plant and the fruit.
Leaves show thin, irregular, dark-green lines around the borders and clear areas around the veins.
The more severely affected leaves are irregular and linear in shape.
The virus can infect the fruit at any stage of its maturity.
Fruits as young as 2 weeks old have been spotted with dark-green ringspots about 1 inch in diameter.
Rings on the fruit are most likely seen on either the stem end or the blossom end.
In the early stages of the ringspots, the rings tend to be many closed circles, but as the disease develops, the rings will increase in diameter consisting of one large ring.
The difference between the ringspot and the mosaic viruses is the ripe fruit in the ringspot has mottling of colors and mosaic does not.
Fungi
The fungus anthracnose is known to specifically attack papaya, especially the mature fruits.
The disease starts out small with very few signs, such as water-soaked spots on ripening fruits.
The spots become sunken, turn brown or black, and may get bigger.
In some of the older spots, the fungus may produce pink spores.
The fruit ends up being soft and having an off flavor because the fungus grows into the fruit.
The fungus phytophthora blight causes damping-off, root rot, stem rot, stem girdling, and fruit rot.
Damping-off happens in young plants by wilting and death.
The spots on established plants start out as white, water-soaked lesions at the fruit and branch scars.
These spots enlarge and eventually cause death.
The most dangerous feature of the disease is the infection of the fruit which may be toxic to consumers.
The papaya whitefly lays yellow, oval eggs that appear dusted on the undersides of the leaves.
They eat papaya leaves, therefore damaging the fruit.
There, the eggs developed into flies in three stages called instars.
The first instar has well-developed legs and is the only mobile immature life stage.
The crawlers insert their mouthparts in the lower surfaces of the leaf when they find it suitable and usually do not move again in this stage.
The next instars are flattened, oval, and scale-like.
In the final stage, the pupal whiteflies are more convex, with large, conspicuously red eyes.
In some parts of Asia, the young leaves of the papaya are steamed and eaten like spinach.
Papayas became a part of Filipino cuisine after being introduced to the islands via the Manila galleons.
Unripe or nearly ripe papayas (with orange flesh but still hard and green) are julienned and are commonly pickled into atchara which is ubiquitous as a side dish to salty dishes.
Nearly ripe papayas can also be eaten fresh as ensaladang papaya (papaya salad) or cubed, and eaten dipped in vinegar or salt.
Green papaya is also a common ingredient or filling in various savory dishes like okoy, tinola, ginataan, lumpia, and empanada, especially in the cuisines of northern Luzon.
In Indonesian cuisine, the unripe green fruits and young leaves are boiled for use as part of lalab salad, while the flower buds are sautéed and stir-fried with chillies and green tomatoes as Minahasan papaya flower vegetable dish.
In Thai cuisine, papaya is used to make Thai salads such as som tam and Thai curries such as kaeng som when still not fully ripe.
South America
In Brazil, the unripe fruits are often used to make sweets or preserves.
Meat tenderizing
Both green papaya fruit and the plant's latex are rich in papain, It is now included as a component in some powdered meat tenderizers.
as well as benzyl isothiocyanates and benzyl glucosinates, with skin and pulp levels that increase during ripening.
Papaya seeds also contain the cyanogenic substance prunasin.
Traditional medicine
In traditional medicine, papaya leaves have been used as a treatment for malaria, an abortifacient, a purgative, or smoked to relieve asthma.
meat that has been tenderized with it may induce an allergic reaction.
Gallery
File:Plàntula de papaia.jpg|Seedlings
File:Carica papaya at Kadavoor.jpg|Buds
File:Carica papaya 004.JPG|Female flowers
File:Carica papaya1.jpg|Male flowers
File:Pollens of Carica papaya .jpg|Pollens
File:Papaya flower 02.jpg|Papaya flower
File:Carica papaya leaf 14 07 2012.jpg|Leaf
File:Papaya tree DRC.jpg|Mature
tree with unripe fruit in Kinshasa
File:Fruit of papaya.jpg|Unripe fruit
File:Carica papaya 005.JPG|Ripe fruit
File:Octastichous Phyllotaxy of Papaya leaves.jpg|Octastichous phyllotaxy of papaya leaves
File:Dos Locos - Papaya Juice.jpg|Papaya juice
