A fief (; ) was the central element of feudalism.
It consisted of heritable property or rights granted by an overlord to a vassal who held it in fealty (or "in fee") in return for a form of feudal allegiance and service, usually given by the personal ceremonies of homage and fealty.
The fees were often lands or revenue-producing real property held in feudal land tenure: these are typically known as fiefs or fiefdoms.
However, not only land but anything of value could be held in fee, including governmental office, rights of exploitation such as hunting or fishing, monopolies in trade, and tax farms.
Terminology
In ancient Rome a "benefice" (from the Latin noun beneficium, meaning "benefit") was a gift of land (precaria) for life as a reward for services rendered, originally, to the state.
In medieval Latin European documents, a land grant in exchange for service continued to be called a beneficium (Latin).
Later, the term feudum, or feodum, began to replace beneficium in the documents.
that it is related to the Frankish term *fehu-ôd, in which *fehu means "cattle" and -ôd means "goods", implying "a moveable object of value."
A theory put forward by Archibald R. Lewis In that text is a passage about Louis the Pious which says annona militaris quas vulgo foderum vocant, which can be translated as " (Louis forbade that) military provender which they popularly call 'fodder' (be furnished)."
Samarrai's theory is that early forms of 'fief' include feo, feu, feuz, feuum and others, the plurality of forms strongly suggesting origins from a loanword.
First use of these terms was in Languedoc, one of the least-Germanized areas of Europe, and bordering Muslim Spain, where the earliest use of feuum as a replacement for beneficium can be dated to 899, the same year a Muslim base at Fraxinetum (La Garde-Freinet) in Provence was established.
It is possible, Samarrai says, that French scribes, writing in Latin, attempted to transliterate the Arabic word fuyū (the plural of fay), which was being used by the Muslims at the time, resulting in a plurality of forms - feo, feu, feuz, feuum and others - from which eventually feudum derived.
Samarrai, however, also advises medieval and early modern Muslim scribes often used etymologically "fanciful roots" in order to claim the most outlandish things to be of Arabian or Muslim origin.
In French, one also finds "seigneurie" (land and rights possessed by a "seigneur" or "lord", 12th-century), which gives rise to the expression "seigneurial system" to describe feudalism.
Early feudal grants
Originally, vassalage did not imply the giving or receiving of landholdings (which were granted only as a reward for loyalty), but by the 8th century the giving of a landholding was becoming standard.
The granting of a landholding to a vassal did not relinquish the lord's property rights, but only the use of the lands and their income; the granting lord retained ultimate ownership of the fee and could, technically, recover the lands in case of disloyalty or death.
By the middle of the 10th century, fee had largely become hereditary.
The eldest son of a deceased vassal would inherit, but first he had to do homage and fealty to the lord and pay a "relief" for the land (a monetary recognition of the lord's continuing proprietary rights over the property).
Historically, the fees of the 11th and the 12th century derived from two separate sources.
The first was land carved out of the estates of the upper nobility.
The second source was allodial land transformed into dependent tenures.
During the 10th century in northern France and the 11th century in France south of the Loire, local magnates either recruited or forced the owners of allodial holdings into dependent relationships and they were turned into fiefs.
The process occurred later in Germany, and was still going on in the 13th century.
In England, Henry II transformed them into important sources of royal income and patronage.
The discontent of barons with royal claims to arbitrarily assessed "reliefs" and other feudal payments under Henry's son King John resulted in Magna Carta of 1215.
Eventually, great feudal lords sought also to seize governmental and legal authority (the collection of taxes, the right of high justice, etc.) in their lands, and some passed these rights to their own vassals.
In northern France in the 12th and 13th centuries, military service for fiefs was limited for offensive campaigns to 40 days for a knight.
By the 12th century, English and French kings and barons began to commute military service for cash payments (scutages), with which they could purchase the service of mercenaries.
Feudal registers
A list of several hundred such fees held in chief between 1198 and 1292, along with their holders' names and form of tenure, was published in three volumes between 1920 and 1931 and is known as The Book of Fees; it was developed from the 1302 Testa de Nevill.
* Appanage, part of the liege's domain granted to a junior relative
* Brahmadeya, a royal fief given to a Brahmin for service to an Indian king.
* Fengjian, the Chinese system often compared to European feudalism
* Seigneurial system of New France, a semifeudal system in France's American colonies
Notes
* Norman F. Cantor.
The Civilization of the Middle Ages.
New York: HarperPerennial, 1993.
* Stéphane Lebecq.
Les origines franques: Ve-IXe siècles.
Series: Nouvelle histoire de la France médiévale.
Paris:
Editions du Seuil, 1999.
kj10rlnp5c14iuygv3ygssmhrdygwr6
