"Cinderella", or "The Little Glass Slipper", is a folk tale embodying a myth-element of unjust oppression and triumphant reward.
Thousands of variants are known throughout the world.
The title character is a young woman living in unfortunate circumstances, that are suddenly changed to remarkable fortune.
The story of Rhodopis, recounted by the Greek geographer Strabo sometime between around 7 BC and 23 AD, about a Greek slave girl who marries the king of Egypt, is considered as a possible source due to some similarities.
The first ancient story that shares the critical elements of the canonical Cinderella story is usually considered to be the Ye Xian story.
The first literary European version of the story was published in Italy by Giambattista Basile in his Pentamerone in 1634; the version that is now most widely known in the English-speaking world was published in French by Charles Perrault in Histoires ou contes du temps passé in 1697.
Another version was later published by the Brothers Grimm in their folk tale collection Grimms' Fairy Tales in 1812.
Although the story's title and main character's name change in different languages, in English-language folklore Cinderella is the archetypal name.
The word Cinderella has, by analogy, come to mean one whose attributes were unrecognized, or one who unexpectedly achieves recognition or success after a period of obscurity and neglect.
The still-popular story of Cinderella continues to influence popular culture internationally, lending plot elements, allusions, and tropes to a wide variety of media.
The Aarne-Thompson-Uther system classifies Cinderella as Tale Type 510A, Persecuted Heroine.
Ancient versions
European versions
Rhodopis
Some traces the Cinderella story to the ancient Greek story of Rhodopis, a Greek courtesan living in the colony of Naucratis in Egypt, whose name means "Rosy-Cheeks", even though many critical elements of the canonical Cinderella story are missing.
This story is first recorded by the Greek geographer Strabo in his Geographica (book 17, 33), The eagle snatched one of her sandals from her maid and carried it to Memphis; and while the king was administering justice in the open air, the eagle, when it arrived above his head, flung the sandal into his lap; and the king, stirred both by the beautiful shape of the sandal and by the strangeness of the occurrence, sent men in all directions into the country in quest of the woman who wore the sandal; and when she was found in the city of Naucratis, she was brought up to Memphis, became the wife of the king ...
The same story is also later reported by the Roman orator Aelian (ca. 175-ca. 235) in his Miscellaneous History, which was written entirely in Greek.
Aelian's story closely resembles the story told by Strabo, but adds that the name of the pharaoh in question was Psammetichus.
Aelian's account indicates that the story of Rhodopis remained popular throughout antiquity.
Herodotus, some five centuries before Strabo, records a popular legend about a possibly-related courtesan named Rhodopis in his Histories,
Le Fresne
The twelfth-century AD lai of Le Fresne ("The Ash-Tree Girl"), retold by Marie de France, is a variant of the "Cinderella" story The infant is discovered by the porter, who names her Fresne, meaning "Ash Tree", In this version, Ye Xian is the daughter of the local tribal leader who died when she was young.
Because her mother died before her father, she is now under the care of her father's second wife, who abused her.
She befriends a fish, which is the reincarnation of her deceased mother.
Tam and Cam
The Story of Tam and Cam, from Vietnam, is similar to the Chinese version.
The heroine Tấm also had a fish which was killed by the stepmother and the half-sister, and its bones also give her clothes.
Later after marrying the king, Tấm was killed by her stepmother and sister, and reincarnated several times in form of a bird, a loom and a "gold apple".
She finally reunited with the king and lived happily ever after.
Literary versions
The first written European version of the story was published in Napoli (Naples), Italy, by Giambattista Basile, in his Pentamerone (1634).
The story itself was set in the Kingdom of Naples, at that time the most important political and cultural center of Southern Italy and among the most influential capitals in Europe, and written in the Neapolitan dialect.
It was later retold, along with other Basile tales, by Charles Perrault in Histoires ou contes du temps passé (1697),
Cendrillon ou la petite pantoufle de verre, by Perrault
One of the most popular versions of Cinderella was written in French by Charles Perrault in 1697, under the name Cendrillon ou la petite pantoufle de verre.
The popularity of his tale was due to his additions to the story, including the pumpkin, the fairy-godmother and the introduction of "glass" slippers.
Plot:
:A wealthy widower has a beautiful young daughter; a girl of unparalleled kindness and sweet temper.
The gentleman marries a proud and haughty woman as his second wife.
She has two daughters, who are equally vain and selfish.
The girl is forced into servitude by her stepmother, where she is made to work day and night doing menial chores.
After the girl's chores are done for the day, she curls up near the fireplace in an effort to stay warm.
She often arises covered in cinders, giving rise to the mocking nickname "Cinderella" by her stepsisters.
Cinderella bears the abuse patiently and does not tell her father, who would have scolded her.
:One day, the Prince invites all the young ladies in the land to a royal ball, planning to choose a wife.
The two stepsisters gleefully plan their wardrobes for the ball, and taunt Cinderella by telling her that maids are not invited to the ball.
:As the sisters depart to the ball, Cinderella cries in despair.
Her Fairy Godmother magically appears and immediately begins to transform Cinderella from house servant to the young lady she was by birth, all in the effort to get Cinderella to the ball.
She turns a pumpkin into a golden carriage, mice into horses, a rat into a coachman, and lizards into footmen.
She then turns Cinderella's rags into a beautiful jeweled gown, complete with a delicate pair of glass slippers.
The Godmother tells her to enjoy the ball, but warns her that she must return before midnight, when the spells will be broken.
:At the ball, the entire court is entranced by Cinderella, especially the Prince.
At this first ball, Cinderella remembers to leave before midnight.
Back home, Cinderella graciously thanks her Godmother.
She then innocently greets the stepsisters, who had not recognized her earlier, and talk of nothing but the beautiful girl at the ball.
:Another ball is held the next evening, and Cinderella again attends with her Godmother's help.
The Prince has become even more infatuated with the mysterious woman at the ball, and Cinderella in turn becomes so enchanted by him she loses track of time and leaves only at the final stroke of midnight, losing one of her glass slippers on the steps of the palace in her haste.
The Prince chases her, but outside the palace, the guards see only a simple country girl leave.
The Prince pockets the slipper and vows to find and marry the girl to whom it belongs.
Meanwhile, Cinderella keeps the other slipper, which does not disappear when the spell is broken.
:The Prince tries the slipper on all the women in the kingdom.
When the Prince arrives at Cinderella's home, the stepsisters try in vain to win him over.
Cinderella asks if she may try, but the stepsisters taunt her.
Naturally, the slipper fits perfectly, and Cinderella produces the other slipper for good measure.
Cinderella's stepfamily pleads for forgiveness, and Cinderella agrees.
Cinderella had hoped her step-family would love her always.
:Cinderella married the Prince as her stepsisters are married to two handsome gentlemen of the royal court.
The first moral of the story is that beauty is a treasure, but graciousness is priceless.
Without it, nothing is possible; with it, one can do anything.
However, the second moral of the story mitigates the first one and reveals the criticism that Perrault is aiming at: That "without doubt it is a great advantage to have intelligence, courage, good breeding, and common sense.
These, and similar talents come only from heaven, and it is good to have them.
However, even these may fail to bring you success, without the blessing of a godfather or a godmother."
Aschenputtel's relationship with her father in this version is ambiguous; Perrault's version states that the absent father is dominated by his second wife, explaining why he does not prevent the abuse of his daughter.
However, the father in this tale plays an active role in several scenes, and it is not explained why he tolerates the mistreatment of his child.
He also describes Aschenputtel as his "first wife's child" and not his own.
Plot variations and alternative tellings
Villains
In some versions, her father plays an active role in the humiliation of his daughter; in others, he is secondary to his new wife, Cinderella's stepmother; in some versions, especially the popular 1950 Disney film, Cinderella's father has died and so has Cinderella's mother.
Although many variants of Cinderella feature the wicked stepmother, the defining trait of type 510A is a female persecutor: in Fair, Brown and Trembling and Finette Cendron, the stepmother does not appear at all, and it is the older sisters who confine her to the kitchen.
In other fairy tales featuring the ball, she was driven from home by the persecutions of her father, usually because he wished to marry her.
Of this type (510B) are Cap O' Rushes, Catskin, All-Kinds-of-Fur, and Allerleirauh, and she slaves in the kitchen because she found a job there.
In Katie Woodencloak, the stepmother drives her from home, and she likewise finds such a job.
In La Cenerentola, Gioachino Rossini inverted the sex roles: Cenerentola is oppressed by her stepfather.
He also made the economic basis for such hostility unusually clear, in that Don Magnifico wishes to make his own daughters' dowries larger, to attract a grander match, which is impossible if he must provide a third dowry.
Folklorists often interpret the hostility between the stepmother and stepdaughter as just such a competition for resources, but seldom does the tale make it clear.
Ball, Ballgown, and Curfew
The number of balls varies, sometimes one, sometimes two, and sometimes three.
The fairy godmother is Perrault's own addition to the tale.
The person who aided Cinderella (Aschenputtel) in the Grimms's version is her dead mother.
Aschenputtel requests her aid by praying at her grave, on which a tree is growing.
Helpful doves roosting in the tree shake down the clothing she needs for the ball.
This motif is found in other variants of the tale as well, such as The Cinder Maid, collected by Joseph Jacobs, and the Finnish The Wonderful Birch.
Playwright James Lapine incorporated this motif into the Cinderella plotline of the musical Into the Woods.
Giambattista Basile's Cenerentola combined them; the Cinderella figure, Zezolla, asks her father to commend her to the Dove of Fairies and ask her to send her something, and she receives a tree that will provide her clothing.
Other variants have her helped by talking animals, as in Katie Woodencloak, Rushen Coatie, Bawang Putih Bawang Merah, The Story of Tam and Cam, or The Sharp Grey Sheep-these animals often having some connection with her dead mother; in The Golden Slipper, a fish aids her after she puts it in water.
In "The Anklet", it's a magical alabaster pot the girl purchased with her own money that brings her the gowns and the anklets she wears to the ball.
Gioachino Rossini, having agreed to do an opera based on Cinderella if he could omit all magical elements, wrote La Cenerentola, in which she was aided by Alidoro, a philosopher and formerly the Prince's tutor.
The midnight curfew is also absent in many versions; Cinderella leaves the ball to get home before her stepmother and stepsisters, or she is simply tired.
In the Grimms' version, Aschenputtel slips away when she is tired, hiding on her father's estate in a tree, and then the pigeon coop, to elude her pursuers; her father tries to catch her by chopping them down, but she escapes.
Furthermore, the gathering need not be a ball; several variants on Cinderella, such as Katie Woodencloak and The Golden Slipper have her attend church.
In the three-ball version, Cinderella keeps a close watch on the time the first two nights and is able to leave without difficulty.
However, on the third (or only) night, she loses track of the time and must flee the castle before her disguise vanishes.
In her haste, she loses a glass slipper which the prince finds-or else the prince has carefully had her exit tarred, so as to catch her, and the slipper is caught in it.
The identifying item
The glass slipper is unique to Charles Perrault's version and its derivatives; in other versions of the tale it may be made of other materials (in the version recorded by the Brothers Grimm, German: Aschenbroedel and Aschenputtel, for instance, it is gold) and in still other tellings, it is not a slipper but an anklet, a ring, or a bracelet that gives the prince the key to Cinderella's identity.
In Rossini's opera "La Cenerentola" ("Cinderella"), the slipper is replaced by twin bracelets to prove her identity.
In the Finnish variant The Wonderful Birch the prince uses tar to gain something every ball, and so has a ring, a circlet, and a pair of slippers.
Some interpreters, perhaps troubled by sartorial impracticalities, have suggested that Perrault's "glass slipper" (pantoufle de verre) had been a "squirrel fur slipper" (pantoufle de vair) in some unidentified earlier version of the tale, and that Perrault or one of his sources confused the words; however, most scholars believe the glass slipper was a deliberate piece of poetic invention on Perrault's part.
The 1950 Disney adaptation takes advantage of the slipper being made of glass to add a twist whereby the slipper is shattered just before Cinderella has the chance to try it on, leaving her with only the matching slipper with which to prove her identity.
Another interpretation of verre fur) suggested a sexual element-the Prince was 'trying on' the 'fur slipper' (vagina) of the maidens in the kingdom, as a 'Droit du seigneur' right of sexual possession of his subjects.
The disguised Cinderella's 'fur slipper' was of unique appeal to the Prince who sought her thereafter through sexual congress (a variety of sources including Joan Gould).
The translation of the story into cultures with different standards of beauty has left the significance of Cinderella's shoe size unclear, and resulted in the implausibility of Cinderella's feet being of a unique size for no particular reason.
Humorous retellings of the story sometimes use the twist of having the shoes turn out to also fit somebody completely unsuitable, such as an amorous old crone.
In Terry Pratchett's Witches Abroad, the witches accuse another witch of manipulating the events because it was a common shoe size, and she could only ensure that the right woman put it on if she already knew where she was and went straight to her.
In "When the Clock Strikes" (from Red As Blood), Tanith Lee had the sorcerous shoe alter shape whenever a woman tried to put it on, so it would not fit.
The Revelation
Cinderella's stepmother and stepsisters (in some versions just the stepsisters and, in some other versions, a stepfather and stepsisters) conspire to win the prince's hand for one of them.
In the German telling, the first stepsister fits into the slipper by cutting off a toe, but the doves in the hazel tree alert the prince to the blood dripping from the slipper, and he returns the false bride to her mother.
The second stepsister fits into the slipper by cutting off her heel, but the same doves give her away.
In many variants of the tale, the prince is told that Cinderella can not possibly be the one, as she is too dirty and ragged.
Often, this is said by the stepmother or stepsisters.
In the Grimms' version, both the stepmother and the father urge it.
The prince nevertheless insists on her trying.
Cinderella arrives and proves her identity by fitting into the slipper or other item (in some cases she has kept the other).
The Conclusion
In the German version of the story, the evil stepsisters are punished for their deception by having their eyes pecked out by birds.
In other versions, they are forgiven, and made ladies-in-waiting with marriages to lesser lords.
In The Thousand Nights and A Night, in a tale called "The Anklet", the stepsisters make a comeback by using twelve magical hairpins to turn the bride into a dove on her wedding night.
In The Wonderful Birch, the stepmother, a witch, manages to substitute her daughter for the true bride after she has given birth.
Such tales continue the fairy tale into what is in effect a second episode.
In an episode of Jim Henson's The Storyteller, writer Anthony Minghella merged the old folk tale Donkeyskin (also written by Perrault) with Cinderella to tell the tale of Sapsorrow, a girl both cursed and blessed by destiny.
Many popular new works based on the story feature one step-sister who is not as cruel to Cinderella as the other.
Examples are the film Ever After, Cinderella 3 and the Broadway revival.
Folkloristics
Folklorists have long studied variants on this tale across cultures.
In 1893, Marian Roalfe Cox, commissioned by the Folklore Society of Britain, produced Cinderella: Three Hundred and Forty-Five Variants of Cinderella, Catskin and, Cap o'Rushes, Abstracted and Tabulated with a Discussion of Medieval Analogues and Notes.
In popular culture
The story of Cinderella has formed the basis of many notable works:
Opera and ballet
* Cendrillon (1810) by Nicolas Isouard, libretto by Charles-Guillaume Étienne
*Agatina o La virtù premiata (1814) by Stefano Pavesi
*Cinderella (1893) by Baron Boris Vietinghoff-Scheel
*Cendrillon (1894-5) by Jules Massenet, libretto by Henri Caïn
*Aschenbrödel (1901) by Johann Strauss II, adapted and completed by Josef Bayer
*Aschenbrödel (1905) by Leo Blech, libretto by Richard Batka
*Das Märchen vom Aschenbrödel (1941) by Frank Martin
*Soluschka or Cinderella (1945) by Sergei Prokofiev
*Cinderella, a "pantomime opera" (1979) by Peter Maxwell Davies
*My First Cinderella (2013) directed by George Williamson and Loipa Araújo
*Cinderella (2015) by 10-year-old composer prodigy Alma Deutscher
Theatre
In 1804 Cinderella was presented at Drury Lane Theatre, London, described as "A new Grand Allegorical Pantomimic Spectacle" though it was very far in style and content from the modern pantomime.
However, it included notable clown Joseph Grimaldi playing the part of a servant called Pedro, the antecedant of today's character Buttons.
In 1820 Harlequin and Cinderella at the Theatre Royal, Covent Garden had much of the modern story (taken from the opera La Cenerentola) by Rossini but was a Harlequinade again featuring Grimaldi.
Films and television
Over the decades, hundreds of films have been made that are either direct adaptations from Cinderella or have plots loosely based on the story.
* Cinderella (1899), the first film version, produced in France by Georges Méliès, as "Cendrillon".
* Cinderella (1911) silent film starring Florence La Badie
* Cinderella (1914), a silent film starring Mary Pickford
* Aschenputtel (1922), a silhouette shadow play short by Lotte Reiniger.
The short silent film uses exaggerated figures and has no background, which creates a stark look.
The film shows Aschenputtel's step-sisters graphically hacking their feet off in order to fit into the glass slipper.
* Cinderella (1922), an animated Laugh-O-Gram produced by Walt Disney, first released on December 6, 1922.
This film was about seven and half minutes long.
* Cinderella (1925), an animated short film directed by Walter Lantz, produced by Bray Studios Inc.
* A Kick for Cinderella (1925), an animated short film directed by Bud Fisher, in the Mutt and Jeff series of comic strip adaptations.
*A Ride For Cinderella (1937) - Jam Handy, Cervolet advert
* Cinderella Meets Fella (1938), a Merrie Melodies animated short film featuring Egghead, the character who would eventually evolve into Elmer Fudd, as Prince Charming.
* Mamele (1938) a Molly Picon vehicle made by the prewar Warsaw Yiddish film industry taking place in contemporary Lodz.
* First Love (1939), a musical modernization with Deanna Durbin and Robert Stack.
* Cinderella (1947), a Soviet film based on the screenplay by Evgeny Schwartz, with Yanina Zhejmo in the leading role.
Shot black-and-white, it went through colorization in 2009.
* Cinderella (1950), a Walt Disney animated feature released on February 15, 1950, now considered one of Disney's classics as well as the most well known film adaptation.
* Ancient Fistory a Popeye parody animated short film.
* The Glass Slipper (1955), feature film with Leslie Caron and Michael Wilding
* Cinderella (1957), a musical adaptation by Rodgers and Hammerstein, starring Julie Andrews as Cinderella, featuring Jon Cypher, Kaye Ballard, Alice Ghostley, and Edie Adams (originally broadcast in color, but only black-and-white kinescopes survive).
* Cinderfella (1960), Cinderfella's (Jerry Lewis) fairy godfather (Ed Wynn) helps him escape from his wicked stepmother (Judith Anderson) and stepbrothers.
* Cinderella (1965), the Rodgers and Hammerstein musical was again produced for television, starring 18-year-old Lesley Ann Warren in the leading role, and featuring Stuart Damon as the Prince, with Ginger Rogers, Walter Pidgeon, and Celeste Holm (filmed in color and broadcast annually for 10 years).
Hey, Cinderella! (1969), a television adaptation featuring The Muppets.
* Three Wishes for Cinderella (Tři oříšky pro Popelku) (1973), a Czechoslovakian/East German fairy tale film starring Libuše Šafránková as Cinderella and Pavel Trávníček as Prince.
A cult film in several European countries.
The Slipper and the Rose (1976), a British Sherman Brothers musical film starring Gemma Craven and Richard Chamberlain.
* Cindy (1978), This version of the Cinderella tale with an all-black cast has Cinderella, who wants to marry a dashing army officer, finding out that her father, who she thought had an important job at a big hotel, is actually the men's room attendant.
Her wicked stepmother finds out, too, and complications ensue.
Starred Charlayne Woodard.
* Cinderella (1979), an animated short film based on Charles Perrault's version of the fairy tale.
It was produced by the Soyuzmultfilm studio.
* In 1985, Shelley Duvall produced a version of the story for Faerie Tale Theatre.
* Cinderella?
Cinderella! (1986), an episode of Alvin & the Chipmunks.
With Brittany of The Chipettes playing the role of Cinderella and Alvin playing the role of Prince Charming.
* The Charmings (1987), a spoof of Cinderella appears in the episode "Cindy's Back In Town" where Cinderella, portrayed by Kim Johnston Ulrich, makes a play for Snow White's husband Prince Charming.
* Cinderella (1994), a direct-to-video animated film produced by Jetlag Productions.
* Cinderella Monogatari (The Story of Cinderella) (1996), anime television series produced by Tatsunoko Production.
* Cinderella (1997), Rodgers and Hammerstein musical starring Brandy Norwood as Cinderella, Whitney Houston as the Fairy Godmother, Bernadette Peters as Cinderella's evil stepmother, Jason Alexander as Lionel the valet and Whoopi Goldberg as the Queen.
Remake of the 1957 and 1965 TV films.
Ever After (1998), starring Drew Barrymore, a post-feminist, historical fiction take on the Cinderella story.
* Cinderella, a British modernization featuring Marcella Plunkett as Cinderella, Kathleen Turner as the stepmother and Jane Birkin as the fairy godmother.
* A Cinderella Story (2004), a modernization featuring Hilary Duff and Chad Michael Murray
* Another Cinderella Story (2008), a modernization featuring Selena Gomez and Drew Seeley
* A Cinderella Story: Once Upon a Song (2011), a modernization featuring Lucy Hale and Freddie Stroma
* Once Upon a Time (2011), features Cinderella as a recurring character, played by Jessy Schram who made a deal with Rumplestiltskin who killed her fairy godmother right in front of her.
In 2016, more of the story is shown in which Ashley, Cinderella's real-world counterpart, discovers her stepsister wanted to marry the footman rather than the prince.
A different Cinderella in season 7, played by Dania Ramirez, went to the ball to kill the prince, not meet him.
* Rags (2012), a musical gender switched inversion of the Cinderella story that stars Keke Palmer and Max Schneider.
* Aik Nayee Cinderella (2013), a Pakistani serial aired on Geo TV.
* Into the Woods (2014), a live-action fairy-tale-themed adaptation of the above-mentioned homonymous musical play, in which Anna Kendrick's Cinderella is a central character.
* Cinderella (2015), a live-action film starring Lily James as Cinderella, Cate Blanchett as Lady Tremaine, Cinderella's evil stepmother, Richard Madden as Kit, the Prince Charming and Helena Bonham Carter as the Fairy Godmother.
It is essentially a live-action reimagining of the 1950 animated film.
*A Cinderella Story: If the Shoe Fits (2016), a modernization featuring Sofia Carson and Thomas Law
*A Cinderella Story: Christmas Wish (2019), a modernization featuring Laura Marano and Gregg Sulkin
* Cinderella adaptations on TV and in cinema are not just limited to female protagonists.
The Sesame Street special "Cinderelmo" and the Magic Adventures of Mumfie episode "Scarecrowella" both feature a male protagonist playing the Cinderella role.
The story was retold as part of the episode "Grimm Job" of the American animated TV series Family Guy (season 12, episode 10), with Lois as Cinderella, Peter as Prince Charming, Mayor West as the fairy godmother, Lois's mother as the wicked step-mother, and Meg and Stewie as the step-sisters.
Books
*Cinderella (1919), Charles S. Evans and illustrated by Arthur Rackham
*The Rough-Face Girl (1998), Rafe Martin and illustrated by David Shannon
*Adelita: A Mexican Cinderella Story (2004), Tomie dePaola
