William Clark Gable (February 1, 1901 - November 16, 1960) was an American film actor.
Often referred to as "The King of Hollywood", he had roles in more than 60 motion pictures in a wide variety of genres during the 1930s, 1940s, and 1950s.
Gable died of a heart attack; his final on screen appearance was of an aging cowboy in The Misfits, released posthumously in 1961.
Born and raised in Ohio, Gable traveled to Hollywood where he began his film career as an extra in Hollywood silent films between 1924 and 1926.
He progressed to supporting roles for Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer and his first leading role in 1931's Dance, Fools, Dance alongside Joan Crawford, who requested him for the part.
His role in the romantic drama Red Dust (1932) alongside reigning sex symbol Jean Harlow made him MGM's biggest male star.
Gable won the Academy Award for Best Actor for Frank Capra's It Happened One Night (1934)
co-starring Claudette Colbert, and was nominated for the same award for his roles in Mutiny on the Bounty (1935), and Gone with the Wind (1939), as Rhett Butler opposite Vivien Leigh as Scarlett O'Hara.
He found continued commercial and critical success with Manhattan Melodrama (1934), San Francisco (1936), Saratoga (1937), Test Pilot (1938), and Boom Town (1940), three of which co-starred Spencer Tracy.
Gable appeared opposite some of the most popular actresses of their time.
Joan Crawford was a favorite actress of his to work with, He experienced a critical revival with The Hucksters (1947), Homecoming (1948) and Mogambo (1953), which also featured newcomer Grace Kelly.
Later he starred in westerns and war movies, such as Run Silent, Run Deep (1958) with Burt Lancaster, and in comedies that paired him with a new generation of female stars such as Doris Day in The Teacher's Pet (1958) and Sophia Loren in It Started in Naples (1960) and Marilyn Monroe in The Misfits (1961).
Gable was one of the most consistent box-office performers in history, appearing on Quigley Publishing's annual Top Ten Money Making Stars Poll 16 times.
He was named the seventh-greatest male star of classic American cinema by the American Film Institute.
He was mistakenly listed as male and female on his birth certificate because the clerks could not understand the doctor's handwriting; the certificate was later corrected to male.
Gable was six months old when he was baptized at a Roman Catholic church in Dennison, Ohio.
His mother died when he was ten months old.
In April 1903, Gable's father married Jennie Dunlap (1874-1919).
Gable was a tall, shy child with a loud voice.
His stepmother raised him to be well-dressed and well-groomed; she played the piano and gave him lessons at home.
He later took up brass instruments, becoming the only boy in the Hopedale's Men's town band at age 13.
Gable was mechanically inclined and loved to repair cars with his father, who insisted that he engage in masculine activities such as hunting and hard physical work.
Gable also loved literature; he would recite Shakespeare among trusted company, particularly the sonnets.
Early career
Gable was inspired to become an actor after seeing the play The Bird of Paradise at age 17, but he was not able to make a real start in acting until he turned 21 and inherited some money.
His stepmother had died, and his father moved to Tulsa, Oklahoma, to go back to the oil business.
He worked with his father for sometime in Oklahoma wildcatting and sludge removing in the oil fields before actually receiving his $300 inheritance and then traveling to the Pacific Northwest.
Gable toured in stock companies, finding work with several second-class theater groups while holding odd jobs.
He made his way across the Midwest to Portland, Oregon, where he worked as a necktie salesman in the Meier & Frank department store.
In Portland, he met Laura Hope Crews, a stage and film actress who encouraged him to return to the stage with another theater company.
Twenty years later, Crews played Aunt Pittypat alongside Gable's Rhett Butler in Gone With the Wind (1939).
He changed his stage name from W. C. Gable to Clark Gable
However, he was not offered any major film roles, so he returned to the stage in What Price Glory? (1925).
He became lifelong friends with Lionel Barrymore, who initially scolded Gable for what he deemed amateurish acting but nevertheless urged him to pursue a stage career.
During the 1927-28 theater season, he acted with the Laskin Brothers Stock Company in Houston, Texas; while there, he played many roles, gained considerable experience, and became a local matinee idol.
He then moved to New York City, where Dillon sought work for him on Broadway.
He received good reviews in Machinal (1928), with one critic describing him as "young, vigorous, and brutally masculine".
In 1930, Gable and Josephine Dillon were divorced.
A few days later, he married Texas socialite Maria Franklin Prentiss Lucas Langham, nicknamed "Rhea".
After moving to California, they were married again in 1931, possibly due to differences in state legal requirements.
The same year, in Night Nurse, Gable played a villainous chauffeur who was gradually starving two adorable little girls to death, then knocked Barbara Stanwyck's character unconscious with his fist, a supporting role originally slated for James Cagney until the release of The Public Enemy abruptly made Cagney a leading man.
"His ears are too big and he looks like an ape", said executive Darryl F. Zanuck, then at Warner Bros., about Gable after testing him for the lead in the studio's gangster drama Little Caesar (1931).
Gable's arrival in Hollywood occurred fortuitously.
MGM was looking to expand its stable of male stars, and he fit the bill.
He first worked mainly in supporting roles, often as the villain.
He made two pictures in 1931 with Wallace Beery, a supporting role in The Secret Six.
He then played a part almost as large as Beery's in the naval aviation film Hell Divers.
MGM's publicity manager Howard Strickling developed Gable's studio image with Screenland magazine playing up his "lumberjack-in-evening-clothes" persona.
To increasing popularity, MGM frequently paired him with well-established female stars.
Joan Crawford asked for him as her co-star in Dance, Fools, Dance (1931).
This was his first starring role.
The electricity of the pair was recognized by studio executive Louis B. Mayer, who would not only put them in seven more films, but began reshooting "Complete Surrender", replacing Johnny Mack Brown as Crawford's leading man and retitled the film Laughing Sinners (1931).
His fame and public visibility after such movies as A Free Soul (1931), in which he played a gangster who shoved the character played by Norma Shearer, insured that Gable never played a supporting role again.
The Hollywood Reporter wrote "A star in the making has been made, one that, to our reckoning, will outdraw every other star ...
Never have we seen audiences work themselves into such enthusiasm as when Clark Gable walks on the screen."
Gable was considered for the role of Tarzan in Tarzan the Ape Man, but lost out to Johnny Weissmuller's more imposing physique and superior swimming prowess.
Gable then starred as the romantic lead in Strange Interlude (1932), reteaming with Shearer, the second of three films they would make together for MGM.
Next, Gable starred with Jean Harlow in the romantic comedy-drama Red Dust (1932) set on a rubber plantation in Indo-China.
Gable portrayed a plantation manager involved with Harlow’s a wisecracking prostitute; however, upon her arrival, Gable's character started to pursue Mary Astor’s prim, classy newlywed.
While some critics thought Harlow stole the show, many agreed that Gable was natural screen partner.
With Gable established as a star, MGM positioned him in the same manner as Harlow for Myrna Loy, a previously lesser billed actor in Night Flight, moving Loy to a costar role in Men in White, a movie filmed in 1933, though delayed in release due to pre-Code Legion of Decency cuts until 1934.
The role of doctor (Gable) and a nurse (Loy), implied intimacy with a resulting complication of pregnancy was a sensitive issue and new image for Gable.
Gable and Harlow were then teamed in Hold Your Man (1933), China Seas (1935); with Gable and Harlow billed above (Wallace Beery), and Wife vs. Secretary (1936) with both Harlow, Loy and James Stewart costarring.
A popular combination on-screen and off, Gable and Harlow made six films together in five years.
Their final film together was Saratoga (1937), which was a bigger hit than their previous collaborations.
Harlow died during its production.
The film was ninety percent completed, and the remaining scenes were filmed with long shots or the use of doubles like Mary Dees; Gable said that he felt as if he were "in the arms of a ghost".
The movie opened slowly at the box office, but once word of mouth spread it became a big hit, with men's underwear sales plummeting because Gable didn't wear an undershirt in the movie.
Gable's career was revitalized by his whimsical, good-natured performance
"It Happened One Night" clinched stardom for Gable making him a bigger star than ever.
Mutiny on the Bounty (1935) was a critical and commercial success, receiving eight Academy Award nominations including the Academy Award for Best Actor for Gable and his co-stars Charles Laughton and Franchot Tone.
It was partly filmed in French Polynesia and won the Academy Award for Best Picture, the second of three films in which Gable played a lead to do so.
Spencer Tracy collaborations
Gable made three pictures with Spencer Tracy, which boosted Tracy's career and permanently cemented them in the public mind as a team.
San Francisco (1936), with Jeannette MacDonald, featured Tracy in an only 17-minute, but Oscar-nominated role, in which he played a Catholic priest who knocks Gable down in a boxing ring.
The film was a box office hit and is the third highest grossing film of Gable's career.
Their next film together was the Academy Award Nominated box office success, Test Pilot (1938) with Myrna Loy, one of her seven pictures with Gable, in which he plays a test pilot, and Tracy is his sidekick.
For their final film, Boom Town (1940)
Tracy gets a larger part than earlier, almost achieving parity with billing directly under Gable and above Claudette Colbert and Hedy Lamarr.
The picture, a lavish epic about two oil wildcatters who become partners then rivals, was a box office success earning a then $5 million.
They were off-screen friends and drinking buddies; Tracy was one of the few Hollywood industry luminaries that attended Lombard's private funeral.
After Boom Town no more Gable-Tracy partnerships were possible, Tracy's success led to a new contract and then both stars had conflicting stipulations requiring top billing in MGM movie credits and on promotional posters.
Gone with the Wind
Despite his reluctance to play the role, Gable is best known for his performance in the Best Picture Oscar-winning Gone with the Wind (1939), for which he gained a Best Actor Oscar nomination.
Carole Lombard may have been the first to suggest that he play Rhett Butler (and she play Scarlett) when she bought him a copy of the best-seller, which he refused to read.
Gable tried to boycott the premiere of Gone with the Wind in Atlanta, Georgia, because the African American McDaniel and Butterfly McQueen were not permitted to attend.
He reportedly only went after she pleaded with him to go.
Gable remained life-long friends with McDaniel, appearing in several films, and he always attended her Hollywood parties.
Gable did not want to shed tears for the scene after Rhett inadvertently causes Scarlett to miscarry their second child.
Olivia de Havilland made him cry, later commenting, "Oh, he would not do it.
He would not!
Victor (Fleming) tried everything with him.
He tried to attack him on a professional level.
We had done it without him weeping several times and then we had one last try.
I said, 'You can do it, I know you can do it, and you will be wonderful...'
Well, by heaven, just before the cameras rolled, you could see the tears come up at his eyes and he played the scene unforgettably well.
He put his whole heart into it."
Years later, Gable said that whenever his career would start to fade, a re-release of Gone with the Wind would soon revive his popularity, and he continued as a top leading actor for the rest of his life.
Marriage to Carole Lombard
Gable's marriage in 1939 to his third wife, actress Carole Lombard (1908-1942), was the happiest period of his personal life.
They met while filming 1932's No Man of Her Own, when Lombard was still married to actor William Powell, but their romance did not take off until 1936.
They became reacquainted at a party and soon were inseparable, cited in fan magazines and tabloids as an official couple.
Gable thrived being around Lombard's youthful, charming, and frank personality, once stating, "You can trust that little screwball with your life or your hopes or your weaknesses, and she wouldn't even know how to think about letting you down."
They purchased a ranch previously owned by director Raoul Walsh in Encino, California, for $50,000 making it their home.
The couple lovingly referred to each other as "Ma and Pa", owned a menagerie of animals and raised chickens and horses there.
With the bombing of Pearl Harbor many Hollywood stars joined the war effort, some such as James Stewart signed up for active duty.
Carole Lombard sent a telegram to President Roosevelt on behalf of Gable expressing his interest in doing so, but F.D.R. thought the 41-year-old actor could best serve by increased patriotic roles in movies and bond drives which Lombard tirelessly began.
On January 16, 1942, Lombard was a passenger on Transcontinental and Western Air Flight 3 with her mother and press agent Otto Winkler.
She had just finished her 57th movie, To Be or Not to Be, and was on her way home from a successful war bond selling tour when the flight's DC-3 airliner crashed into Potosi Mountain near Las Vegas, Nevada, killing all 22 passengers aboard, including 15 servicemen en route to training in California.
Gable flew to the crash site to claim the bodies of his wife, mother-in-law, and Winkler, who had been the best man at Gable and Lombard's wedding.
Lombard was declared to be the first war-related American female casualty of World War II, and Gable received a personal note of condolence from President Roosevelt.
The Civil Aeronautics Board investigation into the crash concluded that pilot error was its cause.
The film's focus is on Gable and French Devil's Islands convicts in an escape from the penal colony, who on the way pick up a local entertainer (Crawford) who Gable had met earlier in the movie.
In their eighth and last film together, Gable and Crawford "again demonstrated their on-screen magic" and the film was among the top ten grossing films for the year.
Honky Tonk (1941) is a western where Gable's con-man/gambler character romances Turner, a prim, young judge’s daughter.
Since the couple had been popular with the public, Gable and Turner were quickly paired again in Somewhere
I'll Find You (1941) as war correspondents who travel to the Pacific theatre and get caught up in a Japanese attack.
The movie was another hit finishing No. 8 at the box office for 1942.
Film historian David Thomson says the quality of all Gable's movies between Gone With the Wind and his enlistment in WWII "hardly befitted a national idol" and began a career decline for Gable.
World War II
For details of Gable's combat missions, see RAF Polebrook.
On August 12, 1942, following Lombard's death and completion of the film Somewhere I'll Find You, Gable joined the U.S. Army Air Forces.
Lombard had suggested that Gable enlist as part of the war effort, but MGM was reluctant to let him go.
Commanding General of the U.S. Army Air Forces Henry H. "Hap" Arnold offered Gable a "special assignment" with the First Motion Picture Unit following basic training.
The Washington Evening Star reported that Gable took a physical examination at Bolling Field on June 19, preliminary to joining the service.
"Mr. Gable, it was learned from a source outside the war department, conferred with Lieutenant General H. H. Arnold, head of the air forces yesterday."
the Star continued.
"It was understood that Mr. Gable, if he is commissioned, will make movies for the air forces.
Lieutenant Jimmy Stewart, another actor in uniform, has been doing this."
Gable had earlier expressed an interest in officer candidate school, with the intention of becoming an aerial gunner upon enlisting in a bomber training school.
MGM arranged for his studio friend, the cinematographer Andrew McIntyre, to enlist with him and accompany him through training.
followed by a photography course at Fort George Wright, Washington State and promoted to first lieutenants upon its completion.
During one of the missions, Gable's aircraft was damaged by flak and attacked by fighters, which knocked out one of the engines and shot up the stabilizer.
In the raid on Germany, one crewman was killed and two others were wounded, and flak went through Gable's boot and narrowly missed his head.
When word of this reached MGM, studio executives began to badger the Army Air Forces to reassign its most valuable screen actor to noncombat duty.
In November 1943, Gable returned to the United States to edit his film, on an old Warner's lot donated to the war effort, joining the First Motion Picture Unit in Hollywood where other stars contributed with any film equipment they had as well.
In May 1944, Gable was promoted to major.
He hoped for another combat assignment, but when the invasion of Normandy came and went in June without any further orders, Gable was relieved from active duty as a major on June 12, 1944, at his request, since he was over-age for combat.
His discharge papers were signed by Captain (later U.S. President) Ronald Reagan.
Gable completed editing of the film Combat America in September 1944, giving the narration himself and making use of numerous interviews with enlisted gunners as focus of the film.
Adolf Hitler favored Gable above all other actors.
During World War II, Hitler offered a sizable reward to anyone who could capture and bring Gable to him unscathed.
He made good use of his wartime experiences in the movie Command Decision (1948), playing a World War II brigadier general who supervised bombing raids over Germany, "... his is a believable delivery interpreting the brigadier general who must send his men out to almost certain death with an understanding that bespeaks his sympathy ... ", said Variety.
After World War II
Immediately after his discharge from the service, Gable returned to his ranch and rested.
Personally, he resumed a pre-war relationship with Virginia Grey while dating other starlets.
Professionally, Gable's first movie after World War II was Adventure (1945), with Greer Garson, by then the leading female star at MGM.
Given the famous teaser tagline "Gable's back, and Garson's got him", the film was a commercial hit, earning over $6 million, but a critical failure.
Gable has since been acclaimed for his performance in The Hucksters (1947), a satire of post-war Madison Avenue corruption and immorality, which co-starred Deborah Kerr and Ava Gardner.
The film was popular with audiences, and Gable was voted the 7th biggest star in the country, but reviews were less than favorable.
Gable followed this up with Homecoming (1948) with Lana Turner, which was a solid hit.
After which he made the war film, Command Decision (1948) a hit with audiences, but it lost MGM money due to its high cost.
In 1949, Gable married Sylvia Ashley, a British model and actress previously married to Douglas Fairbanks, Sr.
The relationship was profoundly unsuccessful; they divorced in 1952.
Gable did a series of films with female co-stars: Any Number Can Play (1950) with Alexis Smith, Key to the City (1950) with Loretta Young, and To Please a Lady (1950) with Barbara Stanwyck.
They were reasonably popular, but he had more success with two Westerns: Across the Wide Missouri (1951), and Lone Star (1952).
He then made Never Let Me Go (1953), opposite Gene Tierney.
Tierney was a favorite of Gable, and he was very disappointed when she was replaced in Mogambo (because of her mental health problems) by Grace Kelly.
While on location in Africa, Gable and Grace Kelly's relationship never extended beyond the screen and friendship, "maybe because of the age difference", Kelly once said, though others claim she did have a crush on him.
The film was a sizable hit, finishing No. 7 in box office gross for the year, easily his most popular film since he returned to MGM after the war.
Leaving MGM
Despite the positive critical and public response to Mogambo, Gable became increasingly unhappy with what he considered mediocre roles offered by MGM, while the studio regarded his salary as excessive.
Studio head Louis B. Mayer was fired in 1951, amid revenue slumping and increased Hollywood production costs, due primarily to the rising popularity of television.
The new studio head, former production chief Dore Schary, struggled to maintain profits for the studio.
Many long-time MGM stars were fired, or their contracts were not renewed, including Greer Garson and Judy Garland.
Gable refused to renew his contract.
His last film at MGM was Betrayed (1954), a popular wartime drama with Turner and Victor Mature.
In March 1954, Gable left MGM.
After MGM
His next two films were made for 20th Century Fox: Soldier of Fortune, an adventure story in Hong Kong with Susan Hayward, and The Tall Men (1955), a Western with Jane Russell.
Both were profitable, although only modest successes.
In 1955, Gable would be 10th at the box office - the last time he was in the top ten.
In 1955, Gable married his fifth wife, Kay Spreckels (née Kathleen Williams), a thrice-married former fashion model and actress who had previously been married to sugar-refining heir Adolph B. Spreckels, Jr. Gable became stepfather to her son Bunker Spreckels, who went on to live a notorious celebrity lifestyle in the late 1960s and early 1970s surfing scene, ultimately leading to his early death in 1977.
In 1955, Gable formed RussFieldGabco, a production company with Jane Russell and her husband Bob Waterfield, and they produced The King and Four Queens (1956), Gable's only production.
He found producing and acting to be too taxing on his health, and he was beginning to manifest a noticeable tremor, particularly in long takes.
His next project was the Warner Bros. production Band of Angels (1957), co-starring Yvonne De Carlo and featuring relative newcomer Sidney Poitier; it was not well received, despite Gable's role's similarities to Rhett Butler.
Newsweek said, "Here is a movie so bad that it must be seen to be disbelieved."
The Misfits
Gable's last film was The Misfits (1961), with a script by Arthur Miller and directed by John Huston.
Co-starring with Gable were Marilyn Monroe (in her last completed film), Montgomery Clift, Eli Wallach and Thelma Ritter.
Many critics regard Gable's performance to be his finest and Gable, after seeing the rough cuts, agreed In a 2002 documentary Eli Wallach recalled the mustang wrangling scenes Gable insisted on performing himself, "You have to pass a physical to film that" and "He was a professional going home at 5 pm to a pregnant wife".
The New York Times found "Mr Gable's performance as a leathery old cowboy with a realistic slant on most plain things" ironically vital, with his death before the film's release.
Politics
Gable was a conservative Republican, though he never publicly spoke about politics.
His third wife, Carole Lombard, was an activist liberal Democrat, and she cajoled him into supporting Democratic President Franklin D. Roosevelt and the New Deal.
In 1944, he became an early member of the conservative Motion Picture Alliance for the Preservation of American Ideals, a pro-McCarthy organization, alongside Ronald Reagan, John Wayne, Gary Cooper, and other conservative actors and film-makers.
In February 1952, he attended a televised rally in New York where he enthusiastically urged General Dwight D. Eisenhower to run for president, when Eisenhower was still being sought by both parties as their candidate.
Gable suffered a severe coronary thrombosis and still voted by mail in the 1960 presidential election for Richard Nixon.
Illness and death
On November 6, 1960, Gable was sent to Hollywood Presbyterian Medical Center in Los Angeles, California, where doctors found that he had suffered a heart attack.
Newspaper reports the following day listed his condition as satisfactory.
By the morning of November 16, he seemed to be improving, but he died that evening at the age of 59 from an arterial blood clot.
Medical staff did not perform CPR for fear that the procedure would rupture Gable's heart, and a defibrillator was not available.
In an interview with Louella Parsons published soon after Gable's death about speculation on his physically demanding role in The Misfits, Kay Gable said, "It wasn't the physical exertion that killed him.
It was the horrible tension, the eternal waiting, waiting, waiting.
He waited around forever, for everybody.
He'd get so angry that he'd just go ahead and do anything to keep occupied."
Gable is interred in the Great Mausoleum, Memorial Terrace, at Glendale's Forest Lawn Memorial Park next to Carole Lombard and her mother.
Personal life and family
Gable was married five times.
He was engaged to actress Franz Dorfler when he lived in Astoria, Oregon.
She referred him to the woman who would become his acting coach and manager, Josephine Dillon; they married in 1924 and divorced in 1930.
Gable would say "he owed her a debt of gratitude", for the training he received from Dillon in the early years of his career.
His second wife was Texas socialite Maria Franklin Prentiss Lucas Langham (nicknamed "Rhea").
The couple divorced on March 7, 1939.
In 1955, Gable married Kay Spreckels (née Kathleen Williams), Clark James died at age 30 on February 22, 2019.
During the filming of The Call of the Wild in early 1935, the film's lead actress, Loretta Young, became pregnant with Gable's child.
Their daughter Judy was born on November 6, 1935 in Venice, California.
Young's pregnancy was hidden in an elaborate scheme.
Gable was in New York City when he received an unsigned telegram that said, "The baby was born, she is beautiful, and has blonde hair."
Young and her mother both denied sending the telegram; Loretta believed that Carter Hermann (her sister Polly's husband, who was also Judy's godfather) had sent it.
Nineteen months after the birth, Young claimed to have adopted Judy.
He did not tell her he was her father.
Five years after Gable's death, when confronted by Lewis, Loretta Young confirmed that she was Lewis's biological mother and that Gable was her father.
Young died of ovarian cancer on August 12, 2000; her autobiography, published posthumously, confirmed that Gable was indeed Lewis's father.
In 2014, Young's son, Christopher Lewis, and his wife, Linda Lewis, publicly disclosed that Young had told them in 1998 that Judy Lewis was conceived during a rape.
Style and reception
In a photo essay of Hollywood film stars, Life magazine called Gable, "All man ... and then some".
Doris Day summed up Gable's unique personality: "He was as masculine as any man I've ever known, and as much a little boy as a grown man could be - it was this combination that had such a devastating effect on women."
Robert Taylor said Gable "was a great, great guy, and certainly one of the great stars of all times, if not the greatest.
I think that I sincerely doubt that there will ever be another like Clark Gable; he was one of a kind."
David Niven states that Gable, a close friend, was extremely supportive after the sudden, accidental death of Niven's first wife, Primula (Primmie), in 1946.
Primmie had supported Gable emotionally after Carole Lombard's death four years earlier: Niven recounts Gable kneeling at Primmie's feet and sobbing while she held and consoled him.
Niven also states that Arthur Miller, the author of The Misfits, had described Gable as "the man who did not know how to hate".
once stated that Gable, "...would not go down with the submarine referring to Run Silent Run Deep (1958), where the movie ended differently from the book on which it was based, because Gable doesn't sink".
Eli Wallach also states in his autobiography that his most dramatic scene in The Misfits was cut from the movie after it had been filmed during several takes.
The scene depicts Wallach's character being emotionally crushed when he visits Roselyn (Marilyn Monroe), hoping to propose to her, and instead sees her with Gable's character.
Both Gable and Monroe are off-screen, and Wallach's heartbreak is indicated by his dropping the rose bouquet he had brought for her.
Gable asked that the scene be removed because he felt that his character would never steal a woman from another man.
Wallach noted that Gable was professional and considerate in his behavior.
Filmography
Gable is known to have appeared as an "extra" in 13 films between 1924 and 1930.
He then appeared in a total of 67 theatrically released motion pictures, as himself in 17 "short subject" films, and he narrated and appeared in a World War II propaganda film entitled Combat America, produced by the United States Army Air Forces.
In popular culture
Warner Bros. cartoons sometimes caricatured Gable.
Examples include: Have You Got Any Castles?
(in which his face appears seven times inside the novel "The House of the Seven Gables"), The Coo-Coo Nut Grove (in which his ears flap on their own), Hollywood Steps Out (in which he follows an enigmatic woman), and Cats Don't Dance (in which he appears on a billboard promotion for Gone With The Wind).
The 2003 album Give Up by electronic music group The Postal Service includes a song titled "Clark Gable".
The song's narrator says he wants a love like something in the movies, and includes the lyrics "I kissed you in a style Clark Gable would have admired, I thought it classic".
In the film Broadway Melody of 1938, Judy Garland (aged 15) sings "You Made Me Love You" while looking at a composite picture of Gable.
The opening lines are: "Dear Mr Gable, I am writing this to you, and I hope that you will read it so you'll know, my heart beats like a hammer, and I stutter and I stammer, every time I see you at the picture show, I guess I'm just another fan of yours, and I thought I'd write and tell you so.
You made me love you, I didn't want to do it, I didn't want to do it..."
Bugs Bunny's nonchalant carrot-chewing standing position, as explained by Chuck Jones, Friz Freleng, and Bob Clampett, originated in a scene in the film It Happened One Night, in which Clark Gable's character leans against a fence, eating carrots rapidly and talking with his mouth full to Claudette Colbert's character.
This scene was well known while the film was popular, and viewers at the time likely recognized Bugs Bunny's behaviour as satire.
Gable has been portrayed in a number of films.
Actors who have played the role include: Phillip Waldron in It Happened in Hollywood (1937), James Brolin in Gable and Lombard (1976), Larry Pennell in (2003).
Bibliography
