The dugong (; Dugong dugon) is a medium-sized marine mammal.
It is one of four living species of the order Sirenia, which also includes three species of manatees.
It is the only living representative of the once-diverse family Dugongidae; its closest modern relative, Steller's sea cow (Hydrodamalis gigas), was hunted to extinction in the 18th century.
The dugong is the only strictly herbivorous marine mammal.
The dugong is the only sirenian in its range, which spans the waters of some 40 countries and territories throughout the Indo-West Pacific.
The dugong is largely dependent on seagrass communities for subsistence and is thus restricted to the coastal habitats which support seagrass meadows, with the largest dugong concentrations typically occurring in wide, shallow, protected areas such as bays, mangrove channels, the waters of large inshore islands and inter-reefal waters.
The northern waters of Australia between Shark Bay and Moreton Bay are believed to be the dugong's contemporary stronghold.
Like all modern sirenians, the dugong has a seagrass communities.
The molar teeth are simple and peg-like unlike the more elaborate molar dentition of manatees.
The dugong has been hunted for thousands of years for its meat and oil.
Traditional hunting still has great cultural significance in several countries in its modern range, particularly northern Australia and the Pacific Islands.
The dugong's current distribution is fragmented, and many populations are believed to be close to extinction.
The IUCN lists the dugong as a species vulnerable to extinction, while the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species limits or bans the trade of derived products.
Despite being legally protected in many countries, the main causes of population decline remain anthropogenic and include fishing-related fatalities, habitat degradation and hunting.
With its long lifespan of 70 years or more, and slow rate of reproduction, the dugong is especially vulnerable to extinction.
Etymology and taxonomy
The word "dugong" derives from the Visayan (probably Cebuano) dugung.
The name was first adopted and popularized by the French naturalist Georges-Louis Leclerc, Comte de Buffon, as "dugon" in Histoire Naturelle (1765), after descriptions of the animal from the island of Leyte in the Philippines.
Other common local names include "sea cow", "sea pig" and "sea camel".
Dugong dugon is the only extant species of the family Dugongidae, and one of only four extant species of the Sirenia order, the others forming the manatee family.
It was first classified by Müller in 1776 as Trichechus dugon, a member of the manatee genus previously defined by Linnaeus.
It was later assigned as the type species of Dugong by Lacépède and further classified within its own family by Gray and subfamily by Simpson.
The body is sparsely covered in short hair, a common feature among sirenians which may allow for tactile interpretation of their environment.
These hairs are most developed around the mouth, which has a large horseshoe-shaped upper lip forming a highly mobile muzzle.
and flippers are similar to those of dolphins.
These flukes are raised up and down in long strokes to move the animal forward, and can be twisted to turn.
The forelimbs are paddle-like flippers which aid in turning and slowing.
A dugong's brain weighs a maximum of , about 0.1% of the animal's body weight.
dugongs have limited vision, but acute hearing within narrow sound thresholds.
Their ears, which lack pinnae, are located on the sides of their head.
The nostrils are located on top of the head and can be closed using valves.
The lungs in a dugong are very long, extending almost as far as the kidneys, which are also highly elongated in order to cope with the saltwater environment.
The dugong has two incisors (tusks) which emerge in males during puberty.
The female's tusks continue to grow without emerging during puberty, sometimes erupting later in life after reaching the base of the premaxilla.
The number of growth layer groups in a tusk indicates the age of a dugong, may act as a ballast to help keep sirenians suspended slightly below the water's surface.
An adult's length rarely exceeds .
An individual this long is expected to weigh around .
Weight in adults is typically more than and less than .
The largest individual recorded was long and weighed , Females tend to be larger than males.
and large numbers are also found in wide and shallow mangrove channels and around leeward sides of large inshore islands, where seagrass beds are common.
In Mozambique, most of the remaining local populations are very small and the largest (about 120 individuals) occurs at Bazaruto Island, but they have become rare in historical habitats such as in Maputo Bay and on Inhaca Island.
In Tanzania, observations have recently been increased around the Mafia Island Marine Park where a hunt was intended by fishermen but failed in 2009.
In the Seychelles, dugongs had been regarded as extinct in 18th century until a small number was discovered around the Aldabra Atoll.
This population may belong to a different group than that distributed among the inner isles.
Dugongs once thrived among the Chagos Archipelago and Sea Cow Island was named after the species, although the species no longer occurs in the region.
A highly isolated breeding population exists in the Marine National Park, Gulf of Kutch, the only remaining population in western India.
It is from the population in the Persian Gulf, and from the nearest population in India.
Former populations in this area, centred on the Maldives and the Laccadive Islands, are presumed to be extinct.
A population exists in the Gulf of Mannar Marine National Park and the Palk Strait between India and Sri Lanka, but it is seriously depleted.
Recoveries of seagrass beds along former ranges of dugongs, such as the Chilika Lake have been confirmed in recent years, rising hopes for re-colorizations of the species.
The population around the Andaman and Nicobar Islands are known only from a few records, and although the population was large during British rule, it is now believed to be small and scattered.
However, recent studies revealed severe declines both in population size and distributions among the region.
A 2017 study, for instance, found a nearly 25% drop in population since 1950.
Reasons for this drastic population loss include illegal poaching, oil spills and net entanglement.
including .
In Vietnam, dugongs have been restricted mostly to the provinces of Kiên Giang and Bà Rịa-Vũng Tàu, including Phu Quoc Island and Con Dao Island, which hosted large populations in the past.
Con Dao is now the only site in Vietnam where dugong are regularly seen, protected within the Côn Đảo National Park.
Nonetheless, dangerously low levels of awarenesses for conservation of marine organisms in Vietnam and Cambodia may result in increased intentional or unintentional catches, and illegal trade is a potential danger for local dugongs.
In Thailand, the present distribution of dugongs is restricted to six provinces along the Andaman Sea, and very few dugongs are present in the Gulf of Thailand.
The Gulf of Thailand was historically home to large number of the animals, but none have been sighted in the west of the gulf in recent years, Dugongs are believed to exist in the Straits of Johor in very small numbers.
The waters around Borneo support a small population, with more scattered throughout the Malay archipelago.
Populations also exist around the Solomon Islands archipelago and New Caledonia, stretching to an easternmost population in Vanuatu.
A highly isolated population lives around the islands of Palau.
Northern Pacific
Today, possibly the smallest and northernmost population of dugongs exists around the Ryukyu islands, and a population formerly existed off Taiwan.
around Okinawa.
New sightings of a cow-calf pair have been reported in 2017, indicating a possible breeding had occurred in these waters.
Some of the last reported sightings were made in Kenting National Park in 1950s and 60s.
There had been occasional records of vagrants at the Northern Mariana Islands prior to 1985.
It is unknown how much mixing there was between these populations historically.
Some theorise that populations existed independently, for example that the Okinawan population were isolated members derived from the migration of a Philippine subspecies.
Others postulate that the populations formed part of a super-population where migration between Ryukyu, Taiwan, and the Philippines was common.
Australia
Australia is home to the largest population, stretching from Shark Bay in Western Australia to Moreton Bay in Queensland.
this reef area houses a stable population of around 10,000, although the population concentration has shifted over time.
Large bays facing north on the Queensland coast provide significant habitats for dugong, with the southernmost of these being Hervey Bay and Moreton Bay.
where an (re)establishment of a local population through range expansions has started recently.
Extinct Mediterranean population
It has been confirmed that dugongs once inhabited the water of the Mediterranean possibly until after the rise of civilizations along the inland sea.
This population possibly shared ancestry with the Red Sea population, and the Mediterranean population had never been large due to geographical factors and climate changes.
The Mediterranean is the region where the Dugongidae originated in the mid-late Eocene, along with Caribbean Sea.
Ecology and life history
Dugongs are long lived, and the oldest recorded specimen reached age 73. and have been known to rest on their tail to breathe with their heads above water.
or marine algae when the supply of their choice grasses decreases.
In other southern areas of both western and eastern Australia, there is evidence that dugongs actively seek out large invertebrates.
This does not apply to dugongs in tropical areas, in which faecal evidence indicates that invertebrates are not eaten.
When moving along the seabed to feed they walk on their pectoral fins.
Species such as Zosteria capricorni are more dominant in established seagrass beds, but grow slowly, while Halophilia and Halodule grow quickly in the open space left by dugong feeding.
The way that females know how a male has reached sexual maturity is by the eruption of tusks in the male since tusks erupt in males when testosterone levels reach a high enough level.
The age when a female first gives birth is disputed, with some studies placing the age between ten and seventeen years, while others place it as early as six years.
and people around the world developed cultures around dugong hunting.
In some areas it remains an animal of great significance, This was discovered by Lieutenant R.L Rawlings in 1959 while on a routine patrol.
During the Renaissance and the Baroque eras, dugongs were often exhibited in wunderkammers.
They were also presented as Fiji mermaids in sideshows.
Dugong meat and oil have traditionally been some of the most valuable foods of Australian aborigines and Torres Strait Islanders.
Some aborigines regard dugongs as part of their Aboriginality.
The dugong is a national animal of Papua New Guinea, which bans all except traditional hunting.
Vanuatu and New Caledonia ban hunting of dugongs.
Dugongs are protected throughout Australia, although the rules vary by state; in some areas indigenous hunting is allowed.
socio-political needs are an impediment to dugong conservation in many developing countries.
The shallow waters are often used as a source of food and income, problems exacerbated by aid used to improve fishing.
In many countries, legislation does not exist to protect dugongs, and if it does it is not enforced.
It was later revealed that the government of Japan was hiding evidence of the negative effects of ship lanes and human activities on dugongs observed during surveys carried out off Henoko reef.
One of the three individuals has not been observed since June 2015, corresponding to the start of the excavation operations.
Environmental degradation
If dugongs do not get enough to eat they may calve later and produce fewer young.
In August 2014, preliminary drilling surveys were conducted around the seagrass beds there.
The construction is expected to seriously damage the dugong population's habitat, possibly leading to local extinction.
Capture and captivity
The Australian state of Queensland has sixteen dugong protection parks, and some preservation zones have been established where even Aboriginal Peoples are not allowed to hunt.
The second resides in Sea World Indonesia, after having been rescued from a fisherman's net and treated.
The last one, a male, is kept at Sydney Aquarium, where he has resided since he was a juvenile.
Sydney Aquarium had a second dugong for many years, until she died in 2018.
Gracie, a captive dugong at Underwater World, Singapore, was reported to have died in 2014 at the age of 19, from complications arising from an acute digestive disorder.
qrwlvpxr9ec3b6tqphl9jyx6fainlat
