In biology, a gene is a sequence of nucleotides in DNA or RNA that encodes the synthesis of a gene product, either RNA or protein.
During gene expression, the DNA is first copied into RNA.
The RNA can be directly functional or be the intermediate template for a protein that performs a function.
The transmission of genes to an organism's offspring is the basis of the inheritance of phenotypic trait.
These genes make up different DNA sequences called genotypes.
Genotypes along with environmental and developmental factors determine what the phenotypes will be.
Most biological traits are under the influence of polygenes (many different genes) as well as gene-environment interactions.
Some genetic traits are instantly visible, such as eye color or number of limbs, and some are not, such as blood type, risk for specific diseases, or the thousands of basic biochemical processes that constitute life.
Genes can acquire mutations in their sequence, leading to different variants, known as alleles, in the population.
These alleles encode slightly different versions of a protein, which cause different phenotypical traits.
Usage of the term "having a gene" (e.g., "good genes," "hair colour gene") typically refers to containing a different allele of the same, shared gene.
Genes evolve due to natural selection / survival of the fittest and genetic drift of the alleles.
The concept of a gene continues to be refined as new phenomena are discovered.
The term gene was introduced by Danish botanist, plant physiologist and geneticist Wilhelm Johannsen in 1909.
It is inspired by the ancient Greek: γόνος, gonos, that means offspring and procreation.
History
Discovery of discrete inherited units
The existence of discrete inheritable units was first suggested by Gregor Mendel (1822-1884).
From 1857 to 1864, in Brno (Czech Republic), he studied inheritance patterns in 8000 common edible pea plants, tracking distinct traits from parent to offspring.
He described these mathematically as 2n combinations where n is the number of differing characteristics in the original peas.
Although he did not use the term gene, he explained his results in terms of discrete inherited units that give rise to observable physical characteristics.
This description prefigured Wilhelm Johannsen's distinction between genotype (the genetic material of an organism) and phenotype (the observable traits of that organism).
Mendel was also the first to demonstrate independent assortment, the distinction between dominant and recessive traits, the distinction between a heterozygote and homozygote, and the phenomenon of discontinuous inheritance.
Prior to Mendel's work, the dominant theory of heredity was one of blending inheritance, which suggested that each parent contributed fluids to the fertilisation process and that the traits of the parents blended and mixed to produce the offspring.
Charles Darwin developed a theory of inheritance he termed pangenesis, from Greek pan ("all, whole") and genesis ("birth") / genos ("origin").
Darwin used the term gemmule to describe hypothetical particles that would mix during reproduction.
Mendel's work went largely unnoticed after its first publication in 1866, but was rediscovered in the late 19th century by Hugo de Vries, Carl Correns, and Erich von Tschermak, who (claimed to have) reached similar conclusions in their own research.
Specifically, in 1889, Hugo de Vries published his book Intracellular Pangenesis, in which he postulated that different characters have individual hereditary carriers and that inheritance of specific traits in organisms comes in particles.
De Vries called these units "pangenes" (Pangens in German), after Darwin's 1868 pangenesis theory.
Sixteen years later, in 1905, Wilhelm Johannsen introduced the term 'gene'
Discovery of DNA
Advances in understanding genes and inheritance continued throughout the 20th century.
Deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) was shown to be the molecular repository of genetic information by experiments in the 1940s to 1950s.
The structure of DNA was studied by Rosalind Franklin and Maurice Wilkins using X-ray crystallography, which led James D. Watson and Francis Crick to publish a model of the double-stranded DNA molecule whose paired nucleotide bases indicated a compelling hypothesis for the mechanism of genetic replication.
In the early 1950s the prevailing view was that the genes in a chromosome acted like discrete entities, indivisible by recombination and arranged like beads on a string.
The experiments of Benzer using mutants defective in the rII region of bacteriophage T4 (1955-1959) showed that individual genes have a simple linear structure and are likely to be equivalent to a linear section of DNA.
Collectively, this body of research established the central dogma of molecular biology, which states that proteins are translated from RNA, which is transcribed from DNA.
This dogma has since been shown to have exceptions, such as reverse transcription in retroviruses.
The modern study of genetics at the level of DNA is known as molecular genetics.
In 1972, Walter Fiers and his team were the first to determine the sequence of a gene: that of Bacteriophage MS2 coat protein.
The subsequent development of chain-termination DNA sequencing in 1977 by Frederick Sanger improved the efficiency of sequencing and turned it into a routine laboratory tool.
An automated version of the Sanger method was used in early phases of the Human Genome Project.
Modern synthesis and its successors
The theories developed in the early 20th century to integrate Mendelian genetics with Darwinian evolution are called the modern synthesis, a term introduced by Julian Huxley.
Evolutionary biologists have subsequently modified this concept, such as George C. Williams' gene-centric view of evolution.
He proposed an evolutionary concept of the gene as a unit of natural selection with the definition: "that which segregates and recombines with appreciable frequency."
In this view, the molecular gene transcribes as a unit, and the evolutionary gene inherits as a unit.
Related ideas emphasizing the centrality of genes in evolution were popularized by Richard Dawkins.
Molecular basis
DNA
The vast majority of organisms encode their genes in long strands of DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid).
DNA consists of a chain made from four types of nucleotide subunits, each composed of: a five-carbon sugar (2-deoxyribose), a phosphate group, and one of the four bases adenine, cytosine, guanine, and thymine.
Two chains of DNA twist around each other to form a DNA double helix with the phosphate-sugar backbone spiralling around the outside, and the bases pointing inwards with adenine base pairing to thymine and guanine to cytosine.
The specificity of base pairing occurs because adenine and thymine align to form two hydrogen bonds, whereas cytosine and guanine form three hydrogen bonds.
The two strands in a double helix must therefore be complementary, with their sequence of bases matching such that the adenines of one strand are paired with the thymines of the other strand, and so on.
The expression of genes encoded in DNA begins by transcribing the gene into RNA, a second type of nucleic acid that is very similar to DNA, but whose monomers contain the sugar ribose rather than deoxyribose.
RNA also contains the base uracil in place of thymine.
RNA molecules are less stable than DNA and are typically single-stranded.
Genes that encode proteins are composed of a series of three-nucleotide sequences called codons, which serve as the "words" in the genetic "language".
The genetic code specifies the correspondence during protein translation between codons and amino acids.
The genetic code is nearly the same for all known organisms.
The centromere is required for binding spindle fibres to separate sister chromatids into daughter cells during cell division.
Whereas the chromosomes of prokaryotes are relatively gene-dense, those of eukaryotes often contain regions of DNA that serve no obvious function.
Simple single-celled eukaryotes have relatively small amounts of such DNA, whereas the genomes of complex multicellular organisms, including humans, contain an absolute majority of DNA without an identified function.
This DNA has often been referred to as "junk DNA".
However, more recent analyses suggest that, although protein-coding DNA makes up barely 2% of the human genome, about 80% of the bases in the genome may be expressed, so the term "junk DNA" may be a misnomer.
Highly transcribed genes have "strong" promoter sequences that form strong associations with transcription factors, thereby initiating transcription at a high rate.
Others genes have "weak" promoters that form weak associations with transcription factors and initiate transcription less frequently.
For example, enhancers increase transcription by binding an activator protein which then helps to recruit the RNA polymerase to the promoter; conversely silencers bind repressor proteins and make the DNA less available for RNA polymerase.
The transcribed pre-mRNA contains untranslated regions at both ends which contain a ribosome binding site, terminator and start and stop codons.
In addition, most eukaryotic open reading frames contain untranslated introns which are removed before the exons are translated.
The sequences at the ends of the introns dictate the splice sites to generate the final mature mRNA which encodes the protein or RNA product.
Many prokaryotic genes are organized into operons, with multiple protein-coding sequences that are transcribed as a unit.
The genes in an operon are transcribed as a continuous messenger RNA, referred to as a polycistronic mRNA.
The term cistron in this context is equivalent to gene.
The transcription of an operon's mRNA is often controlled by a repressor that can occur in an active or inactive state depending on the presence of specific metabolites.
When active, the repressor binds to a DNA sequence at the beginning of the operon, called the operator region, and represses transcription of the operon; when the repressor is inactive transcription of the operon can occur (see e.g. Lac operon).
The products of operon genes typically have related functions and are involved in the same regulatory network.
Regulatory regions of a gene such as enhancers do not necessarily have to be close to the coding sequence on the linear molecule because the intervening DNA can be looped out to bring the gene and its regulatory region into proximity.
Similarly, a gene's introns can be much larger than its exons.
Regulatory regions can even be on entirely different chromosomes and operate in trans to allow regulatory regions on one chromosome to come in contact with target genes on another chromosome.
Early work in molecular genetics suggested the concept that one gene makes one protein.
This concept (originally called the one gene-one enzyme hypothesis) emerged from an influential 1941 paper by George Beadle and Edward Tatum on experiments with mutants of the fungus Neurospora crassa.
Norman Horowitz, an early colleague on the Neurospora research, reminisced in 2004 that “these experiments founded the science of what Beadle and Tatum called biochemical genetics.
In actuality they proved to be the opening gun in what became molecular genetics and all the developments that have followed from that.”
The one gene-one protein concept has been refined since the discovery of genes that can encode multiple proteins by alternative splicing and coding sequences split in short section across the genome whose mRNAs are concatenated by trans-splicing.
A broad operational definition is sometimes used to encompass the complexity of these diverse phenomena, where a gene is defined as a union of genomic sequences encoding a coherent set of potentially overlapping functional products.
This definition categorizes genes by their functional products (proteins or RNA) rather than their specific DNA loci, with regulatory elements classified as gene-associated regions.
(see Crick, Brenner et al. experiment).
Additionally, a "start codon", and three "stop codons" indicate the beginning and end of the protein coding region.
There are 64 possible codons (four possible nucleotides at each of three positions, hence 43 possible codons) and only 20 standard amino acids; hence the code is redundant and multiple codons can specify the same amino acid.
The correspondence between codons and amino acids is nearly universal among all known living organisms.
Transcription
Transcription produces a single-stranded RNA molecule known as messenger RNA, whose nucleotide sequence is complementary to the DNA from which it was transcribed.
Translation
before they can carry out their cellular functions.
RNA genes
A typical protein-coding gene is first copied into RNA as an intermediate in the manufacture of the final protein product.
Some viruses store their entire genomes in the form of RNA, and contain no DNA at all.
Because they use RNA to store genes, their cellular hosts may synthesize their proteins as soon as they are infected and without the delay in waiting for transcription.
On the other hand, RNA retroviruses, such as HIV, require the reverse transcription of their genome from RNA into DNA before their proteins can be synthesized.
RNA-mediated epigenetic inheritance has also been observed in plants and very rarely in animals.
Inheritance
organisms have two copies of each chromosome because they inherit one complete set from each parent.
DNA replication and cell division
The growth, development, and reproduction of organisms relies on cell division; the process by which a single cell divides into two usually identical daughter cells.
This requires first making a duplicate copy of every gene in the genome in a process called DNA replication.
During the period of exponential DNA increase at 37 °C, the rate of elongation was 749 nucleotides per second.
After DNA replication is complete, the cell must physically separate the two copies of the genome and divide into two distinct membrane-bound cells.
Genes that are very close are essentially never separated because it is extremely unlikely that a crossover point will occur between them.
whereas for some RNA viruses it can be as high as 10−3.
This means that each generation, each human genome accumulates 1-2 new mutations.
Larger mutations can be caused by errors in recombination to cause chromosomal abnormalities including the duplication, deletion, rearrangement or inversion of large sections of a chromosome.
Additionally, DNA repair mechanisms can introduce mutational errors when repairing physical damage to the molecule.
The repair, even with mutation, is more important to survival than restoring an exact copy, for example when repairing double-strand breaks.
The wild-type allele is not necessarily the ancestor of less common alleles, nor is it necessarily fitter.
Most mutations within genes are neutral, having no effect on the organism's phenotype (silent mutations).
Some mutations do not change the amino acid sequence because multiple codons encode the same amino acid (synonymous mutations).
Other mutations can be neutral if they lead to amino acid sequence changes, but the protein still functions similarly with the new amino acid (e.g. conservative mutations).
Many mutations, however, are deleterious or even lethal, and are removed from populations by natural selection.
Genetic disorders are the result of deleterious mutations and can be due to spontaneous mutation in the affected individual, or can be inherited.
Finally, a small fraction of mutations are beneficial, improving the organism's fitness and are extremely important for evolution, since their directional selection leads to adaptive evolution.
These genes appear either from gene duplication within an organism's genome, where they are known as paralogous genes, or are the result of divergence of the genes after a speciation event, where they are known as orthologous genes,
The relationship between genes can be measured by comparing the sequence alignment of their DNA.
The sequence differences between genes can be used for phylogenetic analyses to study how those genes have evolved and how the organisms they come from are related.
Origins of new genes
The most common source of new genes in eukaryotic lineages is gene duplication, which creates copy number variation of an existing gene in the genome.
The resulting genes (paralogs) may then diverge in sequence and in function.
Sets of genes formed in this way compose a gene family.
Gene duplications and losses within a family are common and represent a major source of evolutionary biodiversity.
Sometimes, gene duplication may result in a nonfunctional copy of a gene, or a functional copy may be subject to mutations that result in loss of function; such nonfunctional genes are called pseudogenes.
to 60 genes with no identifiable homologs outside humans.
Orphan genes arise primarily from either de novo emergence from previously non-coding sequence, or gene duplication followed by such rapid sequence change that the original relationship becomes undetectable.
De novo genes are typically shorter and simpler in structure than most eukaryotic genes, with few if any introns.
Horizontal gene transfer refers to the transfer of genetic material through a mechanism other than reproduction.
This mechanism is a common source of new genes in prokaryotes, sometimes thought to contribute more to genetic variation than gene duplication.
It is a common means of spreading antibiotic resistance, virulence, and adaptive metabolic functions.
Although horizontal gene transfer is rare in eukaryotes, likely examples have been identified of protist and alga genomes containing genes of bacterial origin.
Genome
The genome is the total genetic material of an organism and includes both the genes and non-coding sequences.
Number of genes
The genome size, and the number of genes it encodes varies widely between organisms.
The smallest genomes occur in viruses, and viroids (which act as a single non-coding RNA gene).
Conversely, plants can have extremely large genomes, with rice containing >46,000 protein-coding genes.
The total number of protein-coding genes is estimated to be 5 million sequences.
Although the number of base-pairs of DNA in the human genome has been known since the 1960s, the estimated number of genes has changed over time as definitions of genes, and methods of detecting them have been refined.
Initial theoretical predictions of the number of human genes were as high as 2,000,000.
Early experimental measures indicated there to be 50,000-100,000 transcribed genes (expressed sequence tags).
Subsequently, the sequencing in the Human Genome Project indicated that many of these transcripts were alternative variants of the same genes, and the total number of protein-coding genes was revised down to ~20,000
Of the human genome, only 1-2% consists of protein-coding genes, with the remainder being 'noncoding' DNA such as introns, retrotransposons, and noncoding RNAs.
Every multicellular organism has all its genes in each cell of its body but not every gene functions in every cell .
Essential genes
Essential genes are the set of genes thought to be critical for an organism's survival.
This definition assumes the abundant availability of all relevant nutrients and the absence of environmental stress.
Only a small portion of an organism's genes are essential.
In bacteria, an estimated 250-400 genes are essential for Escherichia coli and Bacillus subtilis, which is less than 10% of their genes.
Half of these genes are orthologs in both organisms and are largely involved in protein synthesis.
Although the number is more difficult to measure in higher eukaryotes, mice and humans are estimated to have around 2000 essential genes (~10% of their genes).
The synthetic organism, Syn 3, has a minimal genome of 473 essential genes and quasi-essential genes (necessary for fast growth), although 149 have unknown function.
Essential genes include housekeeping genes (critical for basic cell functions) as well as genes that are expressed at different times in the organisms development or life cycle.
Housekeeping genes are used as experimental controls when analysing gene expression, since they are constitutively expressed at a relatively constant level.
Genetic and genomic nomenclature
Gene nomenclature has been established by the HUGO Gene Nomenclature Committee (HGNC), a committee of the Human Genome Organisation, for each known human gene in the form of an approved gene name and symbol (short-form abbreviation), which can be accessed through a database maintained by HGNC.
Symbols are chosen to be unique, and each gene has only one symbol (although approved symbols sometimes change).
Symbols are preferably kept consistent with other members of a gene family and with homologs in other species, particularly the mouse due to its role as a common model organism.
Genetic engineering
Genetic engineering is the modification of an organism's genome through biotechnology.
Since the 1970s, a variety of techniques have been developed to specifically add, remove and edit genes in an organism.
Recently developed genome engineering techniques use engineered nuclease enzymes to create targeted DNA repair in a chromosome to either disrupt or edit a gene when the break is repaired.
The related term synthetic biology is sometimes used to refer to extensive genetic engineering of an organism.
Genetic engineering is now a routine research tool with model organisms.
For example, genes are easily added to bacteria and lineages of knockout mice with a specific gene's function disrupted are used to investigate that gene's function.
Many organisms have been genetically modified for applications in agriculture, industrial biotechnology, and medicine.
For multicellular organisms, typically the embryo is engineered which grows into the adult genetically modified organism.
However, the genomes of cells in an adult organism can be edited using gene therapy techniques to treat genetic diseases.
Sources
; Main textbook
* - A molecular biology textbook available free online through NCBI Bookshelf.
:https:/ books Glossary
:https:/ books Ch 1: Cells and genomes
::https:/ books 1.1: The Universal Features of Cells on Earth
:https:/ books Ch 2: Cell Chemistry and Biosynthesis
::https:/ books 2.1: The Chemical Components of a Cell
:https:/ books Ch 3: Proteins
:https:/ books Ch 4: DNA and Chromosomes
::https:/ books 4.1: The Structure and Function of DNA
::https:/ books 4.2: Chromosomal DNA and Its Packaging in the Chromatin Fiber
:https:/ books Ch 5: DNA Replication, Repair, and Recombination
::https:/ books 5.2: DNA Replication Mechanisms
::https:/ books 5.4: DNA Repair
::https:/ books 5.5: General Recombination
:https:/ books Ch 6: How Cells Read the Genome: From DNA to Protein
::https:/ books 6.1: DNA to RNA
::https:/ books 6.2: RNA to Protein
:https:/ books Ch 7: Control of Gene Expression
::https:/ books 7.1: An Overview of Gene Control
::https:/ books 7.2: DNA-Binding Motifs in Gene Regulatory Proteins
::https:/ books 7.3: How Genetic Switches Work
::https:/ books 7.5: Posttranscriptional Controls
::https:/ books 7.6: How Genomes Evolve
:https:/ books Ch 14: Energy Conversion: Mitochondria and Chloroplasts
::https:/ books 14.4: The Genetic Systems of Mitochondria and Plastids
:https:/ books Ch 18: The Mechanics of Cell Division
::https:/ books 18.1: An Overview of M Phase
::https:/ books 18.2: Mitosis
:https:/ books Ch 20: Germ Cells and Fertilization
::https:/ books 20.2: Meiosis
Further reading
* https:/ print?id=WkHO9HI7koEC Google Book Search; first published 1976.
