Ebola virus disease (EVD), also known as Ebola hemorrhagic fever (EHF) or simply Ebola, is a viral hemorrhagic fever of humans and other primates caused by ebolaviruses.
The disease has a high risk of death, killing 25% to 90% of those infected, with an average of about 50%.
The virus spreads through direct contact with body fluids, such as blood from infected humans or other animals.
Semen or breast milk of a person after recovery from EVD may carry the virus for several weeks to months.
Fruit bats are believed to be the normal carrier in nature, able to spread the virus without being affected by it.
Control of outbreaks requires coordinated medical services and community engagement.
Samples of body fluids and tissues from people with the disease should be handled with special caution.
While there is no approved treatment for Ebola as of 2019, two treatments (REGN-EB3 and mAb114) are associated with improved outcomes.
Supportive efforts, also, improve outcomes.
EVD outbreaks occur intermittently in tropical regions of sub-Saharan Africa.
The largest outbreak to date was the epidemic in West Africa, which occurred from December 2013, to January 2016, with cases and deaths.
It was declared no longer an emergency on 29 March 2016.
Other outbreaks in Africa began in the Democratic Republic of the Congo in May 2017, and 2018.
In July 2019, the World Health Organization declared the Congo Ebola outbreak a world health emergency.
Signs and symptoms
Onset
The length of time between exposure to the virus and the development of symptoms (incubation period) is between 2 and 21 days, and usually between 4 and 10 days.
However, recent estimates based on mathematical models predict that around 5% of cases may take greater than 21 days to develop.
Symptoms usually begin with a sudden influenza-like stage characterized by feeling tired, fever, weakness, decreased appetite, muscular pain, joint pain, headache, and sore throat.
The fever is usually higher than .
This is often followed by nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, abdominal pain, and sometimes hiccups.
The combination of severe vomiting and diarrhea often leads to severe dehydration.
Next, shortness of breath and chest pain may occur, along with swelling, headaches, and confusion.
All infected people show some decreased blood clotting.
This may cause vomiting blood, coughing up of blood, or blood in stool.
Bleeding into the skin may create petechiae, purpura, ecchymoses or hematomas (especially around needle injection sites).
Heavy bleeding is uncommon; if it occurs, it is usually in the gastrointestinal tract.
The incidence of bleeding into the gastrointestinal tract has decreased since earlier epidemics and is now estimated to be approximately 10% with improved prevention of disseminated intravascular coagulation.
Survivors develop antibodies against Ebola that last at least 10 years, but it is unclear whether they are immune to additional infections.
The fifth virus, Reston virus (RESTV), is not thought to cause disease in humans, but has caused disease in other primates.
All five viruses are closely related to marburgviruses.
Ebolavirus genomes contain seven genes including 3'-UTR-NP-VP35-VP40-GP-VP30-VP24-L-5'-UTR.
The genomes of the five different ebolaviruses (BDBV, EBOV, RESTV, SUDV and TAFV) differ in sequence and the number and location of gene overlaps.
As with all filoviruses, ebolavirus virions are filamentous particles that may appear in the shape of a shepherd's crook, of a "U" or of a "6," and they may be coiled, toroid or branched.
In general, ebolavirions are 80 nanometers (nm) in width and may be as long as 14,000 nm.
Their life cycle is thought to begin with a virion attaching to specific cell-surface receptors such as C-type lectins, DC-SIGN, or integrins, which is followed by fusion of the viral envelope with cellular membranes.
The virions taken up by the cell then travel to acidic endosomes and lysosomes where the viral envelope glycoprotein GP is cleaved.
The viral RNA polymerase, encoded by the L gene, partially uncoats the nucleocapsid and transcribes the genes into positive-strand mRNAs, which are then translated into structural and nonstructural proteins.
The most abundant protein produced is the nucleoprotein, whose concentration in the host cell determines when L switches from gene transcription to genome replication.
Replication of the viral genome results in full-length, positive-strand antigenomes that are, in turn, transcribed into genome copies of negative-strand virus progeny.
Transmission
It is believed that between people, Ebola disease spreads only by direct contact with the blood or other body fluids of a person who has developed symptoms of the disease.
Body fluids that may contain Ebola viruses include saliva, mucus, vomit, feces, sweat, tears, breast milk, urine and semen.
Entry points for the virus include the nose, mouth, eyes, open wounds, cuts and abrasions.
Ebola may be spread through large droplets; however, this is believed to occur only when a person is very sick.
This contamination can happen if a person is splashed with droplets.
Virus persistence in semen for over a year has been recorded in a national screening programme.
Ebola may also occur in the breast milk of women after recovery, and it is not known when it is safe to breastfeed again.
Otherwise, people who have recovered are not infectious.
Usually when someone has symptoms of the disease, they are unable to travel without assistance.
Dead bodies remain infectious; thus, people handling human remains in practices such as traditional burial rituals or more modern processes such as embalming are at risk.
Health-care workers treating people with Ebola are at greatest risk of infection.
The risk increases when they do not have appropriate protective clothing such as masks, gowns, gloves and eye protection; do not wear it properly; or handle contaminated clothing incorrectly.
There has been transmission in hospitals in some African countries that reuse hypodermic needles.
Some health-care centers caring for people with the disease do not have running water.
In the United States the spread to two medical workers treating infected patients prompted criticism of inadequate training and procedures.
Human-to-human transmission of EBOV through the air has not been reported to occur during EVD outbreaks,
Airborne transmission among humans is theoretically possible due to the presence of Ebola virus particles in saliva, which can be discharged into the air with a cough or sneeze, but observational data from previous epidemics suggests the actual risk of airborne transmission is low.
A number of studies examining airborne transmission broadly concluded that transmission from pigs to primates could happen without direct contact because, unlike humans and primates, pigs with EVD get very high ebolavirus concentrations in their lungs, and not their bloodstream.
Therefore, pigs with EVD can spread the disease through droplets in the air or on the ground when they sneeze or cough.
By contrast, humans and other primates accumulate the virus throughout their body and specifically in their blood, but not very much in their lungs.
Animals may become infected when they eat fruit partially eaten by bats carrying the virus.
Evidence indicates that both domestic dogs and pigs can also be infected with EBOV.
Dogs do not appear to develop symptoms when they carry the virus, and pigs appear to be able to transmit the virus to at least some primates.
Three types of fruit bats (Hypsignathus monstrosus, Epomops franqueti and Myonycteris torquata) were found to possibly carry the virus without getting sick.
, whether other animals are involved in its spread is not known.
The bats displayed no clinical signs of disease, which is considered evidence that these bats are a reservoir species of EBOV.
In a 2002-2003 survey of 1,030 animals including 679 bats from Gabon and the Republic of the Congo, 13 fruit bats were found to contain EBOV RNA.
Antibodies against Zaire and Reston viruses have been found in fruit bats in Bangladesh, suggesting that these bats are also potential hosts of the virus and that the filoviruses are present in Asia.
Between 1976 and 1998, in 30,000 mammals, birds, reptiles, amphibians and arthropods sampled from regions of EBOV outbreaks, no Ebola virus was detected apart from some genetic traces found in six rodents (belonging to the species Mus setulosus and Praomys) and one shrew (Sylvisorex ollula) collected from the Central African Republic.
However, further research efforts have not confirmed rodents as a reservoir.
Traces of EBOV were detected in the carcasses of gorillas and chimpanzees during outbreaks in 2001 and 2003, which later became the source of human infections.
However, the high rates of death in these species resulting from EBOV infection make it unlikely that these species represent a natural reservoir for the virus.
Pathophysiology
Like other filoviruses, EBOV replicates very efficiently in many cells, producing large amounts of virus in monocytes, macrophages, dendritic cells and other cells including liver cells, fibroblasts, and adrenal gland cells.
Viral replication triggers high levels of inflammatory chemical signals and leads to a septic state.
EBOV is thought to infect humans through contact with mucous membranes or skin breaks.
After infection, endothelial cells (cells lining the inside of blood vessels), liver cells, and several types of immune cells such as macrophages, monocytes, and dendritic cells are the main targets of attack.
EBOV proteins blunt the human immune system's response to viral infections by interfering with the cells' ability to produce and respond to interferon proteins such as interferon-alpha, interferon-beta, and interferon gamma.
The VP24 and VP35 structural proteins of EBOV play a key role in this interference.
When a cell is infected with EBOV, receptors located in the cell's cytosol (such as RIG-I and MDA5) or outside of the cytosol (such as Toll-like receptor 3 (TLR3), TLR7, TLR8 and TLR9) recognize infectious molecules associated with the virus.
Filovirions such as EBOV may be identified by their unique filamentous shapes in cell cultures examined with electron microscopy.
The specific diagnosis of EVD is confirmed by isolating the virus, detecting its RNA or proteins, or detecting antibodies against the virus in a person's blood.
IgM antibodies are detectable two days after symptom onset and IgG antibodies can be detected six to 18 days after symptom onset.
In 2014, with new mobile testing facilities deployed in parts of Liberia, test results were obtained 3-5 hours after sample submission.
In 2015, a rapid antigen test which gives results in 15 minutes was approved for use by WHO.
Differential diagnosis
Early symptoms of EVD may be similar to those of other diseases common in Africa, including malaria and dengue fever.
The complete differential diagnosis is extensive and requires consideration of many other infectious diseases such as typhoid fever, shigellosis, rickettsial diseases, cholera, sepsis, borreliosis, EHEC enteritis, leptospirosis, scrub typhus, plague, Q fever, candidiasis, histoplasmosis, trypanosomiasis, visceral leishmaniasis, measles, and viral hepatitis among others.
Non-infectious diseases that may result in symptoms similar to those of EVD include acute promyelocytic leukemia, hemolytic uremic syndrome, snake envenomation, clotting factor deficiencies/platelet disorders, thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura, hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia, Kawasaki disease, and warfarin poisoning.
Prevention
Vaccines
Many Ebola vaccine candidates had been developed in the decade prior to 2014, but as of November 2014, none had been approved for use in humans in the United States.
In December 2016, Ebola was found to be 70-100% prevented by rVSV-ZEBOV vaccine, making it the first proven vaccine against the disease.
More than 100,000 people have been vaccinated against Ebola as of 2019.
Infection control
People who care for those infected with Ebola should wear protective clothing including masks, gloves, gowns and goggles.
In Sierra Leone, the typical training period for the use of such safety equipment lasts approximately 12 days.
The infected person should be in barrier-isolation from other people.
During the 2014 outbreak, kits were put together to help families treat Ebola disease in their homes, which included protective clothing as well as chlorine powder and other cleaning supplies.
Education of caregivers in these techniques, and providing such barrier-separation supplies has been a priority of Doctors Without Borders.
Ebolaviruses can be eliminated with heat (heating for 30 to 60 minutes at 60 °C or boiling for 5 minutes).
To disinfect surfaces, some lipid solvents such as some alcohol-based products, detergents, sodium hypochlorite (bleach) or calcium hypochlorite (bleaching powder), and other suitable disinfectants may be used at appropriate concentrations.
Education of the general public about the risk factors for Ebola infection and of the protective measures individuals may take to prevent infection is recommended by the World Health Organization.
Bushmeat, an important source of protein in the diet of some Africans, should be handled and prepared with appropriate protective clothing and thoroughly cooked before consumption.
If a person with Ebola disease dies, direct contact with the body should be avoided.
Certain burial rituals, which may have included making various direct contacts with a dead body, require reformulation so that they consistently maintain a proper protective barrier between the dead body and the living.
Social anthropologists may help find alternatives to traditional rules for burials.
Transportation crews are instructed to follow a certain isolation procedure, should anyone exhibit symptoms resembling EVD.
As of August 2014, the WHO does not consider travel bans to be useful in decreasing spread of the disease.
In the United States, the CDC recommends that restrictions on public activity, including travel restrictions, are not required for the following defined risk levels: Laboratory researchers must be properly trained in BSL-4 practices and wear proper PPE.
Quarantine, also known as enforced isolation, is usually effective in decreasing spread.
Governments often quarantine areas where the disease is occurring or individuals who may transmit the disease outside of an initial area.
In the United States, the law allows quarantine of those infected with ebolaviruses.
Contact tracing
Contact tracing is considered important to contain an outbreak.
It involves finding everyone who had close contact with infected individuals and monitoring them for signs of illness for 21 days.
If any of these contacts comes down with the disease, they should be isolated, tested and treated.
Then the process is repeated, tracing the contacts' contacts.
Management
While there is no approved treatment for Ebola as of 2019,
Standard support
Treatment is primarily supportive in nature.
Early supportive care with rehydration and symptomatic treatment improves survival.
Blood products such as packed red blood cells, platelets, or fresh frozen plasma may also be used.
Intensive care
Intensive care is often used in the developed world.
Dialysis may be needed for kidney failure, and extracorporeal membrane oxygenation may be used for lung dysfunction.
, the average risk of death among those infected is 50%.
Death, if it occurs, follows typically six to sixteen days after symptoms appear and is often due to low blood pressure from fluid loss.
Inflammation and swelling of the uveal layer of the eye is the most common eye complication in survivors of Ebola virus disease.
Ebola can stay in some body parts like the eyes, breasts, and testicles after infection.
Sexual transmission after recovery has been suspected.
If sexual transmission occurs following recovery it is believed to be a rare event.
One case of a condition similar to meningitis has been reported many months after recovery, as of October 2015.
A study of 44 survivors of the Ebola virus in Sierra Leone reported musculoskeletal pain in 70%, headache in 48%, and eye problems in 14%.
Epidemiology
The disease typically occurs in outbreaks in tropical regions of Sub-Saharan Africa. , and was caused by Sudan virus (SUDV).
The Sudan outbreak infected 284 people and killed 151.
The first identifiable case in Sudan occurred on 27 June in a storekeeper in a cotton factory in Nzara, who was hospitalized on 30 June and died on 6 July.
Although the WHO medical staff involved in the Sudan outbreak knew that they were dealing with a heretofore unknown disease, the actual "positive identification" process and the naming of the virus did not occur until some months later in Zaire.
This outbreak was caused by EBOV, formerly designated Zaire ebolavirus, a different member of the genus Ebolavirus than in the first Sudan outbreak.
The first person infected with the disease was the village school's headmaster Mabalo Lokela, who began displaying symptoms on 26 August 1976.
Lokela had returned from a trip to Northern Zaire near the border of the Central African Republic, after visiting the Ebola River between 12 and 22 August.
He was originally believed to have malaria and given quinine.
However, his symptoms continued to worsen, and he was admitted to Yambuku Mission Hospital on 5 September.
Lokela died on 8 September, 14 days after he began displaying symptoms.
Soon after Lokela's death, others who had been in contact with him also died, and people in Yambuku began to panic.
The country's Minister of Health and Zaire President Mobutu Sese Seko declared the entire region, including Yambuku and the country's capital, Kinshasa, a quarantine zone.
No-one was permitted to enter or leave the area, and roads, waterways, and airfields were placed under martial law.
Schools, businesses and social organizations were closed.
Researchers from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), including Peter Piot, co-discoverer of Ebola, later arrived to assess the effects of the outbreak, observing that "the whole region was in panic."
Piot concluded that Belgian nuns had inadvertently started the epidemic by giving unnecessary vitamin injections to pregnant women without sterilizing the syringes and needles.
The outbreak lasted 26 days and the quarantine lasted two weeks.
Researchers speculated that the disease disappeared due to the precautions taken by locals, the quarantine of the area, and discontinuing the injections.
The virus responsible for the initial outbreak, first thought to be Marburg virus, was later identified as a new type of virus related to marburgviruses.
Virus strain samples isolated from both outbreaks were named "Ebola virus" after the Ebola River, near the first-identified viral outbreak site in Zaire. or Belgian researchers.
Subsequently, a number of other cases were reported, almost all centered on the Yambuku mission hospital or close contacts of another case.
Although the two outbreaks were at first believed connected, scientists later realized that they were caused by two distinct ebolaviruses, SUDV and EBOV.
In 2004, a Russian scientist died from Ebola after sticking herself with an infected needle.
Between April and August 2007, a fever epidemic in a four-village region of the DRC was confirmed in September to have been cases of Ebola.
Many people who attended the recent funeral of a local village chief died.
The WHO reported 149 cases of this new strain and 37 of those led to deaths.
in the eastern region.
Other than its discovery in 2007, this was the only time that this variant has been identified as responsible for an outbreak.
The WHO revealed that the virus had sickened 57 people and killed 29.
The probable cause of the outbreak was tainted bush meat hunted by local villagers around the towns of Isiro and Viadana.
In 2014, an outbreak occurred in the DRC.
Genome-sequencing showed that this outbreak was not related to the 2014-15 West Africa Ebola virus outbreak, but was the same EBOV species, the Zaire species.
It began in August 2014, and was declared over in November with 66 cases and 49 deaths.
This was the 7th outbreak in the DRC, three of which occurred during the period when the country was known as Zaire.
2013-2016 West Africa
In March 2014, the World Health Organization (WHO) reported a major Ebola outbreak in Guinea, a West African nation.
Researchers traced the outbreak to a one-year-old child who died December 2013.
The disease rapidly spread to the neighboring countries of Liberia and Sierra Leone.
It was the largest Ebola outbreak ever documented, and the first recorded in the region.
By mid-August 2014, Doctors Without Borders reported the situation in Liberia's capital, Monrovia, was "catastrophic" and "deteriorating daily".
They reported that fears of Ebola among staff members and patients had shut down much of the city's health system, leaving many people without medical treatment for other conditions.
In a 26 September statement, WHO said, "The Ebola epidemic ravaging parts of West Africa is the most severe acute public health emergency seen in modern times.
Never before in recorded history has a biosafety level four pathogen infected so many people so quickly, over such a broad geographical area, for so long."
Intense contact tracing and strict isolation largely prevented further spread of the disease in the countries that had imported cases. , suspected cases and deaths were reported; however, the WHO said that these numbers may be underestimated.
Because they work closely with the body fluids of infected patients, healthcare workers were especially vulnerable to infection ; in August 2014, the WHO reported that 10% of the dead were healthcare workers.
In September 2014, it was estimated that the countries' capacity for treating Ebola patients was insufficient by the equivalent of 2,122 beds; by December there were a sufficient number of beds to treat and isolate all reported Ebola cases, although the uneven distribution of cases was causing serious shortfalls in some areas.
On 28 January 2015, the WHO reported that for the first time since the week ending 29 June 2014, there had been fewer than 100 new confirmed cases reported in a week in the three most-affected countries.
The response to the epidemic then moved to a second phase, as the focus shifted from slowing transmission to ending the epidemic.
On 8 April 2015, the WHO reported only 30 confirmed cases, the lowest weekly total since the third week of May 2014.
On 29 December 2015, 42 days after the last person tested negative for a second time, Guinea was declared free of Ebola transmission.
At that time, a 90-day period of heightened surveillance was announced by that agency.
"This is the first time that all three countries - Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone - have stopped the original chains of transmission ...", the organization stated in a news release.
A new case was detected in Sierra Leone on 14 January 2016.
However, the outbreak was declared no longer an emergency on 29 March 2016.
In early October, Teresa Romero, a 44-year-old Spanish nurse, contracted Ebola after caring for a priest who had been repatriated from West Africa.
This was the first transmission of the virus to occur outside Africa.
Romero tested negative for the disease on 20 October, suggesting that she may have recovered from Ebola infection.
On 12 October, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) confirmed that a nurse in Texas, Nina Pham, who had treated Duncan tested positive for the Ebola virus, the first known case of transmission in the United States.
On 15 October, a second Texas health-care worker who had treated Duncan was confirmed to have the virus.
Both of these people recovered.
An unrelated case involved a doctor in New York City, who returned to the United States from Guinea after working with Doctors Without Borders and tested positive for Ebola on 23 October.
The person recovered and was discharged from Bellevue Hospital Center on 11 November.
On 29 December 2014, Pauline Cafferkey, a British nurse who had just returned to Glasgow from Sierra Leone, was diagnosed with Ebola at Glasgow's Gartnavel General Hospital.
After initial treatment in Glasgow, she was transferred by air to RAF Northolt, then to the specialist high-level isolation unit at the Royal Free Hospital in London for longer-term treatment.
2017 Democratic Republic of the Congo
On 11 May 2017, the DRC Ministry of Public Health notified the WHO about an outbreak of Ebola.
Four people died, and four people survived; five of these eight cases were laboratory-confirmed.
A total of 583 contacts were monitored.
On 2 July 2017, the WHO declared the end of the outbreak.
2018 Équateur province
On 14 May 2018, the World Health Organization reported that "the Democratic Republic of Congo reported 39 suspected, probable or confirmed cases of Ebola between 4 April and 13 May, including 19 deaths."
Some 393 people identified as contacts of Ebola patients were being followed up.
The outbreak centered on the Bikoro, Iboko, and Wangata areas in Equateur province, On 13 May 2018, WHO Director-General Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus visited Bikoro.
Reports emerged that maps of the area were inaccurate, not so much hampering medical providers as epidemiologists and officials trying to assess the outbreak and containment efforts.
The 2018 outbreak in the DRC was declared over on 24 July 2018.
By November 2018, nearly 200 Congolese had died of Ebola, about half of them from the city of Beni, where armed groups are fighting over the region's mineral wealth, impeding medical relief efforts.
By March 2019, this became the second largest Ebola outbreak ever recorded, with more than 1,000 cases and insecurity continuing to being the major resistance to providing an adequate response.
As of 4 June 2019, WHO reported 2025 confirmed and probable cases with 1357 deaths.
In June 2019, two people died of Ebola in neighbouring Uganda.
In July 2019, an infected man travelled to Goma, home to more than 2 million people.
One week later, on 17 July 2019, the WHO declared the Ebola outbreak a global health emergency, the fifth time such a declaration has been made by the organization.
A government spokesman said that half of the Ebola cases are unidentified, and he added that the current outbreak could last up to three years.
Society and culture
Weaponization
Ebolavirus is classified as a biosafety level 4 agent, as well as a Category A bioterrorism agent by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
It has the potential to be weaponized for use in biological warfare, and was investigated by Biopreparat for such use, but might be difficult to prepare as a weapon of mass destruction because the virus becomes ineffective quickly in open air.
Fake emails pretending to be Ebola information from the WHO or the Mexican Government have, in 2014, been misused to spread computer malware.
The BBC reported in 2015, that, "North Korean state media has suggested the disease was created by the U.S. military as a biological weapon."
Literature
Richard Preston's 1995 best-selling book, The Hot Zone, dramatized the Ebola outbreak in Reston, Virginia.
William Close's 1995 Ebola: A Documentary Novel of Its First Explosion and 2002 Ebola: Through the Eyes of the People focused on individuals' reactions to the 1976 Ebola outbreak in Zaire.
Tom Clancy's 1996 novel, Executive Orders, involves a Middle Eastern terrorist attack on the United States using an airborne form of a deadly Ebola virus strain named "Ebola Mayinga" (see Mayinga N'Seka).
As the Ebola virus epidemic in West Africa developed in 2014, a number of popular self-published and well-reviewed books containing sensational and misleading information about the disease appeared in electronic and printed formats.
The authors of some such books admitted that they lacked medical credentials and were not technically qualified to give medical advice.
The World Health Organization and the United Nations stated that such misinformation had contributed to the spread of the disease.
Other animals
Wild animals
Ebola has a high mortality rate among primates.
Frequent outbreaks of Ebola may have resulted in the deaths of 5,000 gorillas.
Outbreaks of Ebola may have been responsible for an 88% decline in tracking indices of observed chimpanzee populations in the 420 km2 Lossi Sanctuary between 2002 and 2003.
Recovered gorilla carcasses have contained multiple Ebola virus strains, suggesting multiple introductions of the virus.
Bodies decompose quickly and carcasses are not infectious after 3 to 4 days.
Contact between gorilla groups is rare, suggesting that transmission among gorilla groups is unlikely, and that outbreaks result from transmission between viral reservoirs and animal populations.
Domestic animals
In 2012, it was demonstrated that the virus can travel without contact from pigs to nonhuman primates, although the same study failed to achieve transmission in that manner between primates.
Dogs may become infected with EBOV but not develop symptoms.
Dogs in some parts of Africa scavenge for food, and they sometimes eat EBOV-infected animals and also the corpses of humans.
A 2005 survey of dogs during an EBOV outbreak found that although they remain asymptomatic, about 32 percent of dogs closest to an outbreak showed a seroprevalence for EBOV versus 9 percent of those farther away.
The authors concluded that there were "potential implications for preventing and controlling human outbreaks."
Reston virus
In late 1989, Hazelton Research Products' Reston Quarantine Unit in Reston, Virginia, suffered an outbreak of fatal illness amongst certain lab monkeys.
This lab outbreak was initially diagnosed as simian hemorrhagic fever virus (SHFV) and occurred amongst a shipment of crab-eating macaque monkeys imported from the Philippines.
Hazelton's veterinary pathologist sent tissue samples from dead animals to the United States Army Medical Research Institute of Infectious Diseases (USAMRIID) at Fort Detrick, Maryland, where an ELISA test indicated the antibodies present in the tissue were a response to Ebola virus and not SHFV.
An electron microscopist from USAMRIID discovered filoviruses similar in appearance to Ebola in the tissue samples sent from Hazelton Research Products' Reston Quarantine Unit.
A US Army team headquartered at USAMRIID euthanized the surviving monkeys, and brought all the monkeys to Ft. Detrick for study by the Army's veterinary pathologists and virologists, and eventual disposal under safe conditions.
Of those, six animal handlers eventually seroconverted, including one who had cut himself with a bloody scalpel.
Despite its status as a Level-4 organism and its apparent pathogenicity in monkeys, when the handlers did not become ill, the CDC concluded that the virus had a very low pathogenicity to humans.
The Philippines and the United States had no previous cases of Ebola infection, and upon further isolation, researchers concluded it was another strain of Ebola, or a new filovirus of Asian origin, which they named Reston ebolavirus (RESTV) after the location of the incident.
where the virus had infected pigs.
According to the WHO, routine cleaning and disinfection of pig (or monkey) farms with sodium hypochlorite or detergents should be effective in inactivating the Reston ebolavirus.
Pigs that have been infected with RESTV tend to show symptoms of the disease.
Research
Treatments
, no medication has been proven safe and effective for treating Ebola.
By the time the Ebola virus epidemic in West Africa began in 2013, there were at least nine different candidate treatments.
Several trials were conducted in late 2014, and early 2015, but some were abandoned due to lack of efficacy or lack of people to study.
, two experimental treatments known as REGN-EB3 and mAb-114 were found to be 90% effective.
Diagnostic tests
The diagnostic tests currently available require specialized equipment and highly trained personnel.
Since there are few suitable testing centers in West Africa, this leads to delay in diagnosis.
On 29 November 2014, a new 15-minute Ebola test was reported that if successful, "not only gives patients a better chance of survival, but it prevents transmission of the virus to other people."
The new equipment, about the size of a laptop and solar-powered, allows testing to be done in remote areas.
On 29 December 2014, the FDA approved the LightMix Ebola Zaire rRT-PCR test for patients with symptoms of Ebola.
The article uses public domain text from the CDC as cited.
Bibliography
