A city is a large human settlement.
Cities generally have extensive systems for housing, transportation, sanitation, utilities, land use, and communication.
Their density facilitates interaction between people, government organisations and businesses, sometimes benefiting different parties in the process.
Historically, city-dwellers have been a small proportion of humanity overall, but following two centuries of unprecedented and rapid urbanisation, roughly half of the world population now lives in cities, which has had profound consequences for global sustainability.
Present-day cities usually form the core of larger metropolitan areas and urban areas-creating numerous commuters traveling towards city centres for employment, entertainment, and edification.
However, in a world of intensifying globalisation, all cities are in different degree also connected globally beyond these regions.
The most populated city proper is Chongqing while the most populous metropolitan areas are the Greater Tokyo Area, the Shanghai area, and Jakarta metropolitan area.
The cities of Faiyum, Damascus, and Varanasi are among those laying claim to the longest continual inhabitation.
Meaning
A city is distinguished from other human settlements by its relatively great size, but also by its functions and its special symbolic status, which may be conferred by a central authority.
The term can also refer either to the physical streets and buildings of the city or to the collection of people who dwell there, and can be used in a general sense to mean urban rather than rural territory.
National censuses use a variety of definitions - invoking factors such as population, population density, number of dwellings, economic function, and infrastructure - to classify populations as urban.
Typical working definitions for small-city populations start at around 100,000 people.
Common population definitions for an urban area (city or town) range between 1,500 and 50,000 people, with most U.S states using a minimum between 1,500 and 5,000 inhabitants.
In the United Kingdom, city status is awarded by the Crown and then remains permanently.
According to the "functional definition" a city is not distinguished by size alone, but also by the role it plays within a larger political context.
Cities serve as administrative, commercial, religious, and cultural hubs for their larger surrounding areas.
Examples of settlements called "city" which may not meet any of the traditional criteria to be named such include Broad Top City, Pennsylvania (population 452), and City Dulas, Anglesey, a hamlet.
The presence of a literate elite is sometimes included in the definition.
A typical city has professional administrators, regulations, and some form of taxation (food and other necessities or means to trade for them) to support the government workers.
The governments may be based on heredity, religion, military power, work systems such as canal-building, food-distribution, land-ownership, agriculture, commerce, manufacturing, finance, or a combination of these.
Societies that live in cities are often called civilizations.
Etymology
The word "city" and the related "civilization" come, via Old French, from the Latin root .
Geography
Urban geography deals both with cities in their larger context and with their internal structure.
Site
Town siting has varied through history according to natural, technological, economic, and military contexts.
Access to water has long been a major factor in city placement and growth, and despite exceptions enabled by the advent of rail transport in the nineteenth century, through the present most of the world's urban population lives near the coast or on a river.
Urban areas as a rule cannot produce their own food and therefore must develop some relationship with a hinterland which sustains them.
Only in special cases such as mining towns which play a vital role in long-distance trade, are cities disconnected from the countryside which feeds them.
Thus, centrality within a productive region influences siting, as economic forces would in theory favor the creation of market places in optimal mutually reachable locations.
These spaces historically reflect and amplify the city's centrality and importance to its wider sphere of influence.
Today cities have a city center or downtown, sometimes coincident with a central business district.
Public space
Cities typically have public spaces where anyone can go.
These include privately owned spaces open to the public as well as forms of public land such as public domain and the commons.
Western philosophy since the time of the Greek agora has considered physical public space as the substrate of the symbolic public sphere.
Public art adorns (or disfigures) public spaces.
Parks and other natural sites within cities provide residents with relief from the hardness and regularity of typical built environments.
Internal structure
Urban structure generally follows one or more basic patterns: geomorphic, radial, concentric, rectilinear, and curvilinear.
Physical environment generally constrains the form in which a city is built.
If located on a mountainside, urban structure may rely on terraces and winding roads.
It may be adapted to its means of subsistence (e.g. agriculture or fishing).
And it may be set up for optimal defense given the surrounding landscape.
Beyond these "geomorphic" features, cities can develop internal patterns, due to natural growth or to city planning.
In a radial structure, main roads converge on a central point.
This form could evolve from successive growth over a long time, with concentric traces of town walls and citadels marking older city boundaries.
In more recent history, such forms were supplemented by ring roads moving traffic around the outskirts of a town.
Dutch cities such as Amsterdam and Haarlem are structured as a central square surrounded by concentric canals marking every expansion.
In cities such as and also Moscow, this pattern is still clearly visible.
A system of rectilinear city streets and land plots, known as the grid plan, has been used for millennia in Asia, Europe, and the Americas.
The Indus Valley Civilisation built Mohenjo-Daro, Harappa and other cities on a grid pattern, using ancient principles described by Kautilya, and aligned with the compass points.
The ancient Greek city of Priene exemplifies a grid plan with specialized districts used across the Hellenistic Mediterranean.
Urban areas
Urban-type settlement extends far beyond the traditional boundaries of the city proper in a form of development sometimes described critically as urban sprawl.
Decentralization and dispersal of city functions (commercial, industrial, residential, cultural, political) has transformed the very meaning of the term and has challenged geographers seeking to classify territories according to an urban-rural binary.
History
Cities, characterized by population density, symbolic function, and urban planning, have existed for thousands of years.
In the conventional view, civilization and the city both followed from the development of agriculture, which enabled production of surplus food, and thus a social division of labour (with concomitant social stratification) and trade.
Early cities often featured granaries, sometimes within a temple.
A minority viewpoint considers that cities may have arisen without agriculture, due to alternative means of subsistence (fishing), to use as communal seasonal shelters, to their value as bases for defensive and offensive military organization, or to their inherent economic function.
Cities played a crucial role in the establishment of political power over an area, and ancient leaders such as Alexander the Great founded and created them with zeal.
Ancient times
Jericho and Çatalhöyük, dated to the eighth millennium BC, are among the earliest proto-cities known to archaeologists.
In the fourth and third millennium BC, complex civilizations flourished in the river valleys of Mesopotamia, India, China, and Egypt.
Excavations in these areas have found the ruins of cities geared variously towards trade, politics, or religion.
Some had large, dense populations, but others carried out urban activities in the realms of politics or religion without having large associated populations.
Among the early Old World cities, Mohenjo-daro of the Indus Valley Civilization in present-day Pakistan, existing from about 2600 BC, was one of the largest, with a population of 50,000 or more and a sophisticated sanitation system.
China's planned cities were constructed according to sacred principles to act as celestial microcosms.
The Ancient Egyptian cities known physically by archaeologists are not extensive.
In Mesopotamia, the civilization of Sumer, followed by Assyria and Babylon, gave rise to numerous cities, governed by kings and fostering multiple languages written in cuneiform.
The Phoenician trading empire, flourishing around the turn of the first millennium BC, encompassed numerous cities extending from Tyre, Cydon, and Byblos to Carthage and Cádiz.
In the following centuries, independent city-states of Greece developed the polis, an association of male landowning citizens who collectively constituted the city.
The agora, meaning "gathering place" or "assembly", was the center of athletic, artistic, spiritual and political life of the polis.
Rome's rise to power brought its population to one million.
Under the authority of its empire, Rome transformed and founded many cities (coloniae), and with them brought its principles of urban architecture, design, and society.
In the ancient Americas, early urban traditions developed in the Andes and Mesoamerica.
In the Andes, the first urban centers developed in the Norte Chico civilization, Chavin and Moche cultures, followed by major cities in the Huari, Chimu and Inca cultures.
The Norte Chico civilization included as many as 30 major population centers in what is now the Norte Chico region of north-central coastal Peru.
It is the oldest known civilization in the Americas, flourishing between the 30th century BC and the 18th century BC.
Mesoamerica saw the rise of early urbanism in several cultural regions, beginning with the Olmec and spreading to the Preclassic Maya, the Zapotec of Oaxaca, and Teotihuacan in central Mexico.
Later cultures such as the Aztec drew on these earlier urban traditions.
Jenné-Jeno, located in present-day Mali and dating to the third century BC, lacked monumental architecture and a distinctive elite social class-but nevertheless had specialized production and relations with a hinterland.
Pre-Arabic trade contacts probably existed between Jenné-Jeno and North Africa.
Other early urban centers in sub-Saharan Africa, dated to around 500 AD, include Awdaghust, Kumbi-Saleh the ancient capital of Ghana, and Maranda a center located on a trade route between Egypt and Gao.
In the first millennium AD, Angkor in the Khmer Empire grew into one of the most extensive cities in the world and may have supported up to one million people.
Middle Ages
In the remnants of the Roman Empire, cities of late antiquity gained independence but soon lost population and importance.
The locus of power in the West shifted to Constantinople and to the ascendant Islamic civilization with its major cities Baghdad, Cairo, and Córdoba.
From the 9th through the end of the 12th century, Constantinople, capital of the Eastern Roman Empire, was the largest and wealthiest city in Europe, with a population approaching 1 million.
The Ottoman Empire gradually gained control over many cities in the Mediterranean area, including Constantinople in 1453.
In the Holy Roman Empire, beginning in the 12th. century, free imperial cities such as Nuremberg, Strasbourg, Frankfurt, Zurich, Nijmegen became a privileged elite among towns having won self-governance from their local lay or secular lord or having been granted self-governanace by the emperor and being placed under his immediate protection.
By 1480, these cities, as far as still part of the empire, became part of the Imperial Estates governing the empire with the emperor through the Imperial Diet.
By the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries, some cities become powerful states, taking surrounding areas under their control or establishing extensive maritime empires.
In Italy medieval communes developed into city-states including the Republic of Venice and the Republic of Genoa.
In Northern Europe, cities including Lübeck and Bruges formed the Hanseatic League for collective defense and commerce.
Their power was later challenged and eclipsed by the Dutch commercial cities of Ghent, Ypres, and Amsterdam.
Similar phenomena existed elsewhere, as in the case of Sakai, which enjoyed a considerable autonomy in late medieval Japan.
Early modern
In the West, nation-states became the dominant unit of political organization following the Peace of Westphalia in the seventeenth century.
Post-industrial age
In the second half of the twentieth century, deindustrialization (or "economic restructuring") in the West led to poverty, homelessness, and urban decay in formerly prosperous cities.
America's "Steel Belt" became a "Rust Belt" and cities such as Detroit, Michigan, and Gary, Indiana began to shrink, contrary to the global trend of massive urban expansion.
Such cities have shifted with varying success into the service economy and public-private partnerships, with concomitant gentrification, uneven revitalization efforts, and selective cultural development.
Under the Great Leap Forward and subsequent five-year plans continuing today, the People's Republic of China has undergone concomitant urbanization and industrialization and to become the world's leading manufacturer.
Amidst these economic changes, high technology and instantaneous telecommunication enable select cities to become centers of the knowledge economy.
A new smart city paradigm, supported by institutions such as the RAND Corporation and IBM, is bringing computerized surveillance, data analysis, and governance to bear on cities and city-dwellers.
Some companies are building brand new masterplanned cities from scratch on greenfield sites.
Urbanization
Urbanization is the process of migration from rural into urban areas, driven by various political, economic, and cultural factors.
Until the 18th century, an equilibrium existed between the rural agricultural population and towns featuring markets and small-scale manufacturing.
With the agricultural and industrial revolutions urban population began its unprecedented growth, both through migration and through demographic expansion.
In England the proportion of the population living in cities jumped from 17% in 1801 to 72% in 1891.
In 1900, 15% of the world population lived in cities.
The cultural appeal of cities also plays a role in attracting residents.
"-but the difference continues to shrink because urbanization is happening faster in the latter group.
Asia is home to by far the greatest absolute number of city-dwellers: over two billion and counting.
Megacities, cities with population in the multi-millions, have proliferated into the dozens, arising especially in Asia, Africa, and Latin America.
Economic globalization fuels the growth of these cities, as new torrents of foreign capital arrange for rapid industrialization, as well as relocation of major businesses from Europe and North America, attracting immigrants from near and far.
A deep gulf divides rich and poor in these cities, with usually contain a super-wealthy elite living in gated communities and large masses of people living in substandard housing with inadequate infrastructure and otherwise poor conditions.
Cities around the world have expanded physically as they grow in population, with increases in their surface extent, with the creation of high-rise buildings for residential and commercial use, and with development underground.
Urbanization can create rapid demand for water resources management, as formerly good sources of freshwater become overused and polluted, and the volume of sewage begins to exceed manageable levels.
municipio in Spain and in Portugal, and, along with municipalidad, in most former parts of the Spanish and Portuguese empires) and the commune (in France and in Chile; or comune in Italy).
The chief official of the city has the title of mayor.
Whatever their true degree of political authority, the mayor typically acts as the figurehead or personification of their city.
City governments have authority to make laws governing activity within cities, while its jurisdiction is generally considered subordinate (in ascending order) to state/provincial, national, and perhaps international law.
This hierarchy of law is not enforced rigidly in practice-for example in conflicts between municipal regulations and national principles such as constitutional rights and property rights.
Legal conflicts and issues arise more frequently in cities than elsewhere due to the bare fact of their greater density.
Modern city governments thoroughly regulate everyday life in many dimensions, including public and personal health, transport, burial, resource use and extraction, recreation, and the nature and use of buildings.
Technologies, techniques, and laws governing these areas-developed in cities-have become ubiquitous in many areas.
Municipal officials may be appointed from a higher level of government or elected locally.
Municipal services
Cities typically provide municipal services such as education, through school systems; policing, through police departments; and firefighting, through fire departments; as well as the city's basic infrastructure.
These are provided more or less routinely, in a more or less equal fashion.
Responsibility for administration usually falls on the city government, though some services may be operated by a higher level of government, while others may be privately run.
Armies may assume responsibility for policing cities in states of domestic turmoil such as America's King assassination riots of 1968.
Finance
The traditional basis for municipal finance is local property tax levied on real estate within the city.
Local government can also collect revenue for services, or by leasing land that it owns.
City governments have also begun to use tax increment financing, in which a development project is financed by loans based on future tax revenues which it is expected to yield.
Under these circumstances, creditors and consequently city governments place a high importance on city credit ratings.
Governance
Governance includes government but refers to a wider domain of social control functions implemented by many actors including nongovernmental organizations.
The impact of globalization and the role of multinational corporations in local governments worldwide, has led to a shift in perspective on urban governance, away from the "urban regime theory" in which a coalition of local interests functionally govern, toward a theory of outside economic control, widely associated in academics with the philosophy of neoliberalism.
In the neoliberal model of governance, public utilities are privatized, industry is deregulated, and corporations gain the status of governing actors-as indicated by the power they wield in public-private partnerships and over business improvement districts, and in the expectation of self-regulation through corporate social responsibility.
The biggest investors and real estate developers act as the city's de facto urban planners.
The related concept of good governance places more emphasis on the state, with the purpose of assessing urban governments for their suitability for development assistance.
The concepts of governance and good governance are especially invoked in the emergent megacities, where international organizations consider existing governments inadequate for their large populations.
Urban planning
Urban planning, the application of forethought to city design, involves optimizing land use, transportation, utilities, and other basic systems, in order to achieve certain objectives.
Urban planners and scholars have proposed overlapping theories as ideals for how plans should be formed.
Planning tools, beyond the original design of the city itself, include public capital investment in infrastructure and land-use controls such as zoning.
The continuous process of comprehensive planning involves identifying general objectives as well as collecting data to evaluate progress and inform future decisions.
Planning often involves tradeoffs-decisions in which some stand to gain and some to lose-and thus is closely connected to the prevailing political situation.
The history of urban planning dates to some of the earliest known cities, especially in the Indus Valley and Mesoamerican civilizations, which built their cities on grids and apparently zoned different areas for different purposes.
The effects of planning, ubiquitous in today's world, can be seen most clearly in the layout of planned communities, fully designed prior to construction, often with consideration for interlocking physical, economic, and cultural systems.
Society
Social structure
Urban society is typically stratified.
Spatially, cities are formally or informally segregated along ethnic, economic and racial lines.
People living relatively close together may live, work, and play, in separate areas, and associate with different people, forming ethnic or lifestyle enclaves or, in areas of concentrated poverty, ghettoes.
While in the US and elsewhere poverty became associated with the inner city, in France it has become associated with the banlieues, areas of urban development which surround the city proper.
Meanwhile, across Europe and North America, the racially white majority is empirically the most segregated group.
Suburbs in the west, and, increasingly, gated communities and other forms of "privatopia" around the world, allow local elites to self-segregate into secure and exclusive neighborhoods.
Landless urban workers, contrasted with peasants and known as the proletariat, form a growing stratum of society in the age of urbanization.
In Marxist doctrine, the proletariat will inevitably revolt against the bourgeoisie as their ranks swell with disenfranchised and disaffected people lacking all stake in the status quo.
The global urban proletariat of today, however, generally lacks the status as factory workers which in the nineteenth century provided access to the means of production.
Economics
Historically, cities rely on rural areas for intensive farming to yield surplus crops, in exchange for which they provide money, political administration, manufactured goods, and culture.
As hubs of trade cities have long been home to retail commerce and consumption through the interface of shopping.
In the 20th century, department stores using new techniques of advertising, public relations, decoration, and design, transformed urban shopping areas into fantasy worlds encouraging self-expression and escape through consumerism.
In general, the density of cities expedites commerce and facilitates knowledge spillovers, helping people and firms exchange information and generate new ideas.
A thicker labor market allows for better skill matching between firms and individuals.
Population density enables also sharing of common infrastructure and production facilities, however in very dense cities, increased crowding and waiting times may lead to some negative effects.
Although manufacturing fueled the growth of cities, many now rely on a tertiary or service economy.
The services in question range from tourism, hospitality, entertainment, housekeeping and prostitution to grey-collar work in law, finance, and administration.
Culture and communications
Cities are typically hubs for education and the arts, supporting universities, museums, temples, and other cultural institutions.
Cultural elites tend to live in cities, bound together by shared cultural capital, and themselves playing some role in governance.
By virtue of their status as centers of culture and literacy, cities can be described as the locus of civilization, world history, and social change.
Density makes for effective mass communication and transmission of news, through heralds, printed proclamations, newspapers, and digital media.
These communication networks, though still using cities as hubs, penetrate extensively into all populated areas.
In the age of rapid communication and transportation, commentators have described urban culture as nearly ubiquitous or as no longer meaningful.
Today, a city's promotion of its cultural activities dovetails with place branding and city marketing, public diplomacy techniques used to inform development strategy; to attract businesses, investors, residents, and tourists; and to create a shared identity and sense of place within the metropolitan area.
Physical inscriptions, plaques, and monuments on display physically transmit a historical context for urban places.
Some cities, such as Jerusalem, Mecca, and Rome have indelible religious status and for hundreds of years have attracted pilgrims.
Patriotic tourists visit Agra to see the Taj Mahal, or New York City to visit the World Trade Center.
Elvis lovers visit Memphis to pay their respects at Graceland.
Place brands (which include place satisfaction and place loyalty) have great economic value (comparable to the value of commodity brands) because of their influence on the decision-making process of people thinking about doing business in-"purchasing" (the brand of)-a city.
Sports also play a major role in city branding and local identity formation.
Cities go to considerable lengths in competing to host the Olympic Games, which bring global attention and tourism.
Warfare
Cities play a crucial strategic role in warfare due to their economic, demographic, symbolic, and political centrality.
For the same reasons, they are targets in asymmetric warfare.
Many cities throughout history were founded under military auspices, a great many have incorporated fortifications, and military principles continue to influence urban design.
Indeed, war may have served as the social rationale and economic basis for the very earliest cities.
While occupying the Philippines, the US Army ordered local people concentrated into cities and towns, in order to isolate committed insurgents and battle freely against them in the countryside.
During World War II, national governments on occasion declared certain cities open, effectively surrendering them to an advancing enemy in order to avoid damage and bloodshed.
Urban warfare proved decisive, however, in the Battle of Stalingrad, where Soviet forces repulsed German occupiers, with extreme casualties and destruction.
In an era of low-intensity conflict and rapid urbanization, cities have become sites of long-term conflict waged both by foreign occupiers and by local governments against insurgency.
Such warfare, known as counterinsurgency, involves techniques of surveillance and psychological warfare as well as close combat, functionally extends modern urban crime prevention, which already uses concepts such as defensible space.
Although capture is the more common objective, warfare has in some cases spelt complete destruction for a city.
Mesopotamian tablets and ruins attest to such destruction, as does the Latin motto Carthago delenda est.
Since the atomic bombing of Hiroshima and Nagasaki and throughout the Cold War, nuclear strategists continued to contemplate the use of "countervalue" targeting: crippling an enemy by annihilating its valuable cities, rather than aiming primarily at its military forces.
Infrastructure
Urban infrastructure involves various physical networks and spaces necessary for transportation, water use, energy, recreation, and public functions.
Infrastructure carries a high initial cost in fixed capital (pipes, wires, plants, vehicles, etc.) but lower marginal costs and thus positive economies of scale.
Because of the higher barriers to entry, these networks have been classified as natural monopolies, meaning that economic logic favors control of each network by a single organization, public or private.
The particulars of a city's infrastructure systems have historical path dependence because new development must build from what exists already.
Urban infrastructure ideally serves all residents equally but in practice may prove uneven-with, in some cities, clear first-class and second-class alternatives.
Sanitation, necessary for good health in crowded conditions, requires water supply and waste management as well as individual hygiene.
Urban water systems include principally a water supply network and a network for wastewater including sewage and stormwater.
Historically, either local governments or private companies have administered urban water supply, with a tendency toward government water supply in the 20th century and a tendency toward private operation at the turn of the twenty-first.
Notes
Bibliography
* Abrahamson, Mark (2004).
Global Cities.
Oxford University Press.
* Ashworth, G.J. War and the City.
London & New York: Routledge, 1991. .
* Bridge, Gary, and Sophie Watson, eds. (2000).
A Companion to the City.
Malden, MA: Blackwell, 2000/2003.
* Brighenti, Andrea Mubi, ed. (2013).
Urban Interstices: The Aesthetics and the Politics of the In-between.
Farnham: Ashgate Publishing. .
* Carter, Harold (1995).
The Study of Urban Geography.
Fourth edition.
London:
Arnold.
* Curtis, Simon (2016).
Global Cities and Global Order.
Oxford University Press.
* Ellul, Jacques (1970).
The Meaning of the City.
Translated by Dennis Pardee.
Grand Rapids, Michigan: Eerdmans, 1970. ; French original (written earlier, published later as): ; Paris: Gallimard, 1975.
Republished 2003 with
* Gupta, Joyetta, Karin Pfeffer, Hebe Verrest, & Mirjam Ros-Tonen, eds. (2015).
Geographies of Urban Governance: Advanced Theories, Methods and Practices.
Springer, 2015. .
* Hahn, Harlan, & Charles Levine (1980).
Urban Politics: Past, Present, & Future.
New York & London: Longman.
* Hanson, Royce (ed.).
https:/ read chapter/1 Perspectives on Urban Infrastructure.
Committee on National Urban Policy, Commission on Behavioral and Social Sciences and Education, National Research Council.
Washington: National Academy Press, 1984.
* Herrschel, Tassilo & Peter Newman (2017).
Cities as International Actors: Urban and Regional Governance Beyond the Nation State.
Palgrave Macmillan (Springer Nature).
* Grava, Sigurd (2003).
Urban Transportation Systems: Choices for Communities.
McGraw Hill, e-book.
* Kaplan, David H.; James O. Wheeler; Steven R. Holloway; & Thomas W. Hodler, cartographer (2004).
Urban Geography.
John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
* Kavaratzis, Mihalis, Gary Warnaby, & Gregory J. Ashworth, eds. (2015).
Rethinking Place Branding: Comprehensive Brand Development for Cities and Regions.
Springer. .
* Kraas, Frauke, Surinder Aggarwal, Martin Coy, & Günter Mertins, eds. (2014).
Megacities: Our Global Urban Future.
United Nations "International Year of Planet Earth" book series.
Springer. .
* Latham, Alan, Derek McCormack, Kim McNamara, & Donald McNeil (2009).
Key Concepts in Urban Geography.
London: SAGE. .
* Leach, William (1993).
Land of Desire: Merchants, Power, and the Rise of a New American Culture.
New York: Vintage Books (Random House), 1994. .
* Levy, John M. (2017).
Contemporary Urban Planning.
11th Edition.
New York: Routledge (Taylor & Francis).
* Magnusson, Warren.
Politics of Urbanism: Seeing like a city.
London & New York: Routledge, 2011. .
* Marshall, John U. (1989).
The Structure of Urban Systems.
University of Toronto Press. .
* Marzluff, John M., Eric Schulenberger, Wilfried Endlicher, Marina Alberti, Gordon Bradley, Clre Ryan, Craig ZumBrunne, & Ute Simon (2008).
Urban Ecology: An International Perspective on the Interaction Between Humans and Nature.
New York: Springer Science+Business Media. .
* McQuillan, Eugene (1937/1987).
The Law of Municipal Corporations: Third Edition.
1987 revised volume by Charles R.P. Keating, Esq. Wilmette, Illinois: Callaghan & Company.
* Moholy-Nagy, Sibyl (1968).
Matrix of Man: An Illustrated History of Urban Environment.
New York: Frederick A Praeger.
* Mumford, Lewis (1961).
The City in History: Its Origins, Its Transformations, and Its Prospects.
New York: Harcourt, Brace & World.
* Paddison, Ronan, ed. (2001).
Handbook of Urban Studies.
London; Thousand Oaks, California; and New Delhi: SAGE Publications. .
* Rybczynski, W., City Life: Urban Expectations in a New World, (1995)
* Smith, Michael E. (2002) http:/ ~mesmith9 MES-02-EarlyCities.pdf The Earliest Cities.
In Urban Life: Readings in Urban Anthropology, edited by George Gmelch and Walter Zenner, pp. 3-19.
4th ed.
Waveland Press, Prospect Heights, IL.
* Southall, Aidan (1998).
The City in Time and Space.
Cambridge University Press.
* Wellman, Kath & Marcus Spiller, eds.
(2012).
Urban Infrastructure: Finance and Management.
Chichester, UK: Wiley-Blackwell. .
Further reading
* Berger, Alan S., https:/ books?id=INcgTPo-U1cC The City: Urban Communities and Their Problems, Dubuque, Iowa : William C. Brown, 1978.
* Chandler, T. Four Thousand Years of Urban Growth: An Historical Census.
Lewiston, NY: Edwin Mellen Press, 1987.
* Kemp, Roger L. Managing America's Cities: A Handbook for Local Government Productivity, McFarland and Company, Inc., Publisher, Jefferson, North Carolina and London, 2007.
().
* Kemp, Roger L.
How American Governments Work: A Handbook of City, County, Regional, State, and Federal Operations, McFarland and Company, Inc., Publisher, Jefferson, North Carolina and London.
().
* Kemp, Roger L. "City and Gown Relations: A Handbook of Best Practices," McFarland and Company, Inc., Publisher, Jefferson, North Carolina, US, and London, (2013).
().
* Monti, Daniel J., Jr., The American City: A Social and Cultural History.
Oxford, England and Malden, Massachusetts: Blackwell Publishers, 1999. 391 pp. .
* Robson, W.A., and Regan, D.E., ed., Great Cities of the World, (3d ed., 2 vol., 1972)
Smethurst, Paul (2015).
The Bicycle - Towards a Global History.
Palgrave Macmillan. .
* Thernstrom, S., and Sennett, R., ed., Nineteenth-Century Cities (1969)
* Toynbee, Arnold J. (ed), Cities of Destiny, New York: McGraw-Hill, 1967.
Pan historical/geographical essays, many images.
Starts with "Athens", ends with "The Coming World City-Ecumenopolis".
