John Boyne (born 30 April 1971) is an Irish novelist.
He is the author of eleven novels for adults and six novels for younger readers.
His novels are published in over 50 languages.
His 2006 novel The Boy in the Striped Pyjamas was adapted into a 2008 film of the same name.
Biography
Boyne was born in Dublin, where he still lives.
His first short story was published by the Sunday Tribune and in 1993 was shortlisted for a Hennessy Literary Award.
A graduate of Trinity College, Dublin (BA) and the University of East Anglia (MA), in 2015 he was awarded an Honorary Doctorate of Letters from the University of East Anglia.
He chaired the jury for the 2015 Scotiabank Giller Prize.
Boyne is gay, and has spoken about the difficulties he encountered growing up gay in Catholic Ireland.
Bibliography
Novels
*2001:
The Congress of Rough Riders (Weidenfeld & Nicolson)
Novels for younger readers
*2006:
The Boy in the Striped Pyjamas (David Fickling Books)
*2010: Noah Barleywater Runs Away (David Fickling Books)
*2012: The Terrible Thing That Happened To Barnaby Brocket (Doubleday Children's)
*2013: Stay Where You Are And Then Leave (Doubleday Children's)
*2015:
The Boy at the Top of the Mountain (Doubleday Children's)
Short story collections
Film
A Heyday/Miramax film adaptation of The Boy in the Striped Pyjamas was shot in Budapest in mid-2007 and released in late 2008.
Directed by Mark Herman, the film stars Asa Butterfield, David Thewlis, Vera Farmiga, Rupert Friend and Sheila Hancock.
Awards
* The Boy in the Striped Pyjamas: winner: Irish Book Awards Children's Book of the Year; Irish Book Awards Radio 1 Book of the Year; Qué Leer Award Best International Novel of the Year (Spain); Orange Prize Readers Group:
Book of the Year; Children's Books Ireland Book of the Year.
Shortlist: Irish Book Award Novel of the Year; British Book Award; the Border's New Voices Award; the Ottar's Children's Book Prize; the Paolo Ungari Literary Award (Italy); Deutscher Jugendliteraturpreis (Germany).
Longlist: The Carnegie Medal; the International IMPAC Literary Award
* Noah Barleywater Runs Away: shortlisted for Irish Book Awards Children's Book of the Year; Sheffield Children's Book Award, Hull Children's Book Award; Longlist: The Carnegie Medal
The Terrible Thing That Happened to Barnaby Brocket: shortlisted for Irish Book Awards: Children's Book of the Year; Longlist: The Carnegie Medal
The Absolutist: Longlist: International IMPAC Dublin Literary Award
* Stay Where You Are And Then Leave: shortlisted for Irish Book Awards Children's Book of the Year; Deutscher Jugendliteraturpreis (Germany)
A History of Loneliness: shortlisted for Irish Book Awards Novel of the Year
* The Boy At The Top Of The Mountain: shortlisted for Irish Book Awards Children's Book of the Year; Children's Books Ireland Book of the Year
The Heart's Invisible Furies: shortlisted for Irish Book Awards Novel of the Year
*"The Hearts Invisible Furies": 2017 Book of the Year for Book of the Month
Other Awards:
* 2014:
Winner: Irish Book Awards: Short Story of the Year ('Rest Day')
* 2015: Shortlist: Irish Book Awards: Short Story of the Year ('Boy, 19')
Controversy
His 2019 book My Brother's Name is Jessica, about a trans girl, was criticised over its portrayal of transgender topics, for misgendering people and cis privilege, such as how he rejects the term "cis", and wants to debate transgender rights.
He deleted his Twitter account, claiming social media harassment.
Some Irish authors have supported him.
