Lymphoma is a group of blood cancers that develop from lymphocytes (a type of white blood cell).
Signs and symptoms may include enlarged lymph nodes, fever, drenching sweats, unintended weight loss, itching, and constantly feeling tired.
There are many subtypes of lymphomas.
The two main categories of lymphomas are Hodgkin's lymphomas (HL) and the non-Hodgkin lymphomas (NHL).
The World Health Organization (WHO) includes two other categories as types of lymphoma: multiple myeloma and immunoproliferative diseases.
Lymphomas and leukemias are a part of the broader group of tumors of the hematopoietic and lymphoid tissues.
Risk factors for Hodgkin lymphoma include infection with Epstein-Barr virus and a history of the disease in the family.
Eating large amounts of red meat and tobacco smoking may also increase the risk.
Diagnosis, if enlarged lymph nodes are present, is usually by lymph node biopsy.
while that for non-Hodgkin lymphomas is 69%.
Worldwide, lymphomas developed in 566,000 people in 2012 and caused 305,000 deaths.
They make up 3-4% of all cancers, making them as a group the seventh-most common form.
In children, they are the third-most common cancer.
They occur more often in the developed world than the developing world.
**Fatigue
This examination reveals histopathological features that may indicate lymphoma.
After lymphoma is diagnosed, a variety of tests may be carried out to look for specific features characteristic of different types of lymphoma.
These include:
Classification
Lymphomas in the strict sense are any neoplasms of the lymphatic tissues ().
Several classification systems have existed for lymphoma, which use histological and other findings to divide lymphoma into different categories.
The classification of a lymphoma can affect treatment and prognosis.
Classification systems generally classify lymphoma according to:
* Whether the cell that is replicating is a T cell or B cell
Lymphoma can also spread to the central nervous system, often around the brain in the meninges, known as lymphomatous meningitis (LM).
Hodgkin lymphoma
Hodgkin lymphoma accounts for about 15% of lymphomas.
It differs from other forms of lymphoma in its prognosis and several pathological characteristics.
A division into Hodgkin and non-Hodgkin lymphomas is used in several of the older classification systems.
A Hodgkin lymphoma is marked by the presence of a type of cell called the Reed-Sternberg cell.
Non-Hodgkin lymphomas
Non-Hodgkin lymphomas, which are defined as being all lymphomas except Hodgkin lymphoma, are more common than Hodgkin lymphoma.
A wide variety of lymphomas are in this class, and the causes, the types of cells involved, and the prognosis vary by type.
The incidence of non-Hodgkin lymphoma increases with age.
It is further divided into several subtypes.
Epstein-Barr virus-associated lymphoproliferative diseases
Epstein-Barr virus-associated lymphoproliferative diseases are a group of benign, pre-malignant, and malignant diseases of lymphoid cells, i.e. B cells, T cells, NK cells, and histiocytic-dendritic cells in which one or more of these cell types is infected with the Epstein-Barr virus (EBV).
The virus may be responsible for the development and/or progression of these diseases.
In addition to EBV-positive Hodgkin lymphomas, the World Health Organization (2016) includes the following lymphomas, when associated with EBV infection, in this group of diseases: Burkitt lymphoma; large B cell lymphoma, not otherwise specified; diffuse large B cell lymphoma associated with chronic inflammation; fibrin-associated diffuse large cell lymphoma; primary effusion lymphoma; plasmablastic lymphoma; extranodal NK/T cell lymphoma, nasal type; peripheral T cell lymphoma, not otherwise specified; angioimmunoblastic T cell lymphoma; follicular T cell lymphoma; and systemic T cell lymphoma of childhood.
WHO classification
The WHO classification, published in 2001 and updated in 2008,
Lymphoma subtypes (WHO 2008)
*B-cell chronic lymphocytic leukemia/small cell lymphoma
:: 3 to 4% of lymphomas in adults
:: Small resting lymphocytes mixed with variable numbers of large activated cells, lymph nodes diffusely effaced
:: CD5, surface immunoglobulin
:: 5-year survival rate 50%.
:: Occurs in older adults, usually involves lymph nodes, bone marrow and spleen, most patients have peripheral blood involvement, indolent
*Lymphoplasmacytic lymphoma (such as Waldenström macroglobulinemia)
**Plasma cell myeloma (also known as multiple myeloma)
*Extranodal marginal zone B cell lymphoma, also called MALT lymphoma
:: About 5% of lymphomas in adults
:: Variable cell size and differentiation, 40% show plasma cell differentiation, homing of B cells to epithelium creates lymphoepithelial lesions.
:: CD5, CD10, surface Ig
:: Frequently occurs outside lymph nodes, very indolent, may be cured by local excision
:: About 40% of lymphomas in adults
:: Small "cleaved" cells (centrocytes) mixed with large activated cells (centroblasts), usually nodular ("follicular") growth pattern
:: CD10, surface Ig
:: 72-77%
:: Occurs in older adults, usually involves lymph nodes, bone marrow and spleen, associated with t (14;18) translocation overexpressing Bcl-2, indolent
:: 3 to 4% of lymphomas in adults
:: Lymphocytes of small to intermediate size growing in diffuse pattern
:: CD5
:: 50%
:: Occurs mainly in adult males, usually involves lymph nodes, bone marrow, spleen and GI tract, associated with t (11;14) translocation overexpressing cyclin D1, moderately aggressive
*Diffuse large B cell lymphoma, not otherwise specified
:: About 40 to 50% of lymphomas in adults
:: Variable, most resemble B cells of large germinal centers, diffuse growth pattern
:: Variable expression of CD10 and surface Ig
:: 5-year survival 60%
:: Occurs in all ages, but most commonly in older adults, may occur outside lymph nodes, aggressive
*Diffuse large B-cell lymphoma associated with chronic inflammation
*Primary mediastinal (thymic) large B-cell lymphoma
*Large B-cell lymphoma arising in HHV8-associated multicentric Castleman's disease
:: < 1% of lymphomas in the United States
:: Round lymphoid cells of intermediate size with several nucleoli, starry-sky appearance by diffuse spread with interspersed apoptosis
:: CD10, surface Ig
:: 5-yearsurvival 50%
:: Endemic in Africa, sporadic elsewhere, more common in immunocompromised and children, often visceral involvement, highly aggressive
:: Most common cutaneous lymphoid malignancy
:: Usually small lymphoid cells with convoluted nuclei that often infiltrate the epidermis, creating Pautrier microabscesseses
:: CD4
:: 5-yearsurvival 75%
:: Localized or more generalized skin symptoms, generally indolent, in a more aggressive variant, Sézary's disease, skin erythema and peripheral blood involvement
*Primary cutaneous CD30-positive T cell lymphoproliferative disorders
* Peripheral T-cell lymphoma not otherwise specified
:: Most common T cell lymphoma
:: Variable, usually a mix small to large lymphoid cells with irregular nuclear contours
:: CD3
:: Probably consists of several rare tumor types, often disseminated and generally aggressive
* B-lymphoblastic leukemia lymphoma with recurrent genetic abnormalities
:: 15% of childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemia and 90% of lymphoblastic lymphoma.
It is still used by some cancer agencies for compilation of lymphoma statistics and historical rate comparisons.
In 1994, the Revised European-American Lymphoma (REAL) classification applied immunophenotypic and genetic features in identifying distinct clinicopathologic entities among all the lymphomas except Hodgkin lymphoma.
For coding purposes, the ICD-O (codes 9590-9999) and ICD-10 (codes C81-C96) are available.
Staging
After a diagnosis and before treatment, a cancer is staged.
This refers to determining if the cancer has spread, and if so, whether locally or to distant sites.
Staging is reported as a grade between I (confined) and IV (spread).
Staging is carried out because the stage of a cancer impacts its prognosis and treatment.
The Ann Arbor staging system is routinely used for staging of both HL and NHL.
In this staging system, I represents a localised disease contained within a lymph node group, II represents the presence of lymphoma in two or more lymph nodes groups, III represents spread of the lymphoma to lymph nodes groups on both sides of the diaphragm, and IV indicates spread to tissue outside the lymphatic system.
Different suffixes imply involvement of different organs, for example S for the spleen and H for the liver.
Extra-lymphatic involvement is expressed with the letter E.
In addition, the presence of B symptoms or their absence is expressed with B and A, respectively.
B symptoms are defined as the presence of one of three symptoms: Unintentional weightloss of 10% body weight in the last 6 months, night sweats, and persistent fever of 38 °C or more.
CT scan or PET scan imaging modalities are used to stage a cancer.
PET scan is advised for FDG avid lymphomas, for example Hodgkins Lymphoma as a staging tool that can even replace bone marrow biopsy.
For other lymphomas CT scan is recommended for staging.
Age and poor performance status are established poor prognostic factors, as well.
File:Nodular Mantle Cell Lymphoma - high power view - by Gabriel Caponetti.jpg|Mantle cell lymphoma: Notice the irregular nuclear contours of the medium-sized lymphoma cells and the presence of a pink histiocyte.
By immunohistochemistry, the lymphoma cells expressed CD20, CD5, and Cyclin D1 (high-power view, H&E)
File:Hodgkin lymphoma, nodular lymphocyte predominant - low power view - H&E - by Gabriel Caponetti.jpg|Hodgkin lymphoma, nodular lymphocyte predominant (low-power view): Notice the nodular architecture and the areas of "mottling".
File:Hodgkin lymphoma, nodular lymphocyte predominant - high power view - H&E - by Gabriel Caponetti.jpg|Hodgkin lymphoma, nodular lymphocyte predominant (high-power view): Notice the presence of L&H cells, also known as "popcorn cells".
Differential diagnosis
Certain lymphomas (extranodal NK/T-cell lymphoma, nasal type and type II enteropathy-associated T-cell lymphoma) can be mimicked by two benign diseases which involve the excessive proliferation of non-malignant NK cells in the GI tract, natural killer cell enteropathy, a disease wherein NK cell infiltrative lesions occur in the intestine, colon, stomach, or esophagus, and lymphomatoid gastropathy, a disease wherein these cells' infiltrative lesions are limited to the stomach.
These diseases do not progress to cancer, may regress spontaneously and do not respond to, and do not require, chemotherapy or other lymphoma treatments.
Treatment
Prognoses and treatments are different for HL and between all the different forms of NHL, and also depend on the grade of tumour, referring to how quickly a cancer replicates.
Paradoxically, high-grade lymphomas are more readily treated and have better prognoses: Burkitt lymphoma, for example, is a high-grade tumour known to double within days, and is highly responsive to treatment.
Lymphomas may be curable if detected in early stages with modern treatment.
Low-grade
Many low-grade lymphomas remain indolent for many years.
Treatment of the nonsymptomatic patient is often avoided.
In these forms of lymphoma, such as follicular lymphoma, watchful waiting is often the initial course of action.
This is carried out because the harms and risks of treatment outweigh the benefits.
If a low-grade lymphoma is becoming symptomatic, radiotherapy or chemotherapy are the treatments of choice; although they do not cure the lymphoma, they can alleviate the symptoms, particularly painful lymphadenopathy.
Patients with these types of lymphoma can live near-normal lifespans, but the disease is incurable.
Some centers advocate the use of single agent rituximab in the treatment of follicular lymphoma rather than the wait and watch approach.
Watchful waiting is not a good strategy for all patients, as it leads to significant distress and anxiety in some patients.
It has been equated with watch and worry.
High-grade
Treatment of some other, more aggressive, forms of lymphoma can result in a cure in the majority of cases, but the prognosis for patients with a poor response to therapy is worse.
Treatment for these types of lymphoma typically consists of aggressive chemotherapy, including the CHOP or R-CHOP regimen.
A number of people are cured with first-line chemotherapy.
Most relapses occur within the first two years, and the relapse risk drops significantly thereafter.
For people who relapse, high-dose chemotherapy followed by autologous stem cell transplantation is a proven approach.
Hodgkin lymphoma
Hodgkin lymphoma typically is treated with radiotherapy alone, as long as it is localized.
Advanced Hodgkin disease requires systemic chemotherapy, sometimes combined with radiotherapy.
Chemotherapy used includes the ABVD regimen, which is commonly used in the United States.
Other regimens used in the management of Hodgkin lymphoma include BEACOPP and Stanford V. Considerable controversy exists regarding the use of ABVD or BEACOPP.
Briefly, both regimens are effective, but BEACOPP is associated with more toxicity.
Encouragingly, a significant number of people who relapse after ABVD can still be salvaged by stem cell transplant.
Palliative care
Palliative care, a specialized medical care focused on the symptoms, pain, and stress of a serious illness, is recommended by multiple national cancer treatment guidelines as an accompaniment to curative treatments for people suffering from lymphoma.
It is used to address both the direct symptoms of lymphoma and many unwanted side effects that arise from treatments.
Palliative care can be especially helpful for children who develop lymphoma, helping both children and their families deal with the physical and emotional symptoms of the disease.
For these reasons, palliative care is especially important for patients requiring bone marrow transplants.
Prognosis
Epidemiology
Lymphoma is the most common form of hematological malignancy, or "blood cancer", in the developed world.
Taken together, lymphomas represent 5.3% of all cancers (excluding simple basal cell and squamous cell skin cancers) in the United States and 55.6% of all blood cancers.
According to the U.S. National Institutes of Health, lymphomas account for about 5%, and Hodgkin lymphoma in particular accounts for less than 1% of all cases of cancer in the United States.
Because the whole system is part of the body's immune system, patients with a weakened immune system such as from HIV infection or from certain drugs or medication also have a higher incidence of lymphoma.
History
Thomas Hodgkin published the first description of lymphoma in 1832, specifically of the form named after him.
Since then, many other forms of lymphoma have been described.
Research
The two types of lymphoma research are clinical or translational research and basic research.
Clinical/translational research focuses on studying the disease in a defined and generally immediately patient-applicable way, such as testing a new drug in patients.
Studies may focus on effective means of treatment, better ways of treating the disease, improving the quality of life for patients, or appropriate care in remission or after cures.
Hundreds of clinical trials are being planned or conducted at any given time.
Basic science research studies the disease process at a distance, such as seeing whether a suspected carcinogen can cause healthy cells to turn into lymphoma cells in the laboratory or how the DNA changes inside lymphoma cells as the disease progresses.
The results from basic research studies are generally less immediately useful to patients with the disease, but can improve scientists' understanding of lymphoma and form the foundation for future, more effective treatments.
Other animals
