The saola (Pseudoryx nghetinhensis), also called siola, Vu Quang ox, spindlehorn, Asian unicorn, or, infrequently, the Vu Quang bovid, is one of the world's rarest large mammals, a forest-dwelling bovine found only in the Annamite Range of Vietnam and Laos.
Related to cattle, goats, and antelopes, the species was described following a discovery of remains in 1992 in Vũ Quang Nature Reserve by a joint survey of the Vietnamese Ministry of Forestry and the World Wide Fund for Nature.
Saolas have since been kept in captivity multiple times, although only for short periods.
A living saola in the wild was first photographed in 1999 by a camera trap set by WWF and the Vietnamese government's Forest Protection Department (SFNC).
Etymology
The name saola has been translated as "spindle-horned", although the precise meaning is actually "spinning-wheel post horn".
The name comes from a Tai language of Vietnam , but the meaning is the same in the Lao language .
The specific name nghetinhensis refers to the two Vietnamese provinces of Nghệ An and Hà Tĩnh, while Pseudoryx acknowledges the animal's similarities with the Arabian or African oryx.
Hmong people in Laos refer to the animal as saht-supahp, a term derived from Lao meaning "the polite animal", because it moves quietly through the forest.
Other names used by minority groups in the Saola's range are lagiang (Van Kieu), a ngao (Ta Oi) and xoong xor (Katu)
According to biodiversity specialist Tony Whitten, though Vietnam boasts a variety of flora and fauna, many of which have been recently described, the discovery of as large an animal as the saola was quite unexpected.
The saola was the first large mammal to be discovered in the area for 50 years.
Observations of live saola have been few and far between, restricted to the Annamite Range.
Taxonomy and evolution
The scientific name of the saola is Pseudoryx nghetinhensis.
It is the sole member of the genus Pseudoryx and is classified under the family Bovidae.
The species was first described in 1993 by Vu Van Dung, Do Tuoc, biologists Pham Mong Giao and Nguyen Ngoc Chinh, Peter Arctander of the University of Copenhagen and John MacKinnon.
The morphology of its horns, teeth and some other features indicate it should be grouped with less-derived or more ancestral bovids.
Scientific consensus may lead to classifying the saola as the sole member of a proposed new tribe Pseudorygini.
Description
In a 1998 publication, William G. Robichaud, the coordinator of the Saola Working Group, recorded physical measurements for a captive female saola he dubbed 'Martha', in a Laotian menagerie.
The animal was observed for around 15 days, until she died from unknown causes.
Robichaud noted the height of the female as at the shoulder; the back was slightly elevated, nearly taller than the shoulder height.
The head-and-body length was recorded as .
The general characteristics of the saola, as shown by studies during 1993-5 as well as the 1998 study, include a chocolate brown coat with patches of white on the face, throat and the sides of the neck, a paler shade of brown on the neck and the belly, a black dorsal stripe, a pair of nearly parallel horns (present on both sexes).
The saola has round pupils with dark-brown irises that appear orange when light is shone into them; a cluster of white whiskers about long with a presumably tactile function protrude from the end of the chin.
The specimen Robichaud observed could extend its tongue up to and reach its eyes and upper parts of the face; the upper surface of the tongue is covered with fine, backward-pointing barbs.
Robichaud observed that either of the two maxillary glands (sinuses) had a nearly rectangular hollow with the dimensions , covered by a thick flap.
The maxillary glands of the saola are probably the largest among those of all other animals.
The glands are covered by a thick, pungent, grayish green, semi-solid secretion beneath which lies a sheath of few flat hairs.
Robichaud observed several pores, used probably for secretion, on the upper surface of the lid.
Each white facial spot shelters one or more nodules from which originate long white or black hairs.
These secretions are typically rubbed against the underside of vegetation, leaving a musky, pungent paste.
The spoor of the forelegs measured long by wide, and long by for the hindlegs.
Ecology and behaviour
Local people reported that the saola is active in the day as well as at night, but prefers resting during the hot midday hours.
Robichaud noted that the captive female was active mainly during the day, but pointed out that the observation could have been influenced by the unfamiliar surroundings the animal found herself in.
When she rested, she would draw her forelegs inward to her belly, extend her neck so that her chin touched the ground, and close her eyes.
Robichaud observed that the captive female was calm in the presence of humans, but was afraid of dogs.
On an encounter with a dog, she would resort to snorting and thrust her head forward, pointing her horns at her opponent.
Her erect ears pointed backward, and she stood stiffly with her back arched.
Meanwhile, she hardly paid any attention to her surroundings.
This female was found to urinate and defecate separately, dropping her hind legs and lowering her lower body - a common observation among bovids.
She would spend considerable time grooming herself with her strong tongue.
Marking behaviour in the female involved opening up the flap of the maxillary gland and leaving a pungent secretion on rocks and vegetation.
She would give out short bleats occasionally.
Reproduction
Very little information is available about the reproductive cycle of the saola.
The saola is likely to have a fixed mating season, from late August to mid-November; only single calf births have been documented, mainly during summer between mid-April and late June.
They also sometimes get caught in snares that have been set to catch animals raiding crops, such as wild boar, sambar, and muntjac.
More than 26,651 snares have so far been removed from Saola habitats by conservation groups.
The key feature of the area occupied by the saola is its remoteness from human disturbance.
Species of conservation concern are frequently hard to study; there are often delays in implementing or identifying necessary conservation needs due to lack of data.
The Saola Working Group was formed by the IUCN Species Survival Commission's Asian Wild Cattle Specialist Group, in 2006 to protect the saolas and their habitat.
This coalition includes about 40 experts from the forestry departments of Laos and Vietnam, Vietnam's Institute of Ecology and Biological Resources, Vinh University, biologists and conservationists from Wildlife Conservation Society, and the World Wide Fund for Nature.
A group of scientists from the Vietnam Academy of Science and Technology in central Hanoi, within the Institute of Biotechnology, investigated a last resort effort of conserving the species by cloning, an extremely difficult approach even in the case of well-understood species.
Further reading
* DeBuys, William, The Last Unicorn: a Search for One of Earth's Rarest Creatures, Little, Brown and Company, 2015
* Shuker, Karl P.N.
The New Zoo: New and Rediscovered Animals of the Twentieth Century, House of Stratus, 2002
