Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix is a fantasy novel written by British author J. K. Rowling and the fifth novel in the Harry Potter series.
It follows Harry Potter's struggles through his fifth year at Hogwarts School of Witchcraft and Wizardry, including the surreptitious return of the antagonist Lord Voldemort, O.W.L. exams, and an obstructive Ministry of Magic.
The novel was published on 21 June 2003 by Bloomsbury in the United Kingdom, Scholastic in the United States, and Raincoast in Canada.
Five million copies were sold in the first 24 hours of publication.
Before the release of the fifth book, 200 million copies of the first four books had already been sold and translated into 55 languages in 200 countries.
As the series was already a global phenomenon, the book forged new pre-order records, with thousands of people queuing outside book stores on 20 June 2003 to secure their copy at midnight.
Critical response
Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix was met with mostly positive reviews, and received several awards.
The book was cited as an American Library Association Best Book for Young Adults and as an American Library Association Notable Book, both in 2004.
It also received the Oppenheim Toy Portfolio 2004 Gold Medal along with several other awards.
The novel was also well received by critics.
Rowling was praised for her imagination by USA Today writer Deirdre Donahue.
Most of the negative reviewers were concerned with the violence contained in the novel and with morality issues occurring throughout the book.
The New York Times writer John Leonard praised the novel, saying "The Order of the Phoenix starts slow, gathers speed and then skateboards, with somersaults, to its furious conclusion....
As Harry gets older, Rowling gets better."
However, he also criticises "the one-note Draco Malfoy" and the predictable Lord Voldemort.
The second novel, Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets, was published in the UK on 2 July 1998.
Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban was published a year later in the UK on 8 July 1999 and in the US on 8 September 1999.
Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix is the longest book from the series, yet the second shortest film at 2 hours and 18 minutes.
After the publishing of Order of the Phoenix, the sixth book of the series, Harry Potter and the Half-Blood Prince, was published on 16 July 2005, and sold 9 million copies in the first 24 hours of its worldwide release.
The seventh and final novel, Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows, was published 21 July 2007.
The book sold 11 million copies within 24 hours of its release: 2.7 million copies in the UK and 8.3 million in the US.
and it became the unadjusted eleventh-highest-grossing film of all time, and a critical and commercial success.
The film opened to a worldwide 5-day opening of $333 million, third all-time, and grossed $940 million in total, second to Pirates of the Caribbean: At World's End for the greatest total of 2007.
Video games
A video game adaptation of the book and film versions of Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix was made for Microsoft Windows, PS2, PS3, Xbox 360, PSP, Nintendo DS, Wii, Game Boy Advance and Mac OS X.
It was released on 25 June 2007 in the U.S., 28 June 2007 in Australia and 29 June 2007 in the UK and Europe for PlayStation 3, PSP, PlayStation 2, Windows and 3 July 2007 for most other platforms.
The games were published by Electronic Arts.
The book is also depicted in the 2011 video game Lego Harry Potter: Years 5-7.
Translations
The first official foreign translation of the book appeared in Vietnamese on 21 July 2003, when the first of twenty-two instalments was released.
The first official European translation appeared in Serbia and Montenegro in Serbian, by the official publisher Narodna Knjiga, in early September 2003.
Other translations appeared later (e.g. in November 2003 in Dutch and German).
The English-language version has topped the best-seller list in France, while in Germany and the Netherlands an unofficial distributed translation process was started on the Internet.
* Religious debates over the Harry Potter series
