Tarbosaurus ( ; meaning "alarming lizard") is a genus of tyrannosaurid theropod dinosaur that flourished in Asia about 70 million years ago, at the end of the Late Cretaceous Period.
Fossils have been recovered in Mongolia, with more fragmentary remains found further afield in parts of China.
Although many species have been named, modern paleontologists recognize only one, T. bataar, as valid.
Some experts see this species as an Asian representative of the North American genus Tyrannosaurus; this would make the genus Tarbosaurus redundant.
Tarbosaurus and Tyrannosaurus, if not synonymous, are considered to be at least closely related genera.
Alioramus, also from Mongolia, has previously been thought by some authorities to be the closest relative of Tarbosaurus, though this has since been disproven with the discovery of Qianzhousaurus and the description of the Alioramini.
Like most known tyrannosaurids, Tarbosaurus was a large bipedal predator, weighing up to five tonnes and equipped with about sixty large teeth.
It had a unique locking mechanism in its lower jaw and the smallest forelimbs relative to body size of all tyrannosaurids, renowned for their disproportionately tiny, two-fingered forelimbs.
Tarbosaurus lived in a humid floodplain criss-crossed by river channels.
In this environment, it was an apex predator, probably preying on other large dinosaurs like the hadrosaur Saurolophus or the sauropod Nemegtosaurus.
Tarbosaurus is represented by dozens of fossil specimens, including several complete skulls and skeletons.
These remains have allowed scientific studies focusing on its phylogeny, skull mechanics, and brain structure.
Description
Although slightly smaller than Tyrannosaurus, Tarbosaurus was one of the largest tyrannosaurids.
The largest known individuals were between long.
The mass of a fully grown individual is considered comparable to or slightly smaller than Tyrannosaurus, often estimated to be around 4-5 metric tons.
The largest known Tarbosaurus skull is more than long, larger than all other tyrannosaurids except Tyrannosaurus.
Tyrannosaurids varied little in body form, and Tarbosaurus was no exception.
The head was supported by an S-shaped neck, while the rest of the vertebral column, including the long tail, was held horizontally.
Tarbosaurus had tiny forelimbs, proportionably to body size the smallest of all members of the family.
The hands had two clawed digits each, with an additional unclawed third metacarpal found in some specimens, similar to closely related genera.
Holtz has suggested that Tarbosaurus also has a theropod reduction of fingers IV-I "developed further" than in other tyrannosaurids, as the second metacarpal in the Tarbosaurus specimens he studied is less than twice the length of the first metacarpal (other tyrannosaurids have a second metacarpal about twice the length of the first metacarpal).
Also, the third metacarpal in Tarbosaurus is proportionally shorter than in other tyrannosaurids; in other tyrannosaurids (like Albertosaurus and Daspletosaurus), the third metacarpal is often longer than the first metacarpal, while in the Tarbosaurus specimens studied by Holtz, the third metacarpal is shorter than the first.
In contrast to the forelimbs, the three-toed hindlimbs were long and thick, supporting the body in a bipedal posture.
The long, heavy tail served as a counterweight to the head and torso and placed the center of gravity over the hips.
and the species named after Ivan Yefremov, a Russian paleontologist and science fiction author.
The other two (PIN 553-1 and PIN 552-2) were also named as new species and assigned to the North American genus Gorgosaurus (G. lancinator and G. novojilovi, respectively).
All three of these latter specimens are smaller than the first.
Later authors, including Maleev himself, agreed with Rozhdestvensky's analysis, although some used the name Tarbosaurus efremovi rather than T. bataar.
American paleontologist Kenneth Carpenter re-examined the material in 1992.
He concluded that it belonged to the genus Tyrannosaurus, as originally published by Maleev, and lumped all the specimens into the species Tyrannosaurus bataar except the remains that Maleev had named Gorgosaurus novojilovi.
Carpenter thought this specimen represented a separate, smaller genus of tyrannosaurid, which he called Maleevosaurus novojilovi.
A 1999 study subsequently reclassified Maleevosaurus as a juvenile Tarbosaurus.
All research published since 1999 recognizes only a single species, which is either called Tarbosaurus bataar or Tyrannosaurus bataar.
as well as private expeditions hosted by Canadian paleontologist Phil Currie around the turn of the 21st century, discovered and collected further Tarbosaurus material.
More than 30 specimens are known, including more than 15 skulls and several complete postcranial skeletons.
A recent $1 million smuggling deal was uncovered when suspicions were raised about a catalog put out by Heritage Auctions for an event in New York City on May 20, 2012.
By Mongolian law, any specimen found in the Gobi Desert was to rest at an appropriate Mongolian institution and there was little reasonable doubt that the Tarbosaurus bataar advertised on the catalog was a stolen one.
The president of Mongolia and many paleontologists raised objections to the sale which led to a last-minute investigation that confirmed that it was a specimen that can only be found in the Gobi Desert, rightfully belonging to Mongolia.
During the court case (United States v. One Tyrannosaurus Bataar Skeleton), Eric Prokopi, the smuggler, pleaded guilty to illegal smuggling and the dinosaur was returned to Mongolia in 2013, where it is temporarily displayed on Sukhbaatar Square, the center of the city of Ulaanbaatar.
Prokopi had sold the dinosaur with a partner and fellow commercial hunter in England, Christopher Moore.
The case led to the repatriation of dozens more Mongolian dinosaurs, including several skeletons of Tarbosaurus bataar.
Synonyms
Chinese paleontologists discovered a partial skull and skeleton of a small theropod (IVPP V4878) in the Xinjiang Autonomous Region of China in the mid-1960s.
In 1977, Dong Zhiming described this specimen, which was recovered from the Subashi Formation in Shanshan County, as a new genus and species, Shanshanosaurus huoyanshanensis.
Gregory Paul recognized Shanshanosaurus as a tyrannosaurid in 1988, referring it to the now-defunct genus Aublysodon.
Dong and Currie later re-examined the specimen and deemed it to be a juvenile of a larger species of tyrannosaurid.
These authors refrained from assigning it to any particular genus but suggested Tarbosaurus as a possibility.
Albertosaurus periculosus, Tyrannosaurus luanchuanensis, Tyrannosaurus turpanensis and Chingkankousaurus fragilis were considered synonyms of Tarbosaurus in the second edition of the Dinosauria, but Chingkankousaurus has been assessed as dubious by Brusatte et al. (2013).
Named in 1976 by Sergei Kurzanov, Alioramus is another genus of tyrannosaurid from slightly older sediments in Mongolia.
Several analyses have concluded Alioramus was quite closely related to Tarbosaurus.
and possibly the Mongolian genus Alioramus.
Animals in this subfamily are more closely related to Tyrannosaurus than to Albertosaurus and are known for their robust build with proportionally larger skulls and longer femurs than in the other subfamily, the Albertosaurinae.
an arrangement that has been supported by some more recent studies.
Others prefer to keep the genera separate, while still recognizing them as sister taxa.
The discovery of Lythronax argestes, a much earlier tyrannosaurine further reveals the close relationship between Tyrannosaurus and Tarbosaurus, and it was discovered that Lythronax is a sister taxon to a clade consisting of Campanian genus Zhuchengtyrannus, and Maastrichtian genera Tyrannosaurus and Tarbosaurus.
Further studies of Lythronax also suggest that the Asian tyrannosauroids were part of one evolutionary radiation.
Below is the cladogram of Tyrannosauridae based on the phylogenetic analysis conducted by Loewen et al. in 2013.
Paleobiology
Like several other large tyrannosaurids, Tarbosaurus is known from relatively abundant and well-preserved fossil material.
In fact, one-quarter of all fossils collected from the Nemegt Formation belong to Tarbosaurus.
In 2012, bite marks on two fragmentary gastralia of the holotype specimen of the large ornithomimosaur Deinocheirus mirificus were reported.
The size and shape of the bite marks match the teeth of Tarbosaurus, the largest known predator from the Nemegt Formation.
Various types of feeding traces were identified; punctures, gouges, striae, fragmentary teeth, and combinations of the above marks.
The bite marks probably represent feeding behavior instead of aggression between the species, and the fact that bite marks were not found elsewhere on the body indicates the predator focused on internal organs.
Tarbosaurus bite marks have also been identified on hadrosaur and sauropod fossils, but theropod bite marks on bones of other theropods are very rare in the fossil record.
Skull mechanics
The skull of Tarbosaurus was completely described for the first time in 2003.
Scientists noted key differences between Tarbosaurus and the North American tyrannosaurids.
Many of these differences are related to the handling of stress by the skull bones during a bite.
When the upper jaw bit down on an object, force was transmitted up through the maxilla, the primary tooth-bearing bone of the upper jaw, into surrounding skull bones.
In North American tyrannosaurids, this force went from the maxilla into the fused nasal bones on top of the snout, which were firmly connected in the rear to the lacrimal bones by bony struts.
These struts locked the two bones together, suggesting that force was then transmitted from the nasals to the lacrimals.
As for its bite force, it was revealed that Tarbosaurus had a bite force of around 8,000 to 10,000 pounds per force, meaning that it could possibly crush bone like its North American relative, Tyrannosaurus.
Brain structure
A Tarbosaurus skull found in 1948 by Soviet and Mongolian scientists (PIN 553-1, originally called Gorgosaurus lancinator) included the skull cavity that held the brain.
Making a plaster cast, called an endocast, of the inside of this cavity allowed Maleev to make preliminary observations about the shape of a Tarbosaurus brain.
A newer polyurethane rubber cast allowed a more detailed study of Tarbosaurus brain structure and function.
The endocranial structure of Tarbosaurus was similar to that of Tyrannosaurus, differing only in the positions of some cranial nerve roots, including the trigeminal and accessory nerves.
Tyrannosaurid brains were more similar to those of crocodilians and other nonavian reptiles than to birds.
The total brain volume for a Tarbosaurus is estimated at only .
The auditory nerve was also large, suggesting good hearing, which may have been useful for auditory communication and spatial awareness.
The nerve had a well-developed vestibular component as well, which implies a good sense of balance and coordination.
In contrast, the nerves and brain structures associated with eyesight were smaller and undeveloped.
The midbrain tectum, responsible for visual processing in reptiles, was very small in Tarbosaurus, as were the optic nerve and the oculomotor nerve, which controls eye movement.
Unlike Tyrannosaurus, which had forward-facing eyes that provided some degree of binocular vision, Tarbosaurus had a narrower skull more typical of other tyrannosaurids in which the eyes faced primarily sideways.
All of this suggests that Tarbosaurus relied more on its senses of smell and hearing than on its eyesight.
Examination of the sclerotic rings in this juvenile Tarbosaurus suggests they may also have been crepuscular or nocturnal hunters.
Whether the adult Tarbosaurus were also nocturnal is currently unknown due to lack of fossil evidence.
Skin impressions and footprints
Skin impressions were recovered from a large skeleton at the Bugiin Tsav locality that was previously destroyed by poachers.
These impressions show non-overlapping scales with an average diameter of and pertain to the thoracic region of the individual, although the exact position can not be assessed any longer due to the destruction of the skeleton.
Phil Currie and colleagues (2003) described two footprints from the Nemegt locality that probably pertain to Tarbosaurus.
These tracks represent natural casts, which means that only the sandy infill of the tracks and not the tracks itself are preserved.
The better-preserved tracks feature skin impressions over large areas on and behind the toe impressions that are similar to those discovered in Bugiin Tsav.
They also feature vertical parallel slide marks that were left by scales when the foot was pushed into the ground.
The track measures in length, thus representing a large individual.
The second track, although even larger, was affected by erosion and does not show any detail.
about 70 million years ago.
The Subashi Formation, in which Shanshanosaurus remains were discovered, is also Maastrichtian in age.
Tarbosaurus is found chiefly in the Nemegt Formation, whose sediments preserve large river channels and soil deposits that indicate a far more humid climate than those suggested by the underlying Barun Goyot and Djadochta Formations.
However, caliche deposits indicate at least periodic droughts.
Sediment was deposited in the channels and floodplains of large rivers.
The rock facies of this formation suggest the presence of mudflats, and shallow lakes.
Sediments also indicate that there existed a rich habitat, offering diverse food in abundant amounts that could sustain massive Cretaceous dinosaurs.
Fossils of an unidentified tyrannosaur from the older Djadochta Formation, which closely resemble those of Tarbosaurus, may indicate that it also lived at an earlier time and in a more arid ecosystem than that of the Nemegt.
Mammal fossils are exceedingly rare in the Nemegt Formation, but many birds have been found, including the enantiornithine Gurilynia and the hesperornithiform Judinornis, as well as Teviornis, an early representative of the still-existing Anseriformes (waterfowl).
Scientists have described many dinosaurs from the Nemegt Formation, including the ankylosaurid Saichania, and pachycephalosaur Prenocephale.
By far the largest predator known from the formation, adult Tarbosaurus most likely preyed upon large hadrosaurs such as Saurolophus and Barsboldia, or sauropods such as Nemegtosaurus, and Opisthocoelicaudia.
Adults would have received little competition from small theropods such as the small tyrannosaurid Alioramus, troodontids (Borogovia, Tochisaurus, Zanabazar), oviraptorosaurs (Elmisaurus, Nemegtomaia, Rinchenia) or Bagaraatan, sometimes considered a basal tyrannosauroid.
Other theropods, like the gigantic Therizinosaurus, might have been herbivorous, and ornithomimosaurs such as Anserimimus, Gallimimus, and gigantic Deinocheirus might have been omnivores that only took small prey and were therefore no competition for Tarbosaurus.
However, as in other large tyrannosaurids as well as modern Komodo dragons, juveniles and subadult Tarbosaurus would have filled niches between the massive adults and these smaller theropods.
