A tram (in North America streetcar or trolley) is a rail vehicle that runs on tramway tracks along public urban streets; some include segments of segregated right-of-way.
The lines or networks operated by tramcars are called tramways.
Historically the term electric street railways was also used in the United States.
In the United States, the term tram has sometimes been used for rubber-tired trackless trains, which are unrelated to other kinds of trams.
Tram vehicles are usually lighter and shorter than main line and rapid transit trains.
Today, most trams use electrical power, usually fed by a pantograph sliding on an overhead line; older systems may use a trolley pole or a bow collector.
In some cases by a contact shoe on a third rail is used.
If necessary, they may have dual power systems-electricity in city streets, and diesel in more rural environments.
Occasionally, trams also carry freight.
Trams are now commonly included in the wider term "light rail", which also includes grade-separated systems.
Some trams, known as tram-trains, may have segments that run on mainline railway tracks, similar to interurban systems.
The differences between these modes of rail transport are often indistinct, and a given system may combine multiple features.
One of the advantages over earlier forms of transit was the low rolling resistance of metal wheels on steel rails, allowing the trams to haul a greater load for a given effort.
Problems included the fact that any given animal could only work so many hours on a given day, had to be housed, groomed, fed and cared for day in and day out, and produced prodigious amounts of manure, which the streetcar company was charged with disposing of.
Electric trams largely replaced animal power in the late 19th and early 20th century.
Improvements in other forms of road transport such as buses led to decline of trams in the mid 20th century.
Trams have seen resurgence in recent years.
Etymology and terminology
The English terms tram and tramway are derived from the Scots word tram, referring respectively to a type of truck (goods wagon or freight railroad car) used in coal mines and the tracks on which they ran.
The word tram probably derived from Middle Flemish trame ("beam, handle of a barrow, bar, rung").
The identical word la trame with the meaning "crossbeam" is also used in the French language.
Etymologists believe that the word tram refers to the wooden beams the railway tracks were initially made of before the railroad pioneers switched to the much more wear-resistant tracks made of iron and, later, steel.
The word Tram-car is attested from 1873.
Although the terms tram and tramway have been adopted by many languages, they are not used universally in English; North Americans prefer streetcar, trolley, or trolleycar.
The term streetcar is first recorded in 1840, and originally referred to horsecars.
When electrification came, Americans began to speak of trolleycars or later, trolleys.
A widely held belief holds the word to derive from the troller (said to derive from the words traveler and roller), a four-wheeled device that was dragged along dual overhead wires by a cable that connected the troller to the top of the car and collected electrical power from the overhead wires; this portmanteau derivation is, however, most likely folk etymology.
"Trolley" and variants refer to the verb troll, meaning "roll" and probably derived from Old French, and cognate uses of the word were well established for handcarts and horse drayage, as well as for nautical uses.
The alternative North American term 'trolley' may strictly speaking be considered incorrect, as the term can also be applied to cable cars, or conduit cars that instead draw power from an underground supply.
Conventional diesel tourist buses decorated to look like streetcars are sometimes called trolleys in the US (tourist trolley).
Furthering confusion, the term tram has instead been applied to open-sided, low-speed segmented vehicles on rubber tires generally used to ferry tourists short distances, for example on the Universal Studios backlot tour and, in many countries, as tourist transport to major destinations.
The term may also apply to an aerial ropeway, e.g. the Roosevelt Island Tramway.
Although the use of the term trolley for tram was not adopted in Europe, the term was later associated with the trolleybus, a rubber-tyred vehicle running on hard pavement, which draws its power from pairs of overhead wires.
These electric buses, which use twin trolley poles, are also called trackless trolleys , or sometimes simply trolleys (in the UK, as well as the Pacific Northwest, including Seattle, and Vancouver).
The New South Wales, Australia, government has decided to use the term "light rail" for their trams.
History
The history of trams, streetcars or trolley systems, began in the early nineteenth century.
It can be divided up into several discrete periods defined by the principal means of motive power used.
Horse-drawn
The world's first passenger train or tram was the Swansea and Mumbles Railway, in Wales, UK.
The Mumbles Railway Act was passed by the British Parliament in 1804, and horse-drawn service started in 1807.
The service closed in 1827, but was restarted in 1860, again using horses.
It was worked by steam from 1877, and then, from 1929, by very large (106-seater) electric tramcars, until closure in 1961.
The Swansea and Mumbles Railway was something of a one-off however, and no street tramway would appear in Britain until 1860 when one was built in Birkenhead by the American George Francis Train.
Street railways developed in America before Europe, largely due to the poor paving of the streets in American cities which made them unsuitable for horsebuses, which were then common on the well-paved streets of European cities.
Running the horsecars on rails allowed for a much smoother ride.
There are records of a street railway running in Baltimore as early as 1828, however the first authenticated streetcar in America, was the New York and Harlem Railroad developed by the Irish coach builder John Stephenson, in New York City which began service in the year 1832.
The New York and Harlem Railroad's Fourth Avenue Line ran along the Bowery and Fourth Avenue in New York City.
It was followed in 1835 by the New Orleans and Carrollton Railroad in New Orleans, Louisiana, which still operates as the St. Charles Streetcar Line.
Other American cities did not follow until the 1850s, after which the "animal railway" became an increasingly common feature in the larger towns.
The first permanent tram line in continental Europe was opened in Paris in 1855 by Alphonse Loubat who had previously worked on American streetcar lines.
The tram was developed in numerous cities of Europe (some of the most extensive systems were found in Berlin, Budapest, Birmingham, Leningrad, Lisbon, London, Manchester, Paris).
The first tram in South America opened in 1858 in Santiago, Chile.
The first trams in Australia opened in 1860 in Sydney.
Africa's first tram service started in Alexandria on 8 January 1863.
The first trams in Asia opened in 1869 in Batavia , Netherlands East Indies (now Indonesia).
Problems with horsecars included the fact that any given animal could only work so many hours on a given day, had to be housed, groomed, fed and cared for day in and day out, and produced prodigious amounts of manure, which the streetcar company was charged with storing and then disposing of.
Since a typical horse pulled a streetcar for about a dozen miles a day and worked for four or five hours, many systems needed ten or more horses in stable for each horsecar.
Horsecars were largely replaced by electric-powered trams following the improvement of an overhead trolley system on trams for collecting electricity from overhead wires by Frank J. Sprague.
His spring-loaded trolley pole used a wheel to travel along the wire.
In late 1887 and early 1888, using his trolley system, Sprague installed the first successful large electric street railway system in Richmond, Virginia.
Within a year, the economy of electric power had replaced more costly horsecars in many cities.
By 1889, 110 electric railways incorporating Sprague's equipment had been begun or planned on several continents.
Horses continued to be used for light shunting well into the 20th century, and many large metropolitan lines lasted into the early 20th century.
New York City had a regular horsecar service on the Bleecker Street Line until its closure in 1917.
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, had its Sarah Street line drawn by horses until 1923.
The last regular mule-drawn cars in the US ran in Sulphur Rock, Arkansas, until 1926 and were commemorated by a U.S. postage stamp issued in 1983.
The last mule tram service in Mexico City ended in 1932, and a mule tram in Celaya, Mexico, survived until 1954.
The last horse-drawn tram to be withdrawn from public service in the UK took passengers from Fintona railway station to Fintona Junction one mile away on the main Omagh to Enniskillen railway in Northern Ireland.
The tram made its last journey on 30 September 1957 when the Omagh to Enniskillen line closed.
The "van" now lies at the Ulster Transport Museum.
Horse-drawn trams still operate on the 1876-built Douglas Bay Horse Tramway in the Isle of Man, and at the 1894-built horse tram at Victor Harbor in South Australia.
New horse-drawn systems have been established at the Hokkaidō Museum in Japan and also in Disneyland.
A horse tram route in Polish gmina Mrozy, first built in 1902, was reopened in 2012.
Steam
The first mechanical trams were powered by steam.
Generally, there were two types of steam tram.
The first and most common had a small steam locomotive (called a tram engine in the UK) at the head of a line of one or more carriages, similar to a small train.
Systems with such steam trams included Christchurch, New Zealand; Sydney, Australia; other city systems in New South Wales; Munich, Germany (from August 1883 on), British India (Pakistan) (from 1885) and the Dublin & Blessington Steam Tramway (from 1888) in Ireland.
Steam tramways also were used on the suburban tramway lines around Milan and Padua; the last Gamba de Legn ("Peg-Leg") tramway ran on the Milan-Magenta-Castano Primo route in late 1957.
The other style of steam tram had the steam engine in the body of the tram, referred to as a tram engine (UK) or steam dummy (US).
The most notable system to adopt such trams was in Paris.
French-designed steam trams also operated in Rockhampton, in the Australian state of Queensland between 1909 and 1939.
Stockholm, Sweden, had a steam tram line at the island of Södermalm between 1887 and 1901.
Tram engines usually had modifications to make them suitable for street running in residential areas.
The wheels, and other moving parts of the machinery, were usually enclosed for safety reasons and to make the engines quieter.
Measures were often taken to prevent the engines from emitting visible smoke or steam.
Usually the engines used coke rather than coal as fuel to avoid emitting smoke; condensers or superheating were used to avoid emitting visible steam.
A major drawback of this style of tram was the limited space for the engine, so that these trams were usually underpowered.
Steam tram engines faded out around the 1890s to 1900s, being replaced by electric trams.
Cable-hauled
Another motive system for trams was the cable car, which was pulled along a fixed track by a moving steel cable.
The power to move the cable was normally provided at a "powerhouse" site a distance away from the actual vehicle.
The London and Blackwall Railway, which opened for passengers in east London, England, in 1840 used such a system.
The first practical cable car line was tested in San Francisco, in 1873.
Part of its success is attributed to the development of an effective and reliable cable grip mechanism, to grab and release the moving cable without damage.
The second city to operate cable trams was Dunedin in New Zealand, from 1881 to 1957.
The most extensive cable system in the US was built in Chicago, having been built in stages between 1859 and 1892.
New York City developed multiple cable car lines, that operated from 1883 to 1909.
Los Angeles also had several cable car lines, including the Second Street Cable Railroad, which operated from 1885 to 1889, and the Temple Street Cable Railway, which operated from 1886 to 1898.
From 1885 to 1940, the city of Melbourne, Victoria, Australia operated one of the largest cable systems in the world, at its peak running 592 trams on of track.
There were also two isolated cable lines in Sydney, New South Wales, Australia; the North Sydney line from 1886 to 1900, and the King Street line from 1892 to 1905.
In Dresden, Germany, in 1901 an elevated suspended cable car following the Eugen Langen one-railed floating tram system started operating.
Cable cars operated on Highgate Hill in North London and Kennington to Brixton Hill In South London.
They also worked around "Upper Douglas" in the Isle of Man from 1897 to 1929 (cable car 72/73 is the sole survivor of the fleet).
Cable cars suffered from high infrastructure costs, since an expensive system of cables, pulleys, stationary engines and lengthy underground vault structures beneath the rails had to be provided.
They also required physical strength and skill to operate, and alert operators to avoid obstructions and other cable cars.
The cable had to be disconnected ("dropped") at designated locations to allow the cars to coast by inertia, for example when crossing another cable line.
The cable would then have to be "picked up" to resume progress, the whole operation requiring precise timing to avoid damage to the cable and the grip mechanism.
Breaks and frays in the cable, which occurred frequently, required the complete cessation of services over a cable route while the cable was repaired.
Due to overall wear, the entire length of cable (typically several kilometres) would have to be replaced on a regular schedule.
After the development of reliable electrically powered trams, the costly high-maintenance cable car systems were rapidly replaced in most locations.
Cable cars remained especially effective in hilly cities, since their nondriven wheels would not lose traction as they climbed or descended a steep hill.
The moving cable would physically pull the car up the hill at a steady pace, unlike a low-powered steam or horse-drawn car.
Cable cars do have wheel brakes and track brakes, but the cable also helps restrain the car to going downhill at a constant speed.
Performance in steep terrain partially explains the survival of cable cars in San Francisco.
The San Francisco cable cars, though significantly reduced in number, continue to perform a regular transportation function, in addition to being a well-known tourist attraction.
A single cable line also survives in Wellington, New Zealand (rebuilt in 1979 as a funicular but still called the "Wellington Cable Car").
Another system, actually two separate cable lines with a shared power station in the middle, operates from the Welsh town of Llandudno up to the top of the Great Orme hill in North Wales, UK.
Gas
In the late 19th and early 20th centuries a number of systems in various parts of the world employed trams powered by gas, naphtha gas or coal gas in particular.
Gas trams are known to have operated between Alphington and Clifton Hill in the northern suburbs of Melbourne, Australia (1886-1888); in Berlin and Dresden, Germany; in Estonia (1921-1951); between Jelenia Góra, Cieplice, and Sobieszów in Poland (from 1897); and in the UK at Lytham St Annes, Neath (1896-1920), and Trafford Park, Manchester (1897-1908).
On 29 December 1886 the Melbourne newspaper The Argus reprinted a report from the San Francisco Bulletin that Mr Noble had demonstrated a new 'motor car' for tramways 'with success'.
The tramcar 'exactly similar in size, shape, and capacity to a cable grip car' had the 'motive power' of gas 'with which the reservoir is to be charged once a day at power stations by means of a rubber hose'.
The car also carried an electricity generator for 'lighting up the tram and also for driving the engine on steep grades and effecting a start'.
Comparatively little has been published about gas trams.
However, research on the subject was carried out for an article in the October 2011 edition of "The Times", the historical journal of the Australian Association of Timetable Collectors, now the Australian Timetable Association.
A tram system powered by compressed natural gas was due to open in Malaysia in 2012, but the news about the project appears to have dried up.
Electric
The world's first electric tram line operated in Sestroretsk near Saint Petersburg, Russia, invented and tested by Fyodor Pirotsky in 1880.
The second line was the Gross-Lichterfelde tramway in Lichterfelde near Berlin in Germany, which opened in 1881.
It was built by Werner von Siemens who contacted Pirotsky.
This was world's first commercially successful electric tram.
It initially drew current from the rails, with overhead wire being installed in 1883.
In Britain, Volk's electric railway was opened in 1883 in Brighton (see Volk's Electric Railway).
This two kilometer line, re-gauged to in 1884, remains in service to this day, and is the oldest operating electric tramway in the world.
Also in 1883, Mödling and Hinterbrühl Tram was opened near Vienna in Austria.
It was the first tram in the world in regular service that was run with electricity served by an overhead line with pantograph current collectors.
The Blackpool Tramway, was opened in Blackpool, UK on 29 September 1885 using conduit collection along Blackpool Promenade.
This system is still in operation in a modernised form.
Earliest tram system in Canada was by John Joseph Wright, brother of the famous mining entrepreneur Whitaker Wright, in Toronto in 1883.
In the US, multiple functioning experimental electric trams were exhibited at the 1884 World Cotton Centennial World's Fair in New Orleans, Louisiana, but they were not deemed good enough to replace the Lamm fireless engines then propelling the St. Charles Avenue Streetcar in that city.
The first commercial installation of an electric streetcar in the United States was built in 1884 in Cleveland, Ohio and operated for a period of one year by the East Cleveland Street Railway Company.
Trams were operated in Richmond, Virginia, in 1888, on the Richmond Union Passenger Railway built by Frank J. Sprague.
Sprague later developed multiple unit control, first demonstrated in Chicago in 1897, allowing multiple cars to be coupled together and operated by a single motorman.
This gave rise to the modern subway train.
Following the improvement of an overhead "trolley" system on streetcars for collecting electricity from overhead wires by Sprague, electric tram systems were rapidly adopted across the world.
Earlier installations proved difficult or unreliable.
Siemens' line, for example, provided power through a live rail and a return rail, like a model train, limiting the voltage that could be used, and delivering electric shocks to people and animals crossing the tracks.
Siemens later designed his own version of overhead current collection, called the bow collector, and Thorold, Ontario, opened in 1887, and was considered quite successful at the time.
While this line proved quite versatile as one of the earliest fully functional electric streetcar installations, it required horse-drawn support while climbing the Niagara Escarpment and for two months of the winter when hydroelectricity was not available.
It continued in service in its original form into the 1950s.
Sidney Howe Short designed and produced the first electric motor that operated a streetcar without gears.
The motor had its armature direct-connected to the streetcar's axle for the driving force.
Short pioneered "use of a conduit system of concealed feed" thereby eliminating the necessity of overhead wire and a trolley pole for street cars and railways.
While at the University of Denver he conducted important experiments which established that multiple unit powered cars were a better way to operate trains and trolleys.
Sarajevo built a citywide system of electric trams in 1895.
Budapest established its tramway system in 1887, and its ring line has grown to be the busiest tram line in Europe, with a tram running every 60 seconds at rush hour.
Bucharest and Belgrade ran a regular service from 1894.
Ljubljana introduced its tram system in 1901 - it closed in 1958.
Oslo had the first tramway in Scandinavia, starting operation on 2 March 1894.
The first electric tramway in Australia was a Sprague system demonstrated at the 1888 Melbourne Centennial Exhibition in Melbourne; afterwards, this was installed as a commercial venture operating between the outer Melbourne suburb of Box Hill and the then tourist-oriented country town Doncaster from 1889 to 1896.
As well, electric systems were built in Adelaide, Ballarat, Bendigo, Brisbane, Fremantle, Geelong, Hobart, Kalgoorlie, Launceston, Leonora, Newcastle, Perth, and Sydney.
By the 1970s, the only full tramway system remaining in Australia was the Melbourne tram system.
However, there were also a few single lines remaining elsewhere: the Glenelg Tram, connecting Adelaide to the beachside suburb of Glenelg, and tourist trams in the Victorian Goldfields cities of Bendigo and Ballarat.
In recent years the Melbourne system, generally recognised as one of the largest in the world, has been considerably modernised and expanded.
The Adelaide line has also been extended to the Entertainment Centre, and work is progressing on further extensions.
Sydney re-introduced trams (or light rail) on 31 August 1997.
A completely new system, known as 's 1914-1920 plans for the capital then in the planning stage did propose a Canberra tram system.
In Japan, the Kyoto Electric railroad was the first tram system, starting operation in 1895.
By 1932, the network had grown to 82 railway companies in 65 cities, with a total network length of .
By the 1960s the tram had generally died out in Japan.
Two rare but significant alternatives were conduit current collection, which was widely used in London, Washington, D.C. and New York City, and the surface contact collection method, used in Wolverhampton (the Lorain system), Torquay and Hastings in the UK (the Dolter stud system), and currently in Bordeaux, France (the ground-level power supply system).
The convenience and economy of electricity resulted in its rapid adoption once the technical problems of production and transmission of electricity were solved.
Electric trams largely replaced animal power and other forms of motive power including cable and steam, in the late 19th and early 20th centuries.
There is one particular hazard associated with trams powered from a trolley pole off an overhead line.
Since the tram relies on contact with the rails for the current return path, a problem arises if the tram is derailed or (more usually) if it halts on a section of track that has been particularly heavily sanded by a previous tram, and the tram loses electrical contact with the rails.
In this event, the underframe of the tram, by virtue of a circuit path through ancillary loads (such as interior lighting), is live at the full supply voltage, typically 600 volts DC.
In British terminology, such a tram was said to be ‘grounded’-not to be confused with the US English use of the term, which means the exact opposite.
Any person stepping off the tram completed the earth return circuit and could receive a nasty electric shock.
In such an event, the driver was required to jump off the tram (avoiding simultaneous contact with the tram and the ground) and pull down the trolley pole, before allowing passengers off the tram.
Unless derailed, the tram could usually be recovered by running water down the running rails from a point higher than the tram, the water providing a conducting bridge between the tram and the rails.
In the 2000s, two companies introduced catenary-free designs.
Alstom's Citadis line uses a third rail, and Bombardier's PRIMOVE LRV is charged by contactless induction plates embedded in the trackway.
Other power sources
In some places, other forms of power were used to power the tram.
Battery
As early as 1834, Thomas Davenport, a Vermont blacksmith, had invented a battery-powered electric motor which he later patented.
The following year he used it to operate a small model electric car on a short section of track four feet in diameter.
Attempts to use batteries as a source of electricity were made from the 1880s and 1890s, with unsuccessful trials conducted in among other places Bendigo and Adelaide in Australia, and for about 14 years as The Hague accutram of HTM in the Netherlands.
The first trams in Bendigo, Australia, in 1892, were battery-powered but within as little as three months they were replaced with horse-drawn trams.
In New York City some minor lines also used storage batteries.
Then, comparatively recently, during the 1950s, a longer battery-operated tramway line ran from Milan to Bergamo.
In China there is a Nanjing battery Tram line and has been running since 2014.
Compressed air
Paris operated trams that were powered by compressed air using the Mekarski system.
Human power
The Convict Tramway was hauled by human power in the form of convicts from the Port Arthur convict settlement.
and was created to replace the hazardous sea voyage from Hobart to Port Arthur, Tasmania.
It opened in 1836 and ran for 8 km (5 miles) from Oakwood to Taranna.
By most definitions, the tramway was the first passenger-carrying railway/tramway in Australia.
An unconfirmed report says that it continued to Eaglehawk Neck and, if this was so, the length of the tramway would have been more than doubled.
The tramway carried passengers and freight, and ran on wooden rails.
The gauge is unknown.
The date of closure is unknown, but it was certainly prior to 1877.
Hydrogen
In March 2015, China South Rail Corporation (CSR) demonstrated the world's first hydrogen fuel cell vehicle tramcar at an assembly facility in Qingdao.
The chief engineer of the CSR subsidiary CSR Sifang Co Ltd., Liang Jianying, said that the company is studying how to reduce the running costs of the tram.
Hybrid
The Trieste-Opicina tramway in Trieste operates a hybrid funicular tramway system.
Conventional electric trams are operated in street running and on reserved track for most of their route.
However, on one steep segment of track, they are assisted by cable tractors, which push the trams uphill and act as brakes for the downhill run.
For safety, the cable tractors are always deployed on the downhill side of the tram vehicle.
Similar systems were used elsewhere in the past, notably on the Queen Anne Counterbalance in Seattle and the Darling Street wharf line in Sydney.
Liquid fuel
Hastings and some other tramways, for example Stockholms Spårvägar in Sweden and some lines in Karachi, used petrol trams.
Galveston Island Trolley in Texas operated diesel trams due to the city's hurricane-prone location, which would result in frequent damage to an electrical supply system.
Although Portland, Victoria promotes its tourist tram as being a cable car it actually operates using a hidden diesel motor.
The tram, which runs on a circular route around the town of Portland, uses dummies and salons formerly used on the extensive Melbourne cable tramway system and now beautifully restored.
Modern development
In the mid-20th century many tram systems were disbanded, replaced by buses, automobiles or rapid transit.
The General Motors streetcar conspiracy was a case study of the decline of trams in the United States.
In the 21st century, trams have been re-introduced in cities where they had been closed down for decades (such as Tramlink in London), or kept in heritage use (such as Spårväg City in Stockholm).
Vehicle fabricates from the 1990s and onwards (such as Bombardier's Flexity series and Alstom Citadis) are usually low-floor trams with features such as articulation and regenerative braking.
Design
Articulated
Articulated trams, invented and first used by the Boston Elevated Railway in 1912-13 at a total length of about twelve meters long (40 ft) for each pioneering example of twin-section articulated tram car, have two or more body sections, connected by flexible joints and a round platform at their pivoting midsection (s).
Like articulated buses, they have increased passenger capacity.
In practice, these trams can be up to long (such as CAF Urbos 3 in Budapest, Hungary), while a regular tram has to be much shorter.
With this type, the articulation is normally suspended between carbody sections.
In the Škoda ForCity, which is the world's first 100% low floor tram with pivoting bogies, a Jacobs bogie supports the articulation between the two or more carbody sections.
An articulated tram may be low-floor variety or high (regular) floor variety.
Newer model trams may be up to long and carry 510 passengers at a comfortable .
At crush loadings this would be even higher.
Cargo tram
Since the 19th century goods have been carried on rail vehicles through the streets, often near docks and steelworks, for example the Weymouth Harbour Tramway in Weymouth, Dorset.
Belgian vicinal tramway routes were used to haul agricultural produce, timber and coal from Blégny colliery while several of the US interurbans carried freight.
In Australia, three different "Freight Cars" operated in Melbourne between 1927 and 1977 and the city of Kislovodsk in Russia had a freight-only tram system consisting of one line which was used exclusively to deliver bottled Narzan mineral water to the railway station.
Today, the German city of Dresden has a regular CarGoTram service, run by the world's longest tram trainsets (), carrying car parts across the city centre to its Volkswagen factory.
In addition to Dresden, the cities of Vienna and Zürich currently use trams as mobile recycling depots.
At the turn of the 21st century, a new interest has arisen in using urban tramway systems to transport goods.
The motivation now is to reduce air pollution, traffic congestion and damage to road surfaces in city centres.
One recent proposal to bring cargo tramways back into wider use was the plan by City Cargo Amsterdam to reintroduce them into the city of Amsterdam.
In the spring of 2007 the city piloted this cargo tram operation, which among its aims aimed to reduce particulate pollution in the city by 20% by halving the number of lorries (5,000) unloading in the inner city during the permitted timeframe from 07:00 till 10:30.
The pilot involved two cargo trams, operating from a distribution centre and delivering to a "hub" where special electric trucks delivered the trams' small containers to their final destination.
The trial was successful, releasing an intended investment of €100 million in a fleet of 52 cargo trams distributing from four peripheral "cross docks" to 15 inner-city hubs by 2012.
These specially built vehicles would be long with 12 axles and a payload of .
On weekdays, trams are planned to make 4 deliveries per hour between 7 a.m. and 11 a.m. and two per hour between 11 a.m. and 11 p.m. With each unloading operation taking on average 10 minutes, this means that each site would be active for 40 minutes out of each hour during the morning rush hour.
In early 2009 the scheme was suspended owing to the financial crisis impeding fund-raising.
Dog car
In 1937, Melbourne passenger tramcar C class number 30 was converted for transporting dogs and their owners to the Royal Melbourne Showgrounds.
It was known as the "dog car", and was scrapped in 1955 .
Double decker
A double-decker tram is a tram that has two levels.
Some double-decker trams have open tops.
The earliest double-deck trams were horse drawn.
The first electric double-deck trams were those built for the Blackpool Tramway in 1898, one of which survives at the National Tramway Museum.
Double decker trams were commonplace in Great Britain and Dublin Ireland before most tramways were torn up in the 1950s and 1960s.
New York City's New York Railways experimented in 1912 with a Brill double deck Hedley-Doyle stepless centre entrance car, nicknamed the "Broadway Battleship", a term that spread to other large streetcars.
Hobart, Tasmania, Australia made extensive use of double decker trams.
Arguably the most unusual double-decker tram used to run between the isolated Western Australian outback town of Leonora and the nearby settlement of Gwalia.
Double decker trams still operate in Alexandria, Blackpool, Hong Kong, Dubai and Oranjestad.
Drop-Centre (lowered central section)
Many early 20th century trams used a lowered central section between the bogies (trucks).
This made passenger access easier, reducing the number of steps required to reach the inside of the vehicle.
These cars were frequently referred to as "drop-centres".
It is believed that the design first originated in Christchurch, New Zealand, in 1906 when Boon & Co Ltd. built 26 such trams in three series.
A number of these trams have been preserved.
They were a popular design in Australia and New Zealand, with at least 780 such tramcars being built for use in Melbourne alone.
Trams built since the 1970s have had conventional high or low floors.
Hearse tram
Specially appointed hearse trams, or funeral trolley cars, were used for funeral processions in many cities in the late 19th and early 20th century, particularly cities with large tram systems.
The earliest known example in North America was Mexico City, which was already operating 26 funeral cars in 1886.
In the United States, funeral cars were often given names.
At the turn of the century, "almost every major city in the US had one or more" In the mid-1940s at least one special hearse tram was used in Turin, Italy.
It was introduced due to the wartime shortage of automotive fuel.
Newcastle, Australia also operated two hearse trams and Siemens S70, to 100 per cent low-floor, where the floor passes through a corridor between the drive wheels, thus maintaining a relatively constant (stepless) level from end to end of the tram.
Prior to the introduction of the Škoda ForCity, this carried the mechanical penalty of requiring bogies to be fixed and unable to pivot (except for less than 5 degrees in some trams) and thus reducing curve negotiation.
This creates undue wear on the tracks and wheels.
Low-floor trams are now running in many cities around the world, including Adelaide, Amsterdam, Bratislava, Dublin, and many others.
The Ultra Low Floor or (ULF) tram is a type of low-floor tram operating in Vienna, Austria as of 1997 and in Oradea, Romania, with the lowest floor-height of any such vehicle.
In contrast to other low-floor trams, the floor in the interior of ULF is at sidewalk height (about 18 cm or 7 inches above the road surface), which makes access to trams easy for passengers in wheelchairs or with baby carriages.
This configuration required a new undercarriage.
The axles had to be replaced by a complicated electronic steering of the traction motors.
Auxiliary devices are installed largely under the car's roof.
Pivoting bogie
Most low-floor trams carry the mechanical penalty of requiring bogies to be fixed and unable to pivot.
This creates undue wear on the tracks and wheels and reduces the speed at which a tram can drive through a curve.
Some manufacturers such as Citadis deal with the issue by introducing partially high floor trams.
Others, such as Škoda, developed pivoting bogies at the ends and with jacobs bogies between the articulations for the Škoda 15 T, but this solution proved expensive.
Maintenance tram
Most systems had cars that were converted to specific uses on the system, other than simply the carriage of passengers.
As just one example of a system, Melbourne used or uses the following "technical" cars: a ballast motor, ballast trailers, blow-down cars, breakdown cars, conductors' or drivers' instruction cars, a laboratory testing car, a line marking car, a pantograph testing car, per way locomotives, a rail hardener locomotive, a scrapper car, scrubbers, sleeper carriers, track cleaners, a welding car, and a wheel transport car.
Some were built new for specific purposes, including: rail grinders, scrubbers/track cleaners, and a workshops locomotive.
The Moscow tramway figures prominently at the beginning of Mikhail Bulgakov's novel The Master and Margarita, which was written between 1928 and 1940.
In Satan/Professor Woland announces that Berlioz will die that evening because Anna has spilt sunflower oil, and indeed at the end of Berlioz slips on the tramway tracks and is decapitated.
Danzig trams figure extensively in the early stages of Günter Grass's Die Blechtrommel (The Tin Drum).
In the last chapter the novel's hero Oskar Matzerath and his friend Gottfried von Vittlar steal a tram late at night from outside Unterrath depot on the northern edge of Düsseldorf.
In a surreal journey, von Vittlar drives the tram through the night, south to Flingern and Haniel and then east to the suburb of Gerresheim.
Meanwhile, inside, Matzerath tries to rescue the half-blind Victor Weluhn (who had escaped from the siege of the Polish post office in Danzig at the beginning of the book and of the war) from his two green-hatted would-be executioners.
Mazerath deposits his briefcase, which contains Sister Dorotea's severed ring finger in a preserving jar, on the dashboard "where professional motorman put their lunchboxes".
They leave the tram at the terminus and the executioners tie Weluhn to a tree in von Vittlar's mother's garden and prepare to machine-gun him.
But Matzerath drums, Weluhn sings, and together they conjure up the Polish cavalry, who spirit both victim and executioners away.
Matzerath asks von Vittlar to take his briefcase in the tram to the police HQ in the Fürstenwall, which he does.
The latter part of this route is today served by tram route 703 terminating at Gerresheim Stadtbahn station ("by the glassworks" as Grass notes, referring to the famous glass factory).
* In his 1967 spy thriller An Expensive Place to Die, Len Deighton misidentifies the Flemish coast tram: "The red glow of Ostend is nearer now and yellow trains rattle alongside the motor road and over the bridge by the Royal Yacht Club..."
* In Funeral in Berlin the protagonist approaches Checkpoint Charlie driving "across the tram tracks of Zimmerstrasse that bump you into a world where 'communist' is not a dirty word".
The Rev W. Awdry wrote about GER Class C53 called Toby the Tram Engine, which starred in his The Railway Series with his faithful coach, Henrietta.
In Chrome Shelled Regios, a Japanese novel, trams are featured in the futuristic city of Zuelni.
* In Haruki Murakami's novel Norwegian Wood, protagonist Toru Watanabe takes Tokyo's only surviving tramline, the Toden Arakawa Line, to near Ōtsuka Station: "I sat in the last seat and watched the ancient houses passing close to the window.
The tram almost touched the overhanging eaves....
The tram snaked its way through this private back-alley world."
* In Almonds and Raisins by Maisie Mosco, a novel about Jewish immigration to Manchester, England, from mainland Europe in the early twentieth century, the newly arrived Sanberg family see a tram for the first time - a Manchester double-decker.
Abraham (the father) exclaims, "A train with two storeys?
And no roof?"
Manchester trams were open-topped in those days.
The local rabbi explains: "In English, they call it a tram....
In Yiddish, we don't have a word for it."
"In the wire overhead, there's electricity, we don't have a word for that either."
The Chinese author Eileen Chang, who resided in Shanghai during the Second World War, incorporated the tram into her depiction of the urban lifestyle of the 1940s.
As a city dweller, Eileen Chang explores the charms of the city landscape and how they affect her daily routine in her work ‘Notes on Apartment Life’, "... I can’t fall asleep until I hear the sound of streetcars".
Music
* "The Trolley Song" in the film Meet Me in St. Louis received an Academy Award nomination.
The Stompin' Tom Connors song "To It
And At It" mentions a man who "can't afford the train, he's sittin' on a streetcar, but he's eastbound just the same".
And his song "TTC Skidaddler" makes reference to a TTC Streetcar driver: "I've been a streetcar driver now about eleven years
and I know the old Toronto city well, There's a whole lotta people who wait along the track, For the signal from my clangin trolley bell...".
* Jens Lekman has a song titled "Tram No. 7 to Heaven", a reference to line 7 of the Gothenburg tram which passes through his native borough of Kortedala.
The band Beirut has a song titled "Fountains and Tramways" on the EP Pompeii.
In 2009 Thomas Haggerty composed and produced 'Tram' generations 1, 2 and 3 for the Slowcore/Indie Rock group, Tram.
* British rock band The Move recorded the song Turkish Tram Conductor Blues on their 1970 album Looking On.
Opera
* The 1995 opera A Streetcar Named Desire is based on the play of the same title.
Television
* The US children's TV show Mister Rogers' Neighborhood features a trolley (tram).
It is shown on National Educational Television, PBS, Sprout and the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation.
* Trams feature in the opening titles of the world's longest running TV soap opera Coronation Street, set in a fictional suburb of Greater Manchester, and produced by Granada Television.
A Blackpool tram killed one of the main characters in 1989 and the most recent faked accident involved a tram (modelled on the Manchester Metrolink) careering off a viaduct into the set in 2009.
Visual arts
* Tramway is a contemporary visual and performing arts venue located in the Scottish city of Glasgow.
Based in the former Coplawill Glasgow Corporation Tramways depot in the Pollokshields area of the South Side, it consists of two performance spaces and two galleries, as well as offering facilities for community and artistic projects.
It is claimed to be one of the leading venues of its type in Europe.
* A major feature of Spencer Street railway station, Melbourne from 1978 to 2005 was the giant Cavalcade of Transport mural, measuring .
It was financed by the Victorian state government, and painted by Harold Freedman.
It features all forms of transport used in Victoria from 1835 to 1978, with trams featuring prominently.
A horizontal column of trams shows the progression of vehicle design, with some dozens of trams being illustrated.
In 2000, during a revamp and renaming of the station to Southern Cross railway station, part of the mural was removed.
It was taken down completely in 2005 and, after a cleaning, was in 2007 relocated to Spencer Outlet Centre, adjoining the railway station.
A sculpture of tram 1040, the last numbered of Melbourne's iconic "W"-class trams was unveiled at the corner of Flinders and Spencer Streets, Melbourne, in October 2013.
The sculpture is the work of local artist David Ball.
It can be viewed from a number of tram routes, and is just one block from Southern Cross railway station.
* A Melbourne tram is featured in an Albert Tucker painting in his 1945 series Images of Modern Evil.
The original is held in the collection of the National Gallery of Victoria.
Other
* Toonerville Folks comic strip (1908-55) by Fontaine Fox featured the "Toonerville Trolley that met all the trains".
* In US baseball, the 1944 World Series was also known as the "Streetcar Series".
The predominance of trams (trolleys) in the borough of Brooklyn in New York City gave rise to the disparaging term trolley dodger for residents of the borough.
That term, shortened to "Dodger" became the nickname for the Brooklyn Dodgers (now the Los Angeles Dodgers).
A representation of a Melbourne W-type tram featured at the opening ceremony of the 2006 Commonwealth Games in Melbourne.
A model of the "flying tram" (as it was dubbed) is now exhibited at the Melbourne Museum.
* Tramway, North Carolina, is an area of Lee County, North Carolina which politically forms part of Sanford.
Tram types
Trams by region
Other topics
refs=
Bibliography
Further reading
* Arrivetz, Jean. 1956.
Les Tramways Français (No ISBN).
Lyon: Editions Omni-Presse.
* Bett, W. C., and J. C. Gillam.
Great British Tramway Networks (4th Edition), .
London:
Light Railway Transport League.
* Bigon, Liora. 2007, "Tracking Ethno-Cultural Differences: The Lagos Steam Tramway (1902-1933)" Journal of Historical Geography, 33, 3
* Brimson, Samuel.
The Tramways of Australia ().
Sydney: Dreamweaver Books.
* Buckley, R. J. 1984.
Tramways and Light Railways of Switzerland and Austria ().
Milton Keynes, UK: Light Rail Transit Association.
* Chandler, Allison.
Trolley Through the Countryside (No ISBN).
Denver: Sage Books.
* Cheape, Charles W. Moving the masses: urban public transit in New York, Boston, and Philadelphia, 1880-1912 (Harvard University Press, 1980)
* Davies, W. K. J. 1986.
100 years of the Belgian vicinal: SNCV/NMVB, 1885-1985: a century of secondary rail transport in Belgium ().
Broxbourne, UK: Light Rail Transit Association.
* Dunbar, Charles S. 1967.
Buses, Trolleys & Trams Great Britain: Paul Hamlyn Ltd. republished 2004 with or 9780753709702
Dyer, Peter, and Peter Hodge. 1988.
Cane Train: The Sugar-Cane Railways of Fiji ().
Wellington: New Zealand Railway and Locomotive Society Inc.
* Gragt, Frits van der.
Europe's Greatest Tramway Network (No ISBN).
Leiden, Netherlands: E.J. Brill.
* Hilton, George W. 1997.
The Cable Car in America: A New Treatise upon Cable or Rope Traction As Applied to the Working of Street and Other Railways, Revised Edition ().
Stanford (CA), US: Stanford University Press.
* Howarth, W. Des. 1971.
Tramway Systems of Southern Africa (No ISBN).
Johannesburg: published by the author.
* King, B. R., and J. H. Price. 1995.
The Tramways of Portugal (4th Edition) ().
London: Light Rail Transit Association.
* McKay, John P. Tramways and Trolleys: The Rise of Urban Mass Transport in Europe (1976)
* Middleton, William D. 1967.
The Time of the Trolley ().
Milwaukee (WI), US:
Kalmbach Publishing.
* Morrison, Allen. 1989.
http:/ br 01.html
"The Tramways of Brazil: A 130-Year Survey" ().
New York: Bonde Press.
* Morrison, Allen. 1992.
http:/ cl a.html The Tramways of Chile: 1858-1978 ().
New York: Bonde Press.
* Morrison, Allen. 1996.
Latin America by Streetcar: A Pictorial Survey of Urban Rail Transport South of the U.S.A. ().
New York: Bonde Press.
* Nye, David E.: Electrifying America : social meanings of a new technology, 1880-1940, MIT Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts c1990.
* Pabst, Martin. 1989.
Tram & Trolley in Africa ().
Krefeld: Röhr Verlag GMBH.
* Peschkes, Robert.
World Gazetteer of Tram, Trolleybus, and Rapid Transit Systems.
:Part One, Latin America ().
Exeter, UK: Quail Map Company.
:Part Two, Asia+USSR Australia (). 1987.
London: Rapid Transit Publications.
:Part Three, Europe ().
London: Rapid Transit Publications.
:Part Four, North America ().
London: Rapid Transit Publications.
* Röhr, Gustav.
Schmalspurparadies Schweiz, Band 1: Berner Oberland, Jura, Westschweiz, Genfer See, Wallis ().
Aachen: Schweers + Wall.
* Rowsome, Frank; Stephan McGuire, tech.
ed. (1956).
A Trolley Car Treasury: A Century of American Streetcars-Horsecars, Cable Cars, Interurbans, and Trolleys.
New York: McGraw-Hill.
* Schweers, Hans. 1988.
Schmalspurparadies Schweiz, Band 2: Nordostschweiz, Mittelland, Zentralschweiz, Graubünden, Tessin ().
Aachen: Schweers + Wall.
* Stewart, Graham.
When Trams Were Trumps in New Zealand ().
Wellington: Grantham House Publishing.
* Stewart, Graham. 1993
The End of the Penny Section (revised and enlarged edition) ().
Wellington: Grantham House Publishing.
* Straßenbahnatlas ehem.
Sowjetunion / Tramway Atlas of the former USSR ().
Berlin: Arbeitsgemeinschaft Blickpunkt Straßenbahn, in conjunction with Light Rail Transit Association, London.
* Straßenbahnatlas Rumänien (compiled by Andreas Günter, Sergei Tarknov and Christian Blank; ).
Berlin: Arbeitsgemeinschaft Blickpunkt Straßenbahn.
* Tramway & Light Railway Atlas: Germany 1996 ().
Berlin: Arbeitsgemeinschaft Blickpunkt Straßenbahn, in conjunction with Light Rail Transit Association, London.
* Turner, Kevin.
The Directory of British Tramways: Every Passenger-Carrying Tramway, Past and Present ().
Somerset, UK: Haynes.
* Waller, Michael H., and Peter Walker.
British & Irish Tramway Systems since 1945 ().
Shepperton (Surrey), UK: Ian Allan Ltd.
