A rocket (from Italian rocchetto "bobbin"){{#tag:ref|English rocket, first attested in 1566 (OED), adopted from the Italian term, given due to the similarity in shape to the bobbin or spool used to hold the thread to be fed to a spinning wheel.
The modern Italian term is and push rockets forward simply by expelling their exhaust in the opposite direction at high speed, and can therefore work in the vacuum of space.
In fact, rockets work more efficiently in space than in an atmosphere.
Multistage rockets are capable of attaining escape velocity from Earth and therefore can achieve unlimited maximum altitude.
Compared with airbreathing engines, rockets are lightweight and powerful and capable of generating large accelerations.
To control their flight, rockets rely on momentum, airfoils, auxiliary reaction engines, gimballed thrust, momentum wheels, deflection of the exhaust stream, propellant flow, spin, or gravity.
Rockets for military and recreational uses date back to at least 13th-century China.
Significant scientific, interplanetary and industrial use did not occur until the 20th century, when rocketry was the enabling technology for the Space Age, including setting foot on the Earth's moon.
Rockets are now used for fireworks, weaponry, ejection seats, launch vehicles for artificial satellites, human spaceflight, and space exploration.
Chemical rockets are the most common type of high power rocket, typically creating a high speed exhaust by the combustion of fuel with an oxidizer.
The stored propellant can be a simple pressurized gas or a single liquid fuel that disassociates in the presence of a catalyst (monopropellants), two liquids that spontaneously react on contact (hypergolic propellants), two liquids that must be ignited to react, a solid combination of fuel with oxidizer (solid fuel), or solid fuel with liquid oxidizer (hybrid propellant system).
Chemical rockets store a large amount of energy in an easily released form, and can be very dangerous.
However, careful design, testing, construction and use minimizes risks.
History
The first gunpowder-powered rockets evolved in medieval China under the Song dynasty by the 13th century.
The Mongols adopted Chinese rocket technology and the invention spread via the Mongol invasions to the Middle East and to Europe in the mid-13th century.
Rockets are recorded in use by the Song navy in a military exercise dated to 1245.
Internal-combustion rocket propulsion is mentioned in a reference to 1264, recording that the "ground-rat", a type of firework, had frightened the Empress-Mother Gongsheng at a feast held in her honor by her son the Emperor Lizong.
Subsequently, rockets are included in the military treatise Huolongjing, also known as the Fire Drake Manual, written by the Chinese artillery officer Jiao Yu in the mid-14th century.
This text mentions the first known multistage rocket, the 'fire-dragon issuing from the water' (Huo long chu shui), thought to have been used by the Chinese navy.
Medieval and early modern rockets were used militarily as incendiary weapons in sieges.
Between 1270 and 1280, Hasan al-Rammah wrote al-furusiyyah wa al-manasib al-harbiyya (The Book of Military Horsemanship and Ingenious War Devices), which included 107 gunpowder recipes, 22 of them for rockets.
In Europe, Konrad Kyeser described rockets in his military treatise Bellifortis around 1405.
The name "rocket" comes from the Italian rocchetta, meaning "bobbin" or "little spindle", given due to the similarity in shape to the bobbin or spool used to hold the thread to be fed to a spinning wheel.
Leonhard Fronsperger and Conrad Haas adopted the Italian term into German in the mid-16th century; "rocket" appears in English by the early 17th century.
The Congreve rocket was a British weapon designed and developed by Sir William Congreve in 1804.
This rocket was based directly on the Mysorean rockets, used compressed powder and was fielded in the Napoleonic Wars.
It was Congreve rockets that Francis Scott Key was referring to when he wrote of the "rockets' red glare" while held captive on a British ship that was laying siege to Fort McHenry in 1814.
Together, the Mysorean and British innovations increased the effective range of military rockets from 100 to 2,000 yards.
The first mathematical treatment of the dynamics of rocket propulsion is due to William Moore (1813).
In 1815 Alexander Dmitrievich Zasyadko constructed rocket-launching platforms, which allowed rockets to be fired in salvos (6 rockets at a time), and gun-laying devices.
William Hale in 1844 greatly increased the accuracy of rocket artillery.
Edward Mounier Boxer further improved the Congreve rocket in 1865.
William Leitch first proposed the concept of using rockets to enable human spaceflight in 1861.
Konstantin Tsiolkovsky later (in 1903) also conceived this idea, and extensively developed a body of theory that has provided the foundation for subsequent spaceflight development.
In 1920, Professor Robert Goddard of Clark University published proposed improvements to rocket technology in A Method of Reaching Extreme Altitudes.
In 1923, Hermann Oberth (1894-1989) published Die Rakete zu den
Planetenräumen ("The Rocket into Planetary Space")
Modern rockets originated in 1926 when Goddard attached a supersonic (de Laval) nozzle to the combustion chamber of a liquid-propellant rocket.
These nozzles turn the hot gas from the combustion chamber into a cooler, hypersonic, highly directed jet of gas, more than doubling the thrust and raising the engine efficiency from 2% to 64%.
Use of liquid propellants instead of gunpowder greatly improved the effectiveness of rocket artillery in World War II, and opened up the possibility of human spaceflight after 1945.
In 1943 production of the V-2 rocket began in Germany.
In parallel with the German guided-missile programme, rockets were also used on aircraft, either for assisting horizontal take-off (RATO), vertical take-off (Bachem Ba 349 "Natter") or for powering them (Me 163, see list of World War II guided missiles of Germany).
The Allies' rocket programs were less technological, relying mostly on unguided missiles like the Soviet Katyusha rocket.
The Americans captured a large number of German rocket scientists, including Wernher von Braun, in 1945, and brought them to the United States as part of Operation Paperclip.
After World War II scientists used rockets to study high-altitude conditions, by radio telemetry of temperature and pressure of the atmosphere, detection of cosmic rays, and further techniques; note too the Bell X-1, the first crewed vehicle to break the sound barrier (1947).
Independently, in the Soviet Union's space program research continued under the leadership of the chief designer Sergei Korolev (1907-1966).
During the Cold War rockets became extremely important militarily with the development of modern intercontinental ballistic missiles (ICBMs).
The 1960s saw rapid development of rocket technology, particularly in the Soviet Union (Vostok, Soyuz, Proton) and in the United States (e.g. the X-15).
Rockets came into use for space exploration.
American crewed programs (Project Mercury, Project Gemini and later the Apollo programme) culminated in 1969 with the first crewed landing on the Moon - using equipment launched by the Saturn V rocket.
Types
;Vehicle configurations
Rocket vehicles are often constructed in the archetypal tall thin "rocket" shape that takes off vertically, but there are actually many different types of rockets including:
* tiny models such as balloon rockets, water rockets, skyrockets or small solid rockets that can be purchased at a hobby store
* space rockets such as the enormous Saturn V used for the Apollo program
* rocket-powered aircraft (including rocket assisted takeoff of conventional aircraft - RATO)
* rapid escape systems such as ejection seats and launch escape systems
Design
A rocket design can be as simple as a cardboard tube filled with black powder, but to make an efficient, accurate rocket or missile involves overcoming a number of difficult problems.
The main difficulties include cooling the combustion chamber, pumping the fuel (in the case of a liquid fuel), and controlling and correcting the direction of motion.
Components
Rockets consist of a propellant, a place to put propellant (such as a propellant tank), and a nozzle.
They may also have one or more rocket engines, directional stabilization device (s) (such as fins, vernier engines or engine gimbals for thrust vectoring, gyroscopes) and a structure (typically monocoque) to hold these components together.
Rockets intended for high speed atmospheric use also have an aerodynamic fairing such as a nose cone, which usually holds the payload.
As well as these components, rockets can have any number of other components, such as wings (rocketplanes), parachutes, wheels (rocket cars), even, in a sense, a person (rocket belt).
Vehicles frequently possess navigation systems and guidance systems that typically use satellite navigation and inertial navigation systems.
Engines
Rocket engines employ the principle of jet propulsion.
but some employ a decomposing monopropellant) that emit a hot exhaust gas.
A rocket engine can use gas propellants, solid propellant, liquid propellant, or a hybrid mixture of both solid and liquid.
Some rockets use heat or pressure that is supplied from a source other than the chemical reaction of propellant (s), such as steam rockets, solar thermal rockets, nuclear thermal rocket engines or simple pressurized rockets such as water rocket or cold gas thrusters.
With combustive propellants a chemical reaction is initiated between the fuel and the oxidizer in the combustion chamber, and the resultant hot gases accelerate out of a rocket engine nozzle (or nozzles) at the rearward-facing end of the rocket.
The acceleration of these gases through the engine exerts force ("thrust") on the combustion chamber and nozzle, propelling the vehicle (according to Newton's Third Law).
This actually happens because the force (pressure times area) on the combustion chamber wall is unbalanced by the nozzle opening; this is not the case in any other direction.
The shape of the nozzle also generates force by directing the exhaust gas along the axis of the rocket.
Rocket engines are also used to propel rocket sleds along a rail at extremely high speed.
The world record for this is Mach 8.5.
Spaceflight
Larger rockets are normally launched from a launch pad that provides stable support until a few seconds after ignition.
Due to their high exhaust velocity--rockets are particularly useful when very high speeds are required, such as orbital speed at approximately .
Spacecraft delivered into orbital trajectories become artificial satellites, which are used for many commercial purposes.
Indeed, rockets remain the only way to launch spacecraft into orbit and beyond.
They are also used to rapidly accelerate spacecraft when they change orbits or de-orbit for landing.
Also, a rocket may be used to soften a hard parachute landing immediately before touchdown (see retrorocket).
Rescue
Rockets were used to propel a line to a stricken ship so that a Breeches buoy can be used to rescue those on board.
Rockets are also used to launch emergency flares.
Some crewed rockets, notably the Saturn V and Soyuz have launch escape systems.
This is a small, usually solid rocket that is capable of pulling the crewed capsule away from the main vehicle towards safety at a moments notice.
These types of systems have been operated several times, both in testing and in flight, and operated correctly each time.
This was the case when the Safety Assurance System (Soviet nomenclature) successfully pulled away the L3 capsule during three of the four failed launches of the Soviet moon rocket, N1 vehicles 3L, 5L and 7L. In all three cases the capsule, albeit uncrewed, was saved from destruction.
Only the three aforementioned N1 rockets had functional Safety Assurance Systems.
The outstanding vehicle, 6L, had dummy upper stages and therefore no escape system giving the N1 booster a 100% success rate for egress from a failed launch.
A successful escape of a crewed capsule occurred when Soyuz T-10, on a mission to the Salyut 7 space station, exploded on the pad.
Solid rocket propelled ejection seats are used in many military aircraft to propel crew away to safety from a vehicle when flight control is lost.
Hobby, sport, and entertainment
A model rocket is a small rocket designed to reach low altitudes (e.g., for model) and be recovered by a variety of means.
According to the United States National Association of Rocketry (nar) Safety Code, model rockets are constructed of paper, wood, plastic and other lightweight materials.
The code also provides guidelines for motor use, launch site selection, launch methods, launcher placement, recovery system design and deployment and more.
Since the early 1960s, a copy of the Model Rocket Safety Code has been provided with most model rocket kits and motors.
Despite its inherent association with extremely flammable substances and objects with a pointed tip traveling at high speeds, model rocketry historically has proven to be a very safe hobby and has been credited as a significant source of inspiration for children who eventually become scientists and engineers.
Hobbyists build and fly a wide variety of model rockets.
Many companies produce model rocket kits and parts but due to their inherent simplicity some hobbyists have been known to make rockets out of almost anything.
Rockets are also used in some types of consumer and professional fireworks.
A water rocket is a type of model rocket using water as its reaction mass.
The pressure vessel (the engine of the rocket) is usually a used plastic soft drink bottle.
The water is forced out by a pressurized gas, typically compressed air.
It is an example of Newton's third law of motion.
The scale of amateur rocketry can range from a small rocket launched in one's own backyard to a rocket that reached space.
Amateur rocketry is split into three categories according to total engine impulse: low-power, mid-power, and high-power.
Hydrogen peroxide rockets are used to power jet packs, and have been used to power cars and a rocket car holds the all time (albeit unofficial) drag racing record.
Corpulent Stump is the most powerful non-commercial rocket ever launched on an Aerotech engine in the United Kingdom.
Noise
Rocket exhaust generates a significant amount of acoustic energy.
As the supersonic exhaust collides with the ambient air, shock waves are formed.
The sound intensity from these shock waves depends on the size of the rocket as well as the exhaust velocity.
The sound intensity of large, high performance rockets could potentially kill at close range.
The Space Shuttle generated 180 dB of noise around its base.
To combat this, NASA developed a sound suppression system which can flow water at rates up to 900,000 gallons per minute (57 m3/s) onto the launch pad.
The water reduces the noise level from 180 dB down to 142 dB (the design requirement is 145 dB).
Without the sound suppression system, acoustic waves would reflect off of the launch pad towards the rocket, vibrating the sensitive payload and crew.
These acoustic waves can be so severe as to damage or destroy the rocket.
Noise is generally most intense when a rocket is close to the ground, since the noise from the engines radiates up away from the jet, as well as reflecting off the ground.
This noise can be reduced somewhat by flame trenches with roofs, by water injection around the jet and by deflecting the jet at an angle.
In a closed chamber, the pressures are equal in each direction and no acceleration occurs.
If an opening is provided in the bottom of the chamber then the pressure is no longer acting on the missing section.
This opening permits the exhaust to escape.
The remaining pressures give a resultant thrust on the side opposite the opening, and these pressures are what push the rocket along.
The shape of the nozzle is important.
Consider a balloon propelled by air coming out of a tapering nozzle.
In such a case the combination of air pressure and viscous friction is such that the nozzle does not push the balloon but is pulled by it.
Using a convergent/divergent nozzle gives more force since the exhaust also presses on it as it expands outwards, roughly doubling the total force.
If propellant gas is continuously added to the chamber then these pressures can be maintained for as long as propellant remains.
Note that in the case of liquid propellant engines, the pumps moving the propellant into the combustion chamber must maintain a pressure larger than the combustion chamber - typically on the order of 100 atmospheres.
* Lift; usually relatively small effect except for rocket-powered aircraft
In addition, the inertia and centrifugal pseudo-force can be significant due to the path of the rocket around the center of a celestial body; when high enough speeds in the right direction and altitude are achieved a stable orbit or escape velocity is obtained.
These forces, with a stabilizing tail (the empennage) present will, unless deliberate control efforts are made, naturally cause the vehicle to follow a roughly parabolic trajectory termed a gravity turn, and this trajectory is often used at least during the initial part of a launch.
Vehicles can thus maintain low or even zero angle of attack, which minimizes transverse stress on the launch vehicle, permitting a weaker, and hence lighter, launch vehicle.
Drag
Drag is a force opposite to the direction of the rocket's motion relative to any air it is moving through.
This slows the speed of the vehicle and produces structural loads.
The deceleration forces for fast-moving rockets are calculated using the drag equation.
Drag can be minimised by an aerodynamic nose cone and by using a shape with a high ballistic coefficient (the "classic" rocket shape-long and thin), and by keeping the rocket's angle of attack as low as possible.
During a rocket launch, as the vehicle speed increases, and the atmosphere thins, there is a point of maximum aerodynamic drag called Max Q.
This determines the minimum aerodynamic strength of the vehicle, as the rocket must avoid buckling under these forces.
Net thrust
A typical rocket engine can handle a significant fraction of its own mass in propellant each second, with the propellant leaving the nozzle at several kilometres per second.
This means that the thrust-to-weight ratio of a rocket engine, and often the entire vehicle can be very high, in extreme cases over 100.
This compares with other jet propulsion engines that can exceed 5 for some of the better engines.
It can be shown that the net thrust of a rocket is:
:F_n = \dot\;v_
:\Delta v\ = v_e \ln \frac
where:
:m_0 is the initial total mass, including propellant, in kg (or lb)
:m_1 is the final total mass in kg (or lb)
:v_e is the effective exhaust velocity in m s.
Some theoretical designs have rockets with delta-vs over 9 km/s.
The required delta-v can also be calculated for a particular manoeuvre; for example the delta-v to launch from the surface of the Earth to Low earth orbit is about 9.7 km s at an altitude of around 200 km.
In this manoeuvre about 1.9 km/s is lost in air drag, gravity drag and gaining altitude.
The ratio \frac is sometimes called the mass ratio.
Mass ratios
Almost all of a launch vehicle's mass consists of propellant.
Mass ratio is, for any 'burn', the ratio between the rocket's initial mass and its final mass.
Everything else being equal, a high mass ratio is desirable for good performance, since it indicates that the rocket is lightweight and hence performs better, for essentially the same reasons that low weight is desirable in sports cars.
Rockets as a group have the highest thrust-to-weight ratio of any type of engine; and this helps vehicles achieve high mass ratios, which improves the performance of flights.
The higher the ratio, the less engine mass is needed to be carried.
This permits the carrying of even more propellant, enormously improving the delta-v. Alternatively, some rockets such as for rescue scenarios or racing carry relatively little propellant and payload and thus need only a lightweight structure and instead achieve high accelerations.
For example, the Soyuz escape system can produce 20g.
The maximum speeds that can be achieved with staging is theoretically limited only by the speed of light.
However the payload that can be carried goes down geometrically with each extra stage needed, while the additional delta-v for each stage is simply additive.
Acceleration and thrust-to-weight ratio
From Newton's second law, the acceleration, a, of a vehicle is simply:
:a = \frac
Where m is the instantaneous mass of the vehicle and F_n is the net force acting on the rocket
As the remaining propellant decreases, rocket vehicles become lighter and their acceleration tends to increase until the propellant is exhausted.
This means that much of the speed change occurs towards the end of the burn when the vehicle is much lighter.
some solid rockets are over 1000 In 1986, following the Space Shuttle Challenger disaster, American physicist Richard Feynman, having served on the Rogers Commission estimated that the chance of an unsafe condition for a launch of the Shuttle was very roughly 1%; more recently the historical per person-flight risk in orbital spaceflight has been calculated to be around 2% or 4%.
Costs and economics
The costs of rockets can be roughly divided into propellant costs, the costs of obtaining and/or producing the 'dry mass' of the rocket, and the costs of any required support equipment and facilities.
Most of the takeoff mass of a rocket is normally propellant.
However propellant is seldom more than a few times more expensive than gasoline per kilogram (as of 2009 gasoline was about or less), and although substantial amounts are needed, for all but the very cheapest rockets, it turns out that the propellant costs are usually comparatively small, although not completely negligible.
Even though a rocket's non-propellant, dry mass is often only between 5-20% of total mass, nevertheless this cost dominates.
For hardware with the performance used in orbital launch vehicles, expenses of $2000-$10,000+ per kilogram of dry weight are common, primarily from engineering, fabrication, and testing; raw materials amount to typically around 2% of total expense.
For most rockets except reusable ones (shuttle engines) the engines need not function more than a few minutes, which simplifies design.
Extreme performance requirements for rockets reaching orbit correlate with high cost, including intensive quality control to ensure reliability despite the limited safety factors allowable for weight reasons.
Lists
General Rocketry
* Astrodynamics-the study of spaceflight trajectories
Rocket garden-a place for viewing unlaunched rockets
* Variable-mass system-the form of Newton's second law used for describing rocket motion
Propulsion and Propellant
* Ammonium Perchlorate Composite Propellant-Most common solid rocket propellant
* Bipropellant rocket-two-part liquid or gaseous fuelled rocket
* Pulsed Rocket Motors-solid rocket that burns in segments
* Spacecraft propulsion-describes many different propulsion systems for spacecraft
* Tripropellant rocket-variable propellant mixes can improve performance
Recreational Rockets
Recreational Pyrotechnic Rocketry
* Bottle rocket-small firework type rocket often launched from bottles
* Skyrocket-fireworks that typically explode at apogee
Weaponry
* Shin Ki Chon-Korean variation of the Chinese fire arrow
* VA-111 Shkval-Russian rocket-propelled supercavitation torpedo
Rockets for Research
* Sounding rocket-suborbital rocket used for atmospheric and other research
Misc
Equivalence principle-Einstein was able to show that the effects of gravity were completely equivalent to a rocket's acceleration in any small region of space
* Rocket Festival-Tradition bamboo rockets of Laos and Northeastern Thailand
Rocket mail-the delivery of mail by rocket or missile.
Notes
