Ronald Wilson Reagan (; February 6, 1911June 5, 2004) was an American politician In his inaugural address (which Reagan himself wrote), he addressed the country's economic malaise, arguing: "In this present crisis, government is not the solution to our problems; government is the problem."
Prayer in schools and a moment of silence
During his term in office, Reagan campaigned vigorously to restore organized prayer to the schools, first as a moment of prayer and later as a moment of silence.
In 1981, Reagan became the first president to propose a constitutional amendment on school prayer.
to the 1962 Supreme Court case Engel v. Vitale, prohibiting state officials from composing an official state prayer and requiring that it be recited in the public schools.
Reagan's 1981 proposed amendment stated: "Nothing in this Constitution shall be construed to prohibit individual or group prayer in public schools or other public institutions.
No person shall be required by the United States or by any state to participate in prayer."
In 1984, Reagan again raised the issue, asking Congress "why can't freedom to acknowledge God be enjoyed again by children in every schoolroom across this land?"
In 1985, Reagan expressed his disappointment that the Supreme Court ruling still banned a moment of silence for public schools, and said that efforts to reinstitute prayer in public schools were "an uphill battle".
In 1987 Reagan renewed his call for Congress to support voluntary prayer in schools and end "the expulsion of God from America's classrooms."
Assassination attempt
On March 30, 1981 (shortly into his new administration), Reagan, his press secretary James Brady, Washington police officer Thomas Delahanty, and Secret Service agent Tim McCarthy were struck by gunfire from would-be assassin John Hinckley Jr. outside the Washington Hilton hotel.
Although "close to death" upon arrival at George Washington University Hospital, Reagan was stabilized in the emergency room, then underwent emergency exploratory surgery.
He recovered and was released from the hospital on April 11, becoming the first serving U.S. president to survive being shot in an assassination attempt.
The attempt had a significant influence on Reagan's popularity; polls indicated his approval rating to be around 73%.
Air traffic controllers' strike
In August 1981, PATCO, the union of federal air traffic controllers, went on strike, violating a federal law prohibiting government unions from striking.
Declaring the situation an emergency as described in the 1947 Taft-Hartley Act, Reagan stated that if the air traffic controllers "do not report for work within 48 hours, they have forfeited their jobs and will be terminated."
They did not return, and on August 5, Reagan fired 11,345 striking air traffic controllers who had ignored his order and used supervisors and military controllers to handle the nation's commercial air traffic until new controllers could be hired and trained.
A leading reference work on public administration concluded, "The firing of PATCO employees not only demonstrated a clear resolve by the president to take control of the bureaucracy, but it also sent a clear message to the private sector that unions no longer needed to be feared."
"Reaganomics" and the economy
During Jimmy Carter's last year in office (1980), inflation averaged 12.5%, compared with 4.4% during Reagan's last year in office (1988).
During Reagan's administration, the unemployment rate declined from 7.5% to 5.4%, with the rate reaching highs of 10.8% in 1982 and 10.4% in 1983, averaging 7.5% over the eight years, and real GDP growth averaged 3.4% with a high of 8.6% in 1983, while nominal GDP growth averaged 7.4%, and peaked at 12.2% in 1982.
Reagan implemented policies based on supply-side economics, advocating a laissez-faire philosophy and free-market fiscal policy, seeking to stimulate the economy with large, across-the-board tax cuts.
He also supported returning the United States to some sort of gold standard and successfully urged Congress to establish the U.S. Gold Commission to study how one could be implemented.
Citing the economic theories of Arthur Laffer, Reagan promoted the proposed tax cuts as potentially stimulating the economy enough to expand the tax base, offsetting the revenue loss due to reduced rates of taxation, a theory that entered political discussion as the Laffer curve.
Reaganomics was the subject of debate with supporters pointing to improvements in certain key economic indicators as evidence of success, and critics pointing to large increases in federal budget deficits and the national debt.
His policy of "peace through strength" resulted in a record peacetime defense buildup including a 40% real increase in defense spending between 1981 and 1985.
During Reagan's presidency, federal income tax rates were lowered significantly with the signing of the Economic Recovery Tax Act of 1981, which lowered the top marginal tax bracket from 70% to 50% over three years , The 1981 tax act also required that exemptions and brackets be indexed for inflation starting in 1985.
In 1982, the Job Training Partnership Act of 1982 was signed into law, initiating one of the United States' first public-private partnerships and a substantial part of the president's job creation program.
Reagan's Assistant Secretary of Labor and Chief of Staff, Al Angrisani, was a primary architect of the bill.
Conversely, Congress passed and Reagan signed into law tax increases of some nature in every year from 1981 to 1987 to continue funding such government programs as Tax Equity and Fiscal Responsibility Act of 1982 (TEFRA), Social Security, and the Deficit Reduction Act of 1984 (DEFRA).
TEFRA was the "largest peacetime tax increase in American history."
Gross domestic product (GDP) growth recovered strongly after the early 1980s recession ended in 1982, and grew during his eight years in office at an annual rate of 7.9% per year, with a high of 12.2% growth in 1981.
Unemployment peaked at 10.8% monthly rate in December 1982-higher than any time since the Great Depression-then dropped during the rest of Reagan's presidency.
Sixteen million new jobs were created, while inflation significantly decreased.
The net effect of all Reagan-era tax bills was a 1% decrease in government revenues when compared to Treasury Department revenue estimates from the Administration's first post-enactment January budgets.
However, federal income tax receipts increased from 1980 to 1989, rising from $308.7 billion to $549 billion or an average annual rate of 8.2% (2.5% attributed to higher Social Security receipts), and federal outlays grew at an annual rate of 7.1%.
Reagan's policies proposed that economic growth would occur when marginal tax rates were low enough to spur investment, which would then lead to higher employment and wages.
Critics labeled this "trickle-down economics"-the belief that tax policies that benefit the wealthy will create a "trickle-down" effect reaching the poor.
Questions arose whether Reagan's policies benefited the wealthy more than those living in poverty, Along with Reagan's 1981 cut in the top regular tax rate on unearned income, he reduced the maximum capital gains rate to 20%.
Reagan later set tax rates on capital gains at the same level as the rates on ordinary income like salaries and wages, with both topping out at 28%.
Reagan is viewed as an antitax hero despite raising taxes eleven times throughout his presidency, all in the name of fiscal responsibility.
According to Paul Krugman, "Over all, the 1982 tax increase undid about a third of the 1981 cut; as a share of GDP, the increase was substantially larger than Mr. Clinton's 1993 tax increase."
According to historian and domestic policy adviser Bruce Bartlett, Reagan's tax increases throughout his presidency took back half of the 1981 tax cut.
Reagan was opposed to government intervention, and he cut the budgets of non-military programs including Medicaid, food stamps, federal education programs He protected entitlement programs such as Social Security and Medicare, but his administration attempted to purge many people with disabilities from the Social Security disability rolls.
The administration's stance toward the savings and loan industry contributed to the savings and loan crisis.
A minority of the critics of Reaganomics also suggested that the policies partially influenced the stock market crash of 1987, but there is no consensus regarding a single source for the crash.
To cover newly spawned federal budget deficits, the United States borrowed heavily both domestically and abroad, raising the national debt from $997 billion to $2.85 trillion.
Reagan described the new debt as the "greatest disappointment" of his presidency.
He reappointed Paul Volcker as Chairman of the Federal Reserve, and in 1987 he appointed monetarist Alan Greenspan to succeed him.
Reagan ended the price controls on domestic oil that had contributed to the energy crises of 1973-74 and the summer of 1979.
The price of oil subsequently dropped, and there were no fuel shortages like those in the 1970s.
Some economists, such as Nobel Prize winners Milton Friedman and Robert Mundell, argue that Reagan's tax policies invigorated America's economy and contributed to the economic boom of the 1990s.
During Reagan's presidency, a program was initiated within the United States Intelligence Community to ensure America's economic strength.
The program, Project Socrates, developed and demonstrated the means required for the United States to generate and lead the next evolutionary leap in technology acquisition and utilization for a competitive advantage-automated innovation.
To ensure that the United States acquired the maximum benefit from automated innovation, Reagan, during his second term, had an executive order drafted to create a new federal agency to implement the Project Socrates results on a nationwide basis.
However, Reagan's term came to an end before the executive order could be coordinated and signed, and the incoming Bush administration, labeling Project Socrates as "industrial policy," had it terminated.
Civil rights
The Reagan administration was often criticized for inadequately enforcing, if not actively undermining, civil rights legislation.
In 1982, he signed a bill extending the Voting Rights Act for 25 years after a grass-roots lobbying and legislative campaign forced him to abandon his plan to ease that law's restrictions.
He also signed legislation establishing a federal Martin Luther King holiday, though he did so with reservations.
In 1988, he vetoed the Civil Rights Restoration Act, but his veto was overridden by Congress.
Reagan had argued that the legislation infringed on states' rights and the rights of churches and business owners.
Escalation of the Cold War
Reagan escalated the Cold War, accelerating a reversal from the policy of détente that began during the Carter administration, following the Afghan Saur Revolution and subsequent Soviet invasion.
He ordered a massive buildup of the United States Armed Forces In response to Soviet deployment of the SS-20, Reagan oversaw NATO's deployment of the Pershing missile in West Germany.
In 1982 Reagan tried to cut off Moscow's access to hard currency by impeding its proposed gas line to Western Europe.
It hurt the Soviet economy, but it also caused ill will among American allies in Europe who counted on that revenue.
Reagan retreated on this issue.
In 1984, journalist Nicholas Lemann interviewed Secretary of Defense Caspar Weinberger and summarized the strategy of the Reagan administration to roll back the Soviet Union:
QTEMPLATE |Their society is economically weak, and it lacks the wealth, education, and technology to enter the information age.
They have thrown everything into military production, and their society is starting to show terrible stress as a result.
They can't sustain military production the way we can.
Eventually it will break them, and then there will be just one superpower in a safe world-if, only if, we can keep spending.
Lemann noted that when he wrote that in 1984, he thought the Reaganites were living in a fantasy world.
But by 2016, Lemann stated that the passage represents "a fairly uncontroversial description of what Reagan actually did."
In a famous address on June 8, 1982, to the Parliament of the United Kingdom in the Royal Gallery of the Palace of Westminster, Reagan said, "the forward march of freedom and democracy will leave Marxism-Leninism on the ash heap of history."
On March 3, 1983, he predicted that communism would collapse, stating, "Communism is another sad, bizarre chapter in human history whose last pages even now are being written."
In a speech to the National Association of Evangelicals on March 8, 1983, Reagan called the Soviet Union "an evil empire."
After Soviet fighters downed Korean Air Lines Flight 007 near Moneron Island on September 1, 1983, carrying 269 people, including Georgia congressman Larry McDonald, Reagan labeled the act a "massacre" and declared that the Soviets had turned "against the world and the moral precepts which guide human relations among people everywhere."
The Reagan administration responded to the incident by suspending all Soviet passenger air service to the United States and dropped several agreements being negotiated with the Soviets, wounding them financially.
Under a policy that came to be known as the Reagan Doctrine, Reagan and his administration also provided overt and covert aid to anti-communist resistance movements in an effort to "rollback" Soviet-backed communist governments in Africa, Asia, and Latin America.
However, in a break from the Carter administration's policy of arming Taiwan under the Taiwan Relations Act, Reagan also agreed with the communist government in China to reduce the sale of arms to Taiwan.
Reagan deployed the CIA's Special Activities Division to Afghanistan and Pakistan.
They were instrumental in training, equipping and leading Mujahideen forces against the Soviet Army.
President Reagan's Covert Action program has been given credit for assisting in ending the Soviet occupation of Afghanistan, though some of the United States funded armaments introduced then would later pose a threat to U.S. troops in the 2001 War in Afghanistan.
The CIA also began sharing information with the Iranian government which it was secretly courting.
In one instance, in 1982, this practice enabled the government to identify and purge communists from its ministries and to virtually eliminate the pro-Soviet infrastructure in Iran.
In March 1983, Reagan introduced the Strategic Defense Initiative, a defense project Reagan believed that this defense shield could make nuclear war impossible.
There was much disbelief surrounding the program's scientific feasibility, leading opponents to dub SDI "Star Wars" and argue that its technological objective was unattainable.
For those reasons, David Gergen, a former aide to President Reagan, believes that in retrospect, SDI hastened the end of the Cold War.
Though supported by leading American conservatives who argued that Reagan's foreign policy strategy was essential to protecting U.S. security interests, critics labeled the administration's foreign policy initiatives as aggressive and imperialistic, and chided them as "warmongering."
The administration was also heavily criticized for backing anti-communist leaders accused of severe human rights violations, such as Hissène Habré of May 15, 2013.
Previous human rights violations had prompted the United States to cut off aid to the Guatemalan government, but the Reagan administration appealed to Congress to restart military aid.
Although unsuccessful with that, the administration was successful in providing nonmilitary assistance such as USAID.
Lebanese Civil War
With the approval of Congress, Reagan sent forces to Lebanon in 1983 to reduce the threat of the Lebanese Civil War.
The American peacekeeping forces in Beirut, a part of a multinational force during the Lebanese Civil War, were attacked on October 23, 1983.
The Beirut barracks bombing killed 241 American servicemen and wounded more than 60 others by a suicide truck bomber.
Reagan sent in the battleship to shell Syrian positions in Lebanon.
He then withdrew all the Marines from Lebanon.
Invasion of Grenada
On October 25, 1983, Reagan ordered U.S. forces to invade Grenada (codenamed "Operation Urgent Fury") where a 1979 coup d'état had established an independent non-aligned Marxist-Leninist government.
A formal appeal from the Organisation of Eastern Caribbean States (OECS) led to the intervention of U.S. forces; President Reagan also cited an allegedly regional threat posed by a Soviet-Cuban military build-up in the Caribbean and concern for the safety of several hundred American medical students at St. George's University as adequate reasons to invade.
Operation Urgent Fury was the first major military operation conducted by U.S. forces since the Vietnam War, several days of fighting commenced, resulting in a U.S. victory, with 19 American fatalities and 116 wounded American soldiers.
In mid-December, after a new government was appointed by the governor-general, U.S. forces withdrew.
Previous Olympics taking place in the United States had been opened by either the Vice President (three times) or another person in charge (twice).
Reagan's opponent in the 1984 presidential election was former Vice President Walter Mondale.
Following a weak performance in the first presidential debate, Reagan's ability to perform the duties of president for another term was questioned.
His confused and forgetful behavior was evident to his supporters; they had previously known him to be clever and witty.
Rumors began to circulate that Reagan had Alzheimer's disease.
Reagan rebounded in the second debate; confronting questions about his age, he quipped: "I will not make age an issue of this campaign.
I am not going to exploit, for political purposes, my opponent's youth and inexperience".
This remark generated applause and laughter, even from Mondale himself.
That November, Reagan won a landslide re-election victory, carrying 49 of the 50 states.
Mondale won only his home state of Minnesota and the District of Columbia.
In terms of electoral votes, this was the second-most lopsided presidential election in modern U.S. history (Franklin D. Roosevelt's 1936 victory over Alfred M. Landon, in which he won 98.5% or 523 of the (then-total) 531 electoral votes, ranks first).-was exceeded only by Richard Nixon in his 1972 victory over George McGovern.
He said that "drugs were menacing our society" and promised to fight for drug-free schools and workplaces, expanded drug treatment, stronger law enforcement and drug interdiction efforts, and greater public awareness.
In 1986, Reagan signed a drug enforcement bill that budgeted $1.7 billion (equivalent to $ billion in ) to fund the War on Drugs and specified a mandatory minimum penalty for drug offenses.
The bill was criticized for promoting significant racial disparities in the prison population, Defenders of the effort point to success in reducing rates of adolescent drug use: marijuana use among high-school seniors declined from 33% in 1980 to 12% in 1991.
First Lady Nancy Reagan made the War on Drugs her main priority by founding the "Just Say No" drug awareness campaign, which aimed to discourage children and teenagers from engaging in recreational drug use by offering various ways of saying "no."
Nancy Reagan traveled to 65 cities in 33 states, raising awareness about the dangers of drugs, including alcohol.
Response to AIDS epidemic
According to AIDS activist organizations such as ACT UP, the Reagan administration largely ignored the AIDS crisis, which began to unfold in the United States in 1981, the same year Reagan took office.
They also claim AIDS research was chronically underfunded during Reagan's administration, and requests for more funding by doctors at the Centers for Disease Control (CDC) were routinely denied.
By the time President Reagan had given his first prepared speech on the epidemic, some six years into his presidency, 36,058 Americans had been diagnosed with AIDS, and 20,849 had died of it.
By the end of 1989, the year Reagan left office, 115,786 people had been diagnosed with AIDS in the United States, and more than 70,000 of them had died of it.
Others, however, point out that federal funding for AIDS-related programs was $2.3 billion in 1989 and nearly $6 billion total over his presidency.
In a September 1985 press conference, Reagan said: "this is a top priority with us... there's no question about the seriousness of this and the need to find an answer."
Gary Bauer, who was Reagan's domestic policy adviser near the end of his second term, similarly argued that Reagan's belief in cabinet government led him to assign the job of speaking out against AIDS to his Surgeon General and Secretary of Health and Human Services.
Addressing Apartheid
From the late 1960s onward, the American public grew increasingly vocal in its opposition to the apartheid policy of the white-minority government of South Africa, and in its insistence that the U.S. impose economic and diplomatic sanctions on South Africa.
The strength of the anti-apartheid opposition surged during Reagan's first term in office as its component disinvestment from South Africa movement, which had been in existence for quite some years, gained critical mass following in the United States, particularly on college campuses and among mainline Protestant denominations.
President Reagan was opposed to divestiture because, as he wrote in a letter to Sammy Davis Jr., it "would hurt the very people we are trying to help and would leave us no contact within South Africa to try and bring influence to bear on the government".
He also noted the fact that the "American-owned industries there employ more than 80,000 blacks" and that their employment practices were "very different from the normal South African customs".
As an alternative strategy for opposing apartheid, the Reagan Administration developed a policy of constructive engagement with the South African government as a means of encouraging it to move away from apartheid gradually.
It was part of a larger initiative designed to foster peaceful economic development and political change throughout southern Africa.
In response, Reagan announced the imposition of new sanctions on the South African government, including an arms embargo in late 1985.
These sanctions were, however, seen as weak by anti-apartheid activists, and as insufficient by the president's opponents in Congress.
Libya bombing
Relations between Libya and the United States under President Reagan were continually contentious, beginning with the Gulf of Sidra incident in 1981; by 1982, Libyan leader Muammar Gaddafi was considered by the CIA to be, along with USSR leader Leonid Brezhnev and Cuban leader Fidel Castro, part of a group known as the "unholy trinity" and was also labeled as "our international public enemy number one" by a CIA official.
These tensions were later revived in early April 1986, when a bomb exploded in a Berlin discothèque, resulting in the injury of 63 American military personnel and death of one serviceman.
Stating that there was "irrefutable proof" that Libya had directed the "terrorist bombing," Reagan authorized the use of force against the country.
In the late evening of April 15, 1986, the United States launched a series of airstrikes on ground targets in Libya.
Britain's prime minister, Margaret Thatcher, allowed the U.S. Air Force to use Britain's air bases to launch the attack, on the justification that the UK was supporting America's right to self-defense under the United Nations Charter.
Immigration
Reagan signed the Immigration Reform and Control Act in 1986.
The act made it illegal to knowingly hire or recruit illegal immigrants, required employers to attest to their employees' immigration status, and granted amnesty to approximately three million illegal immigrants who entered the United States before January 1, 1982, and had lived in the country continuously.
Upon signing the act at a ceremony held beside the newly refurbished Statue of Liberty, Reagan said, "The legalization provisions in this act will go far to improve the lives of a class of individuals who now must hide in the shadows, without access to many of the benefits of a free and open society.
Very soon, many of these men and women will be able to step into the sunlight and, ultimately, if they choose, they may become Americans."
Reagan also said, "The employer sanctions program is the keystone and major element.
It will remove the incentive for illegal immigration by eliminating the job opportunities which draw illegal aliens here."
The affair became a political scandal in the United States during the 1980s.
The International Court of Justice, whose jurisdiction to decide the case was disputed by the United States, ruled that the United States had violated international law and breached treaties in Nicaragua in various ways.
President Reagan professed that he was unaware of the plot's existence.
He opened his own investigation and appointed two Republicans and one Democrat, John Tower, Brent Scowcroft and Edmund Muskie, respectively, to investigate the scandal.
The commission could not find direct evidence that Reagan had prior knowledge of the program, but criticized him heavily for his disengagement from managing his staff, making the diversion of funds possible.
A separate report by Congress concluded that "If the president did not know what his national security advisers were doing, he should have."
The scandal resulted in eleven convictions and fourteen indictments within Reagan's staff.
Many Central Americans criticize Reagan for his support of the Contras, calling him an anti-communist zealot, blinded to human rights abuses, while others say he "saved Central America."
Daniel Ortega, Sandinistan and president of Nicaragua, said that he hoped God would forgive Reagan for his "dirty war against Nicaragua."
End of the Cold War
Until the early 1980s, the United States had relied on the qualitative superiority of its weapons to essentially frighten the Soviets, but the gap had been narrowed.
Although the Soviet Union did not accelerate military spending after President Reagan's military buildup, their enormous military expenses, in combination with collectivized agriculture and inefficient planned manufacturing, were a heavy burden for the Soviet economy.
At the same time, oil prices in 1985 fell to one-third of the previous level; oil was the primary source of Soviet export revenues.
These factors contributed to a stagnant Soviet economy during Gorbachev's tenure.
Reagan was deeply committed first to the abolition of nuclear weapons worldwide.
Second, he was committed (thanks to his California friend Edward Teller, the father of the hydrogen bomb) to building a defense against nuclear weapons, called the Strategic Defense Initiative (SDI, nicknamed "Star Wars").
American scientists were not sure that SDI would work, but they were sure its total cost would reach in the trillions of dollars.
Reagan encouraged Congress to think of it as billions of new dollars spent in individual districts.
If SDI worked, thousands of Soviet nuclear-armed missiles would be worthless - if launched, they could all be shot down.
Gorbachev made it his highest priority to get Reagan to abandon SDI.
Meanwhile, Reagan escalated the rhetoric.
In his famous 1983 speech to religious fundamentalists, he outlined his strategy for victory.
First, he labeled the Soviet system an "Evil Empire" and a failure-its demise would be a godsend for the world.
Second, Reagan explained his strategy was an arms buildup that would leave the Soviets far behind, with no choice but to negotiate arms reduction.
Finally, displaying his characteristic optimism, he praised liberal democracy and promised that such a system eventually would triumph over Soviet communism.
Reagan appreciated the revolutionary change in the direction of the Soviet policy with Mikhail Gorbachev, and shifted to diplomacy, intending to encourage the Soviet leader to pursue substantial arms agreements.
Reagan believed that if he could persuade the Soviets to allow for more democracy and free speech, this would lead to reform and the end of Communism.
The critical summit was at Reykjavík in October 1986, where they met alone, with translators but with no aides.
To the astonishment of the world, and the chagrin of Reagan's most conservative supporters, they agreed to abolish all nuclear weapons.
Gorbachev then asked the end of SDI.
Reagan said no, claiming that it was defensive only, and that he would share the secrets with the Soviets.
No deal was achieved.
Speaking at the Berlin Wall on June 12, 1987, Reagan challenged Gorbachev to go further, saying "General Secretary Gorbachev, if you seek peace, if you seek prosperity for the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe, if you seek liberalization, come here to this gate!
Mr. Gorbachev, open this gate!
Mr. Gorbachev, tear down this wall!"
Later, in November 1989, East German authorities began allowing citizens to pass freely through border checkpoints, and began dismantling the Wall the following June; its demolition was completed in 1992.
The two leaders laid the framework for the Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty, or START I; Reagan insisted that the name of the treaty be changed from Strategic Arms Limitation Talks to Strategic Arms Reduction Talks.
When Reagan visited Moscow for the fourth summit in 1988, he was viewed as a celebrity by the Soviets.
A journalist asked the president if he still considered the Soviet Union the evil empire.
"No," he replied, "I was talking about another time, another era."
At Gorbachev's request, Reagan gave a speech on free markets at the Moscow State University.
Honoring German war dead at Bitburg, Germany
Reagan came under much criticism in 1985 when he was accused of honoring Nazi war criminals at a cemetery in West Germany.
In February 1985, the administration accepted an invitation for Reagan to visit a German military cemetery in Bitburg and to place a wreath alongside West German Chancellor Helmut Kohl.
Deaver was given assurances by a German head of protocol that no war criminals were buried there.
It was later determined that the cemetery held the graves of 49 members of the Waffen-SS.
What neither Deaver nor other administration officials initially realized was that many Germans distinguished the regular SS, who typically were composed of Nazi true believers, and the Waffen-SS which were attached to military units and composed of conscripted soldiers.
As the controversy brewed in April 1985, Reagan issued a statement that called the Nazi soldiers buried in that cemetery as themselves "victims," a designation which ignited a stir over whether Reagan had equated the SS men to victims of the Holocaust.
Pat Buchanan, Reagan's Director of Communications, argued that the president did not equate the SS members with the actual Holocaust, but as victims of the ideology of Nazism.
Now strongly urged to cancel the visit, the president responded that it would be wrong to back down on a promise he had made to Chancellor Kohl.
On May 5, 1985, President Reagan and Chancellor Kohl first visited the site of the former Nazi Bergen-Belsen concentration camp and then the Bitburg cemetery where, along with two military generals, they did place a wreath.
Health
See also:
Early in his presidency, Reagan started wearing a custom-made, technologically advanced hearing aid, first in his right ear and later in his left ear as well.
His decision to go public in 1983 regarding his wearing the small, audio-amplifying device boosted their sales.
On July 13, 1985, Reagan underwent surgery at Bethesda Naval Hospital to remove cancerous polyps from his colon.
He relinquished presidential power to the Vice President for eight hours in a similar procedure as outlined in the 25th Amendment, which he specifically avoided invoking.
The surgery lasted just under three hours and was successful.
Reagan resumed the powers of the presidency later that day.
In August of that year, he underwent an operation to remove skin cancer cells from his nose.
In October, more skin cancer cells were detected on his nose and removed.
In January 1987, Reagan underwent surgery for an enlarged prostate that caused further worries about his health.
No cancerous growths were found, and he was not sedated during the operation.
In July of that year, aged 76, he underwent a third skin cancer operation on his nose.
On January 7, 1989, Reagan underwent surgery at Walter Reed Army Medical Center to repair a Dupuytren's contracture of the ring finger of his left hand.
The surgery lasted for more than three hours and was performed under regional anesthesia.
This procedure was done just 13 days before he left office.
For this reason, he had a hand and finger bandage the day of his farewell speech and during President Bush's inauguration.
Judiciary
During the 1980 presidential campaign, Reagan pledged that he would appoint the first female Supreme Court Justice if given the opportunity.
That opportunity came during his first year in office when Associate Justice Potter Stewart retired; Reagan selected Sandra Day O'Connor, who was confirmed unanimously by the Senate.
In his second term, Reagan had three opportunities to fill a Supreme Court vacancy.
When Chief Justice Warren E. Burger retired in September 1986, Reagan nominated incumbent Associate Justice William Rehnquist to succeed Burger as Chief Justice (the appointment of an incumbent associate justice as chief justice is subject to a separate confirmation process).
Then, following Rehnquist's confirmation, the president named Antonin Scalia to fill the consequent associate justice vacancy.
Reagan's final opportunity to fill a vacancy arose in mid-1987 when Associate Justice Lewis F. Powell Jr. announced his intention to retire.
Reagan initially chose Conservative jurist Robert Bork to succeed Powell.
Bork's nomination was strongly opposed by civil and women's rights groups, and by Senate Democrats.
That October, after a contentious Senate debate, the nomination was rejected by a roll call vote of 42-58.
Soon afterward, Reagan announced his intention to nominate Douglas Ginsburg to the Court.
However, before his name was submitted to the Senate, Ginsburg withdrew himself from consideration.
Anthony Kennedy was subsequently nominated and confirmed as Powell's successor.
Along with his four Supreme Court appointments, Reagan appointed 83 judges to the United States courts of appeals, and 290 judges to the United States district courts.
Early in his presidency, Reagan appointed Clarence M. Pendleton Jr., of San Diego as the first African American to chair the United States Commission on Civil Rights.
Pendleton tried to steer the commission into a conservative direction in line with Reagan's views on social and civil rights policy during his tenure from 1981 until his sudden death in 1988.
Pendleton soon aroused the ire of many civil rights advocates and feminists when he ridiculed the comparable worth proposal as being "Looney Tunes."
Post-presidency (1989-2004)
Assault
On April 13, 1992, Reagan was assaulted by an anti-nuclear protester during a luncheon speech while accepting an award from the National Association of Broadcasters in Las Vegas.
The protester, Richard Springer, smashed a 2-foot-high (60 cm) 30-pound (13.5 kg) crystal statue of an eagle that the broadcasters had given the former president.
Flying shards of glass hit Reagan, but he was not injured.
Using media credentials, Springer intended to announce government plans for an underground nuclear weapons test in the Nevada desert the following day.
Springer was the founder of an anti-nuclear group called the 100th Monkey.
Following his arrest on assault charges, a Secret Service spokesman could not explain how Springer got past the federal agents who guarded Reagan's life at all times.
Later, Springer pled guilty to reduced charges and said he had not meant to hurt Reagan through his actions.
He pled guilty to a misdemeanor federal charge of interfering with the Secret Service, but other felony charges of assault and resisting officers were dropped.
Public speaking
After leaving office in 1989, the Reagans purchased a home in Bel Air, Los Angeles, in addition to the Reagan Ranch in Santa Barbara.
They regularly attended Bel Air Church and occasionally made appearances on behalf of the Republican Party; Reagan delivered a well-received speech at the 1992 Republican National Convention.
Previously, on November 4, 1991, the Ronald Reagan Presidential Library was dedicated and opened to the public.
Five presidents and six first ladies attended the dedication ceremonies, marking the first time that five presidents were gathered in the same location.
Reagan continued to speak publicly in favor of a line-item veto; the Brady Bill; a constitutional amendment requiring a balanced budget; and the repeal of the 22nd Amendment, which prohibits anyone from serving more than two terms as president.
In 1992 Reagan established the Ronald Reagan Freedom Award with the newly formed Ronald Reagan Presidential Foundation.
His final public speech occurred on February 3, 1994, during a tribute to him in Washington, D.C.; his last major public appearance was at the funeral of Richard Nixon on April 27, 1994.
Alzheimer's disease
Announcement and reaction: 1994
In August 1994, at the age of 83, Reagan was diagnosed with Alzheimer's disease, writing in part:
QTEMPLATE |I have recently been told that I am one of the millions of Americans who will be afflicted with Alzheimer's Disease ...
At the moment I feel just fine.
I intend to live the remainder of the years God gives me on this earth doing the things I have always done ...
I now begin the journey that will lead me into the sunset of my life.
I know that for America there will always be a bright dawn ahead.
Thank you, my friends.
May God always bless you.
After his diagnosis, letters of support from well-wishers poured into his California home.
But there was also speculation over how long Reagan had demonstrated symptoms of mental degeneration.
At a June 1981 reception for mayors, not long after the assassination attempt, Reagan greeted his Secretary of Housing and Urban Development Samuel Pierce by saying "How are you, Mr. Mayor?
How are things in your city?
", although he later realized his mistake.
In a 2011 book, Reagan's son Ron said he had suspected early signs of his father's dementia as early as 1984.
Former CBS White House correspondent Lesley Stahl recounted that in her final meeting with the president in 1986, Reagan did not seem to know who Stahl was.
Stahl came close to reporting that Reagan was senile, but at the end of the meeting, he had regained his alertness.
Dr. Lawrence Altman of The New York Times noted that "the line between mere forgetfulness and the beginning of Alzheimer's can be fuzzy", and all four of Reagan's White House doctors said that they saw no evidence of Alzheimer's while he was president.
Daniel Ruge, a neurosurgeon who served as Physician to the President from 1981 to 1985, said that he never detected signs of the disease while speaking almost every day with Reagan.
John E. Hutton, who served from 1985 to 1989, said the president "absolutely" did not "show any signs of dementia or Alzheimer's". or 1993,
Reagan suffered an episode of head trauma in July 1989, five years before his diagnosis.
After being thrown from a horse in Mexico, a subdural hematoma was found and surgically treated later in the year.
Nancy Reagan, citing what doctors told her, asserted that her husband's 1989 fall hastened the onset of Alzheimer's disease, Ruge said it is possible that the horse accident affected Reagan's memory.
Reagan suffered a fall at his Bel Air home on January 13, 2001, resulting in a broken hip.
The fracture was repaired the following day, and the 89-year-old Reagan returned home later that week, although he faced difficult physical therapy at home.
On February 6, 2001, Reagan reached the age of 90, becoming the third former president to do so .
Reagan's public appearances became much less frequent with the progression of the disease, and as a result, his family decided that he would live in quiet semi-isolation with his wife Nancy.
She told CNN's Larry King in 2001 that very few visitors were allowed to see her husband because she felt that "Ronnie would want people to remember him as he was."
After her husband's diagnosis and death, Nancy Reagan became a stem-cell research advocate, asserting that it could lead to a cure for Alzheimer's.
Death and funeral
Reagan died of pneumonia, complicated by Alzheimer's disease, at his home in the Bel Air district of Los Angeles, California, on the afternoon of June 5, 2004.
Speaking in Paris, France, President George W. Bush called Reagan's death "a sad hour in the life of America".
He also declared June 11 a National Day of Mourning.
Reagan's body was taken to the Kingsley and Gates Funeral Home in Santa Monica, California, where well-wishers paid tribute by laying flowers and American flags in the grass.
On June 7, his body was transferred to the Ronald Reagan Presidential Library, where a brief family funeral, conducted by Pastor Michael Wenning, was held.
Reagan's body lay in repose in the Library lobby until June 9; over 100,000 people viewed the coffin.
On June 9, Reagan's body was flown to Washington, D.C., where he became the tenth U.S. president to lie in state in the Rotunda of the U.S. Capitol; in thirty-four hours, 104,684 people filed past the coffin.
On June 11, a state funeral was conducted in the Washington National Cathedral, presided over by President George W. Bush.
Eulogies were given by former British Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher, former Canadian Prime Minister Brian Mulroney, and both former President George H. W. Bush and President George W. Bush.
Also in attendance were Mikhail Gorbachev and many world leaders, including British Prime Minister Tony Blair; Prince Charles, representing his mother Queen Elizabeth II; German Chancellor Gerhard Schröder; Italian Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi; and interim presidents Hamid Karzai of Afghanistan and Ghazi al-Yawer of Iraq.
After the funeral, the Reagan entourage was flown back to the Ronald W. Reagan Presidential Library in Simi Valley, California, where another service was held, and President Reagan was interred.
At the time of his death, Reagan was the longest-lived president in U.S. history, having lived 93 years and 120 days (2 years, 8 months, and 23 days longer than John Adams, whose record he surpassed).
He was also the first U.S. president to die in the 21st century.
Reagan's burial site is inscribed with the words he delivered at the opening of the Ronald Reagan Presidential Library: "I know in my heart that man is good, that what is right will always eventually triumph and that there is purpose and worth to each and every life."
Legacy
Since Reagan left office in 1989, substantial debate has occurred among scholars, historians, and the general public surrounding his legacy.
Supporters have pointed to a more efficient and prosperous economy as a result of Reagan's economic policies, foreign policy triumphs including a peaceful end to the Cold War, and a restoration of American pride and morale.
after a decline in American confidence and self-respect under Jimmy Carter's perceived weak leadership, particularly during the Iran hostage crisis, as well as his gloomy, dreary outlook for the future of the United States during the 1980 election.
Critics point out that Reagan's economic policies resulted in rising budget deficits, and that the Iran-Contra affair lowered American credibility.
Opinions of Reagan's legacy among the country's leading policymakers and journalists differ as well.
Edwin Feulner, president of The Heritage Foundation, said that Reagan "helped create a safer, freer world" and said of his economic policies: "He took an America suffering from 'malaise'... and made its citizens believe again in their destiny."
However, Mark Weisbrot, co-Director of the Center for Economic and Policy Research, contended that Reagan's "economic policies were mostly a failure" while Howard Kurtz of The Washington Post opined that Reagan was "a far more controversial figure in his time than the largely gushing obits on television would suggest."
Despite the continuing debate surrounding his legacy, many conservative and liberal scholars agree that Reagan has been the most influential president since Franklin D. Roosevelt, leaving his imprint on American politics, diplomacy, culture, and economics through his effective communication and pragmatic compromising.
Since he left office, historians have reached a consensus, as summarized by British historian M. J. Heale, who finds that scholars now concur that Reagan rehabilitated conservatism, turned the nation to the right, practiced a considerably pragmatic conservatism that balanced ideology and the constraints of politics, revived faith in the presidency and American exceptionalism, and contributed to victory in the Cold War.
Cold War
In 2017 a C-SPAN survey of scholars - most of whom opposed his specific policies - ranked Reagan in terms of leadership in comparison with all 42 presidents.
He ranked number nine in international relations.
Reagan's major achievement was that the USSR and Communism collapsed, causing the U.S. to become the world's only superpower.
His admirers say he won the Cold War.
After 40 years of high tension, the USSR pulled back in the last years of Reagan's second term.
In 1989, the Kremlin lost control of all its East European satellites.
In 1991, Communism was overthrown in the USSR, and on December 26, 1991, the Soviet Union ceased to exist.
The resulting states were no threat to the United States.
Reagan's exact role is debated, with many believing that Reagan's defense policies, economic policies, military policies and hard-line rhetoric against the Soviet Union and Communism-together with his summits with General Secretary Gorbachev-played a significant part in ending the Cold War.
He was the first president to reject containment and détente and to put into practice the concept that the Soviet Union could be defeated rather than simply negotiated with, a post-Détente strategy, Reagan's aggressive rhetoric toward the USSR had mixed effects; Jeffery W. Knopf observes that being labeled "evil" probably made no difference to the Soviets but gave encouragement to the East-European citizens opposed to communism.
and deemed him "a great president."
Margaret Thatcher, former Prime Minister of the United Kingdom, said of Reagan, "he warned that the Soviet Union had an insatiable drive for military power...
but he also sensed it was being eaten away by systemic failures impossible to reform."
She later said, "Ronald Reagan had a higher claim than any other leader to have won the Cold War for liberty and he did it without a shot being fired." and received the United States Military Academy's Sylvanus Thayer Award.
In 1981, Reagan was inducted as a Laureate of The Lincoln Academy of Illinois and awarded the Order of Lincoln (the state's highest honor) by the Governor of Illinois in the area of Government.
In 1982 he was given the "Distinguished Service Medal" by the American Legion because his highest priority was the national defense.
In 1983, he received the highest distinction of the Scout Association of Japan, the Golden Pheasant Award.
In 1989, Reagan was made an Honorary Knight Grand Cross of the Order of the Bath, one of the highest British orders (this entitled him to the use of the post-nominal letters "GCB" but, as a foreign national, not to be known as "Sir Ronald Reagan"); only two U.S. presidents have received this honor since attaining office, Reagan and George H. W. Bush, while Dwight D. Eisenhower received his before becoming President in his capacity as a general after World War II.
Reagan was also named an honorary Fellow of Keble College, Oxford.
Japan awarded him the Grand Cordon of the Order of the Chrysanthemum in 1989; he was the second U.S. president to receive the order and the first to have it given to him for personal reasons (Dwight D. Eisenhower received it as a commemoration of U.S.-Japanese relations).
In 1990, Reagan was awarded the WPPAC's Top Honor Prize because he signed the Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces Treaty with H.E. Mikhail Sergeyevich Gorbachev (then President of Russia), ending the cold war.
On January 18, 1993, Reagan received the Presidential Medal of Freedom (awarded with distinction), the highest honor that the United States can bestow, from President George H. W. Bush, his Vice President and successor.
Reagan was also awarded the Republican Senatorial Medal of Freedom, the highest honor bestowed by Republican members of the Senate.
On Reagan's 87th birthday in 1998, Washington National Airport was renamed Ronald Reagan Washington National Airport by a bill signed into law by President Bill Clinton.
That year, the Ronald Reagan Building and International Trade Center was dedicated in Washington, D.C.
He was among 18 included in Gallup's most admired man and woman poll of the 20th century, from a poll conducted in the U.S. in 1999; two years later, was christened by Nancy Reagan and the United States Navy.
It is one of few Navy ships christened in honor of a living person and the first aircraft carrier to be named in honor of a living former president.
In 1998 the U.S. Navy Memorial Foundation awarded Reagan its Naval Heritage award for his support of the U.S. Navy and military in both his film career and while he served as president.
Congress authorized the creation of the Ronald Reagan Boyhood Home in Dixon, Illinois in 2002, pending federal purchase of the property.
On May 16 of that year, Nancy Reagan accepted the Congressional Gold Medal, the highest civilian honor bestowed by Congress, on behalf of the president and herself.
After Reagan's death, the United States Postal Service issued a President Ronald Reagan commemorative postage stamp in 2005.
Later in the year, CNN, along with the editors of Time magazine, named him the "most fascinating person" of the network's first 25 years; Time listed Reagan one of the 100 Most Important People of the 20th century as well.
The Discovery Channel asked its viewers to vote for The Greatest American in June 2005; Reagan placed in first place, ahead of Lincoln and Martin Luther King Jr.
In 2006, Reagan was inducted into the California Hall of Fame, located at The California Museum.
"Ronald Reagan Day" in the state of California in honor of their most famous predecessor.
In 2010, Schwarzenegger signed Senate Bill 944, authored by Senator George Runner, to make every February 6 Ronald Reagan Day in California.
In 2007, Polish President Lech Kaczyński posthumously conferred on Reagan the highest Polish distinction, the Order of the White Eagle, saying that Reagan had inspired the Polish people to work for change and helped to unseat the repressive communist regime; Kaczyński said it "would not have been possible if it was not for the tough-mindedness, determination, and feeling of mission of President Ronald Reagan."
Reagan backed the nation of Poland throughout his presidency, supporting the anti-communist Solidarity movement, along with Pope John Paul II; the Ronald Reagan Park, a public facility in Gdańsk, was named in his honor.
On June 3, 2009, Nancy Reagan unveiled a statue of her late husband in the United States Capitol rotunda.
The statue represents the state of California in the National Statuary Hall Collection.
After Reagan's death, both major American political parties agreed to erect a statue of Reagan in the place of that of Thomas Starr King.
The day before, President Obama signed the Ronald Reagan Centennial Commission Act into law, establishing a commission to plan activities to mark the upcoming centenary of Reagan's birth.
On Independence Day 2011 a statue to Reagan was unveiled in London, England, outside the U.S. embassy in Grosvenor Square.
The unveiling was supposed to be attended by Reagan's wife Nancy, but she did not attend; former Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice took her place and read a statement on her behalf.
President Reagan's friend and British prime minister during his presidency, Margaret Thatcher, was also unable to attend due to frail health.
Portraits
File:Ronald Reagan with family 1916-17.jpg1916-17.
Pictured from left: Father Jack, older brother Neil, Reagan (with "Dutchboy" haircut), and mother Nelle
File:Ronald Reagan in Dixon, Illinois, 1920s.jpg|1920s.
As a teenager, in Dixon, Illinois
File:Ronald Reagan and General Electric Theater 1954-62.jpg|.
Hosting General Electric Theater
File:Ronald Reagan with cowboy hat 12-0071M edit.jpg|1976.
At his home at Rancho del Cielo
* List of Presidents of the United States by previous experience
* Presidents of the United States on U.S. postage stamps
Sources
* Holden, Kenneth.
Making of the Great Communicator: Ronald Reagan's Transformation From Actor To Governor (2013)
Further reading
Primary sources
Historiography
* Johns, Andrew L., ed.
A Companion to Ronald Reagan (Wiley-Blackwell, 2015).
xiv, 682 pp.; topical essays by scholars emphasizing historiography; http:/ book 9781118607770 contents free at many libraries
