Sleep is a naturally recurring state of mind and body, characterized by altered consciousness, relatively inhibited sensory activity, reduced muscle activity and inhibition of nearly all voluntary muscles during rapid eye movement (REM) sleep, and reduced interactions with surroundings.
It is distinguished from wakefulness by a decreased ability to react to stimuli, but more reactive than coma or disorders of consciousness, with sleep displaying very different and active brain patterns.
Sleep occurs in repeating periods, in which the body alternates between two distinct modes: REM sleep and non-REM sleep.
Although REM stands for "rapid eye movement", this mode of sleep has many other aspects, including virtual paralysis of the body.
A well-known feature of sleep is the dream, an experience typically recounted in narrative form, which resembles waking life while in progress, but which usually can later be distinguished as fantasy.
During sleep, most of the body's systems are in an anabolic state, helping to restore the immune, nervous, skeletal, and muscular systems; these are vital processes that maintain mood, memory, and cognitive function, and play a large role in the function of the endocrine and immune systems.
The internal circadian clock promotes sleep daily at night.
The diverse purposes and mechanisms of sleep are the subject of substantial ongoing research.
Sleep is a highly conserved behavior across animal evolution.
Humans may suffer from various sleep disorders, including dyssomnias such as insomnia, hypersomnia, narcolepsy, and sleep apnea; parasomnias such as sleepwalking and REM behavior disorder; bruxism; and circadian rhythm sleep disorders.
The advent of artificial light has substantially altered sleep timing in industrialized countries.
Physiology
The most pronounced physiological changes in sleep occur in the brain.
The brain uses significantly less energy during sleep than it does when awake, especially during non-REM sleep.
In areas with reduced activity, the brain restores its supply of adenosine triphosphate (ATP), the molecule used for short-term storage and transport of energy.
In quiet waking, the brain is responsible for 20% of the body's energy use, thus this reduction has a noticeable effect on overall energy consumption.
Sleep increases the sensory threshold.
In other words, sleeping persons perceive fewer stimuli, but can generally still respond to loud noises and other salient sensory events.
Key physiological methods for monitoring and measuring changes during sleep include electroencephalography (EEG) of brain waves, electrooculography (EOG) of eye movements, and electromyography (EMG) of skeletal muscle activity.
Simultaneous collection of these measurements is called polysomnography, and can be performed in a specialized sleep laboratory.
Sleep researchers also use simplified electrocardiography (EKG) for cardiac activity and actigraphy for motor movements.
The sleep cycle of alternate NREM and REM sleep takes an average of 90 minutes, occurring 4-6 times in a good night's sleep.
The American Academy of Sleep Medicine (AASM) divides NREM into three stages: N1, N2, and N3, the last of which is also called delta sleep or slow-wave sleep.
The whole period normally proceeds in the order: N1 → N2 → N3 → N2 → REM.
REM sleep occurs as a person returns to stage 2 or 1 from a deep sleep.
Awakening involves heightened electrical activation in the brain, beginning with the thalamus and spreading throughout the cortex.
however, people can also reliably wake themselves up at a specific time with no need for an alarm.
Scientific studies on sleep have shown that sleep stage at awakening is an important factor in amplifying sleep inertia.
Timing
Sleep timing is controlled by the circadian clock (Process C), sleep-wake homeostasis (Process S), and to some extent by individual will.
Circadian clock
Sleep timing depends greatly on hormonal signals from the circadian clock, or Process C, a complex neurochemical system which uses signals from an organism's environment to recreate an internal day-night rhythm.
Process C counteracts the homeostatic drive for sleep during the day (in diurnal animals) and augments it at night.
The circadian clock exerts constant influence on the body, effecting sinusoidal oscillation of body temperature between roughly 36.2 °C and 37.2 °C.
The suprachiasmatic nucleus itself shows conspicuous oscillation activity, which intensifies during subjective day and drops to almost nothing during subjective night.
The circadian pacemaker in the suprachiasmatic nucleus has a direct neural connection to the pineal gland, which releases the hormone melatonin at night.
Circadian prolactin secretion begins in the late afternoon, especially in women, and is subsequently augmented by sleep-induced secretion, to peak in the middle of the night.
Circadian rhythm exerts some influence on the nighttime secretion of growth hormone.
Sleepiness increases during the night.
REM sleep occurs more during body temperature minimum within the circadian cycle, whereas slow-wave sleep can occur more independently of circadian time.
Modern humans often find themselves desynchronized from their internal circadian clock, due to the requirements of work (especially night shifts), long-distance travel, and the influence of universal indoor lighting.
Sleep deprivation tends to cause slower brain waves in the frontal cortex, shortened attention span, higher anxiety, impaired memory, and a grouchy mood.
Conversely, a well-rested organism tends to have improved memory and mood.
Neurophysiological and functional imaging studies have demonstrated that frontal regions of the brain are particularly responsive to homeostatic sleep pressure.
There is disagreement on how much sleep debt it is possible to accumulate, and whether sleep debt is accumulated against an individual's average sleep or some other benchmark.
It is also unclear whether the prevalence of sleep debt among adults has changed appreciably in the industrialized world in recent decades.
Sleep debt does show some evidence of being cumulative.
Subjectively, however, humans seem to reach maximum sleepiness after 30 hours of waking.
One neurochemical indicator of sleep debt is adenosine, a neurotransmitter that inhibits many of the bodily processes associated with wakefulness.
Adenosine levels increase in the cortex and basal forebrain during prolonged wakefulness, and decrease during the sleep-recovery period, potentially acting as a homeostatic regulator of sleep.
Coffee and caffeine temporarily block the effect of adenosine, prolong sleep latency, and reduce total sleep time and quality.
Social timing
Humans are also influenced by aspects of social time, such as the hours when other people are awake, the hours when work is required, the time on the clock, etc.
Time zones, standard times used to unify the timing for people in the same area, correspond only approximately to the natural rising and setting of the sun.
The approximate nature of the timezone can be shown with China, a country which used to span five time zones and now officially uses only one (UTC+8).
Naps
The siesta habit has recently been associated with a 37% lower coronary mortality, possibly due to reduced cardiovascular stress mediated by daytime sleep.
Short naps at mid-day and mild evening exercise were found to be effective for improved sleep, cognitive tasks, and mental health in elderly people.
Many people experience a temporary drop in alertness in the early afternoon, commonly known as the "post-lunch dip".
While a large meal can make a person feel sleepy, the post-lunch dip is mostly an effect of the circadian clock.
People naturally feel most sleepy at two times of the day about 12 hours apart-for example, at 2:00 a.m. and 2:00 p.m.
At those two times, the body clock is activated.
At about 2 p.m. (14:00), it overrides the homeostatic buildup of sleep debt, allowing several more hours of wakefulness.
At about 2 a.m. (02:00), with the daily sleep debt paid off, it is activated again to ensure a few more hours of sleep.
Genetics
It is hypothesized that a considerable amount of sleep-related behavior, such as when and how long a person needs to sleep, is regulated by genetics.
Researchers have discovered some evidence that seems to support this assumption.
Monozygotic (identical) but not dizygotic (fraternal) twins tend to have similar sleep habits.
Neurotransmitters, molecules whose production can be traced to specific genes, are one genetic influence on sleep which can be analyzed.
The circadian clock has its own set of genes.
Genes which may influence sleep include ABCC9, DEC2, and variants near PAX 8 and VRK2.
Quality
The quality of sleep may be evaluated from an objective and a subjective point of view.
Objective sleep quality refers to how difficult it is for a person to fall asleep and remain in a sleeping state, and how many times they wake up during a single night.
Poor sleep quality disrupts the cycle of transition between the different stages of sleep.
Subjective sleep quality in turn refers to a sense of being rested and regenerated after awaking from sleep.
A study by A. Harvey et al. (2002) found that insomniacs were more demanding in their evaluations of sleep quality than individuals who had no sleep problems.
Homeostatic sleep propensity (the need for sleep as a function of the amount of time elapsed since the last adequate sleep episode) must be balanced against the circadian element for satisfactory sleep.
Along with corresponding messages from the circadian clock, this tells the body it needs to sleep.
A person who regularly awakens at an early hour will generally not be able to sleep much later than his or her normal waking time, even if moderately sleep-deprived.
The timing is correct when the following two circadian markers occur after the middle of the sleep episode and before awakening: maximum concentration of the hormone melatonin, and minimum core body temperature.
Ideal duration
Human sleep needs vary by age and amongst individuals; sleep is considered to be adequate when there is no daytime sleepiness or dysfunction.
Moreover, self-reported sleep duration is only moderately correlated with actual sleep time as measured by actigraphy, and those affected with sleep state misperception may typically report having slept only four hours despite having slept a full eight hours.
Researchers have found that sleeping 6-7 hours each night correlates with longevity and cardiac health in humans, though many underlying factors may be involved in the causality behind this relationship.
Sleep difficulties are furthermore associated with psychiatric disorders such as depression, alcoholism, and bipolar disorder.
Up to 90 percent of adults with depression are found to have sleep difficulties.
Dysregulation detected by EEG includes disturbances in sleep continuity, decreased delta sleep and altered REM patterns with regard to latency, distribution across the night and density of eye movements.
Children
By the time infants reach the age of two, their brain size has reached 90 percent of an adult-sized brain; a majority of this brain growth has occurred during the period of life with the highest rate of sleep.
The hours that children spend asleep influence their ability to perform on cognitive tasks.
Children who sleep through the night and have few night waking episodes have higher cognitive attainments and easier temperaments than other children.
Sleep also influences language development.
To test this, researchers taught infants a faux language and observed their recollection of the rules for that language.
Infants who slept within four hours of learning the language could remember the language rules better, while infants who stayed awake longer did not recall those rules as well.
There is also a relationship between infants' vocabulary and sleeping: infants who sleep longer at night at 12 months have better vocabularies at 26 months.
the National Sleep Foundation in the US announced newly revised recommendations as shown in the table below.
Functions
Restoration
The human organism physically restores itself during sleep, healing itself and removing metabolic wastes which build up during periods of activity.
This restoration takes place mostly during slow-wave sleep, during which body temperature, heart rate, and brain oxygen consumption decrease.
The brain, especially, requires sleep for restoration, whereas in the rest of the body these processes can take place during quiescent waking.
In both cases, the reduced rate of metabolism enables countervailing restorative processes.
While awake, metabolism generates reactive oxygen species, which are damaging to cells.
During sleep, metabolic rates decrease and reactive oxygen species generation is reduced allowing restorative processes to take over.
The sleeping brain has been shown to remove metabolic waste products at a faster rate than during an awake state.
It is further theorized that sleep helps facilitate the synthesis of molecules that help repair and protect the brain from these harmful elements generated during waking.
Anabolic hormones such as growth hormones are secreted preferentially during sleep.
The concentration of the sugar compound glycogen in the brain increases during sleep, and is depleted through metabolism during wakefulness.
It has been shown that sleep deprivation affects the immune system.
It is now possible to state that "sleep loss impairs immune function and immune challenge alters sleep," and it has been suggested that sleep increases white blood cell counts.
A 2014 study found that depriving mice of sleep increased cancer growth and dampened the immune system's ability to control cancers.
The effect of sleep duration on somatic growth is not completely known.
One study recorded growth, height, and weight, as correlated to parent-reported time in bed in 305 children over a period of nine years (age 1-10).
It was found that "the variation of sleep duration among children does not seem to have an effect on growth."
It is well established that slow-wave sleep affects growth hormone levels in adult men.
Memory processing
It has been widely accepted that sleep must support the formation of long-term memory, and generally increasing previous learning and experiences recalls.
However, its benefit seems to depend on the phase of sleep and the type of memory.
For example, declarative and procedural memory recall tasks applied over early and late nocturnal sleep, as well as wakefulness controlled conditions, have been shown that declarative memory improves more during early sleep (dominated by SWS) while procedural memory during late sleep (dominated by REM sleep).
Regarding to declarative memory, the functional role of SWS has been associated with hippocampal replays of previously encoded neural patterns that seem to facilitate long-term memories consolidation.
It assumes the hippocampus might hold information only temporarily and in fast-learning rate, whereas the neocortex is related to long-term storage and slow-learning rate.
This dialogue between hippocampus and neocortex occurs in parallel with hippocampal sharp-wave ripples and thalamo-cortical spindles, synchrony that drives the formation of spindle-ripple event which seems to be a prerequisite for the formation of long-term memories.
Reactivation of memory also occurs during wakefulness and its function is associated with serving to update the reactivated memory with new encoded information, whereas reactivations during SWS are presented as crucial for memory stabilization.
Furthermore, nocturnal reactivation seems to share the same neural oscillatory patterns as reactivation during wakefulness, processes which might be coordinated by theta activity.
During wakefulness, theta oscillations have been often related to successful performance in memory tasks, and cued memory reactivations during sleep have been showing that theta activity is significantly stronger in subsequent recognition of cued stimuli as compared to uncued ones, possibly indicating a strengthening of memory traces and lexical integration by cuing during sleep.
However, the beneficial effect of TMR for memory consolidation seems to occur only if the cued memories can be related to prior knowledge.
Dreaming
During sleep, especially REM sleep, people tend to have dreams: elusive first-person experiences which seem realistic while in progress, despite their frequently bizarre qualities.
Dreams can seamlessly incorporate elements within a person's mind that would not normally go together.
They can include apparent sensations of all types, especially vision and movement.
People have proposed many hypotheses about the functions of dreaming.
Sigmund Freud postulated that dreams are the symbolic expression of frustrated desires that have been relegated to the unconscious mind, and he used dream interpretation in the form of psychoanalysis in attempting to uncover these desires.
Counterintuitively, penile erections during sleep are not more frequent during sexual dreams than during other dreams.
The parasympathetic nervous system experiences increased activity during REM sleep which may cause erection of the penis or clitoris.
In males, 80% to 95% of REM sleep is normally accompanied by partial to full penile erection, while only about 12% of men's dreams contain sexual content.
John Allan Hobson and Robert McCarley propose that dreams are caused by the random firing of neurons in the cerebral cortex during the REM period.
Neatly, this theory helps explain the irrationality of the mind during REM periods, as, according to this theory, the forebrain then creates a story in an attempt to reconcile and make sense of the nonsensical sensory information presented to it.
This would explain the odd nature of many dreams.
Using antidepressants, acetaminophen, ibuprofen, or alcoholic beverages is thought to potentially suppress dreams, whereas melatonin may have the ability to encourage them.
Disorders
Insomnia
Insomnia is a general term for difficulty falling asleep and/or staying asleep.
Insomnia is the most common sleep problem, with many adults reporting occasional insomnia, and 10-15% reporting a chronic condition.
Insomnia can have many different causes, including psychological stress, a poor sleep environment, an inconsistent sleep schedule, or excessive mental or physical stimulation in the hours before bedtime.
Insomnia is often treated through behavioral changes like keeping a regular sleep schedule, avoiding stimulating or stressful activities before bedtime, and cutting down on stimulants such as caffeine.
The sleep environment may be improved by installing heavy drapes to shut out all sunlight, and keeping computers, televisions and work materials out of the sleeping area.
A 2010 review of published scientific research suggested that exercise generally improves sleep for most people, and helps sleep disorders such as insomnia.
The optimum time to exercise may be 4 to 8 hours before bedtime, though exercise at any time of day is beneficial, with the exception of heavy exercise taken shortly before bedtime, which may disturb sleep.
However, there is insufficient evidence to draw detailed conclusions about the relationship between exercise and sleep.
Sleeping medications such as Ambien and Lunesta are an increasingly popular treatment for insomnia.
Although these nonbenzodiazepine medications are generally believed to be better and safer than earlier generations of sedatives, they have still generated some controversy and discussion regarding side-effects.
White noise appears to be a promising treatment for insomnia.
Obstructive sleep apnea
Obstructive sleep apnea is a condition in which major pauses in breathing occur during sleep, disrupting the normal progression of sleep and often causing other more severe health problems.
Apneas occur when the muscles around the patient's airway relax during sleep, causing the airway to collapse and block the intake of oxygen.
Obstructive sleep apnea is more common than central sleep apnea.
As oxygen levels in the blood drop, the patient then comes out of deep sleep in order to resume breathing.
When several of these episodes occur per hour, sleep apnea rises to a level of seriousness that may require treatment.
Diagnosing sleep apnea usually requires a professional sleep study performed in a sleep clinic, because the episodes of wakefulness caused by the disorder are extremely brief and patients usually do not remember experiencing them.
Instead, many patients simply feel tired after getting several hours of sleep and have no idea why.
Major risk factors for sleep apnea include chronic fatigue, old age, obesity and snoring.
Aging and sleep
People over age 60 with prolonged sleep (8-10 hours or more; average sleep duration of 7-8 hours in the elderly) have a 33% increased risk of all-cause mortality and 43% increased risk of cardiovascular diseases, while those with short sleep (less than 7 hours) have a 6% increased risk of all-cause mortality.
Sleep disorders, including sleep apnea, insomnia, or periodic limb movements, occur more commonly in the elderly, each possibly impacting sleep quality and duration.
Various practices are recommended to mitigate sleep disturbances in the elderly, such as having a light bedtime snack, avoidance of caffeine, daytime naps, excessive evening stimulation, and tobacco products, and using regular bedtime and wake schedules.
Other disorders
Sleep disorders include narcolepsy, periodic limb movement disorder (PLMD), restless leg syndrome (RLS), upper airway resistance syndrome (UARS), and the circadian rhythm sleep disorders.
Fatal familial insomnia, or FFI, an extremely rare genetic disease with no known treatment or cure, is characterized by increasing insomnia as one of its symptoms; ultimately sufferers of the disease stop sleeping entirely, before dying of the disease.
Somnambulism, known as sleep walking, is a sleeping disorder, especially among children.
Drugs and diet
Drugs which induce sleep, known as hypnotics, include benzodiazepines, although these interfere with REM; Nonbenzodiazepine hypnotics such as eszopiclone (Lunesta), zaleplon (Sonata), and zolpidem (Ambien); Antihistamines, such as diphenhydramine (Benadryl) and doxylamine; Alcohol (ethanol), despite its rebound effect later in the night and interference with REM; barbiturates, which have the same problem; melatonin, a component of the circadian clock, and released naturally at night by the pineal gland; and cannabis, which may also interfere with REM.
Stimulants, which inhibit sleep, include caffeine, an adenosine antagonist; amphetamine, MDMA, empathogen-entactogens, and related drugs; cocaine, which can alter the circadian rhythm, and methylphenidate, which acts similarly; and other analeptic drugs like modafinil and armodafinil with poorly understood mechanisms.
Dietary and nutritional choices may affect sleep duration and quality.
One 2016 review indicated that a high carbohydrate diet promoted shorter onset to sleep and longer duration sleep than a high fat diet.
A 2012 investigation indicated that mixed micronutrients and macronutrients are needed to promote quality sleep.
A varied diet containing fresh fruits and vegetables, low saturated fat, and whole grains may be optimal for individuals seeking to improve sleep quality.
The most striking differences are observed between societies that have plentiful sources of artificial light and ones that do not.
Ekirch attributes the change to increases in "street lighting, domestic lighting and a surge in coffee houses," which slowly made nighttime a legitimate time for activity, decreasing the time available for rest.
During Ramadan, many Muslims sleep during the day rather than at night.
In some societies, people sleep with at least one other person (sometimes many) or with animals.
In other cultures, people rarely sleep with anyone except for an intimate partner.
In almost all societies, sleeping partners are strongly regulated by social standards.
For example, a person might only sleep with the immediate family, the extended family, a spouse or romantic partner, children, children of a certain age, children of specific gender, peers of a certain gender, friends, peers of equal social rank, or with no one at all.
Sleep may be an actively social time, depending on the sleep groupings, with no constraints on noise or activity.
in Greek mythology, Hypnos (the god of sleep) and Thanatos (the god of death) were both said to be the children of Nyx (the goddess of night).
Many cultural stories have been told about people falling asleep for extended periods of time.
The earliest of these stories is the ancient Greek legend of Epimenides of Knossos.
According to the biographer Diogenes Laërtius, Epimenides was a shepherd on the Greek island of Crete.
One day, one of his sheep went missing and he went out to look for it, but became tired and fell asleep in a cave under Mount Ida. is about a man in colonial America named Rip Van Winkle who falls asleep on one of the Catskill Mountains and wakes up twenty years later after the American Revolution.
File:Carel Fabritius - De poort bewaker (1654).jpg|The Sentry (1654) by Carel Fabritius
File:Museo del Prado - Goya - Caprichos - No. 43 - El sueño de la razon produce monstruos.jpg|The Sleep of Reason Produces Monsters (1799) by Francisco Goya
File:J%C3%A9r%C3%B4me-Martin_Langlois_-_Diana_and_Endymion_-_WGA12461.jpg|Diana and Endymion ( 1822) by Jérôme-Martin Langlois
File:Honoré Daumier - The Second Class Carriage - Walters 371224.jpg|The Second Class Carriage (1864) by Honoré Daumier
File:Waterhouse-sleep and his half-brother death-1874.jpg|Sleep and his Half-brother Death (1874) by John William Waterhouse
File:William-Adolphe Bouguereau (1825-1905) - Lullaby (1875).jpg|Lullaby (1875) by William-Adolphe Bouguereau
File:Илья Е. Репин - Отдых.
Портрет В.А.Репинa (1882).jpg|Taking a Rest (1882) by Ilya Repin
File:George Hare - Victory of Faith.jpg|Victory of Faith (1889) by Saint George Hare
File:Auf dem Ofen 1895.jpg|Zwei schlafende Mädchen auf der Ofenbank (1895) Albert Anker
File:Flaming June, by Frederic Lord Leighton (1830-1896).jpg|Flaming June ( 1895) by Frederic Lord Leighton
File:Noon, rest from work - Van Gogh.jpeg|Noon - Rest from Work (1890) by Vincent van Gogh (after Millet)
File:Paul Klimsch Schlafender Jaguar.jpg|Sleeping Jaguar, by Paul Klimsch
File:Albert Anker - Schlafendes
Mädchen auf einer Holzbank.jpg|Sleeping Girl on a Wooden Bench by Albert Anker
File:Chrapek, the Sleepy one... (3734650615).jpg|Chrapek (Snorer), Wrocław's dwarfs
