The capybara (Hydrochoerus hydrochaeris) is a mammal native to South America.
It is the largest living rodent in the world.
Also called chigüire, chigüiro (in Colombia and Venezuela) and carpincho, it is a member of the genus Hydrochoerus, of which the only other extant member is the lesser capybara (Hydrochoerus isthmius).
Its close relatives include guinea pigs and rock cavies, and it is more distantly related to the agouti, the chinchilla, and the coypu.
The capybara inhabits savannas and dense forests and lives near bodies of water.
It is a highly social species and can be found in groups as large as 100 individuals, but usually lives in groups of 10-20 individuals.
The capybara is not a threatened species but it is hunted for its meat and hide and also for grease from its thick fatty skin, which is used in the pharmaceutical trade.
Etymology
Its common name is derived from Tupi , a complex agglutination of (leaf) + (slender) + (eat) + (a suffix for agent nouns), meaning "one who eats slender leaves", or "grass-eater".
Capybaras were called several times "Cuartins" in Colombia in 2018: in Eje Cafetero (Alcalà) and near Barranquilla where the meat was offered as "Cuartin Asado".
The scientific name, both hydrochoerus and hydrochaeris, comes from Greek ( "water") and ( "pig, hog").
Classification and phylogeny
The capybara and the lesser capybara belong to the subfamily Hydrochoerinae along with the rock cavies.
The living capybaras and their extinct relatives were previously classified in their own family Hydrochoeridae.
The taxonomy of fossil hydrochoerines is also in a state of flux.
In recent years, the diversity of fossil hydrochoerines has been substantially reduced.
The dental formula is .
Their muzzles are blunt, with nostrils, and the eyes and ears are near the top of their heads.
Its karyotype has 2n
66 and FN
Capybara have flourished in cattle ranches.
In 2011, one specimen was spotted on the Central Coast of California.
Diet and predation
Capybaras are herbivores, grazing mainly on grasses and aquatic plants, In addition, a female alerts males she is in estrus by whistling through her nose.
their population is stable throughout most of their South American range, though in some areas hunting has reduced their numbers.
The European Association of Zoos and Aquaria asked Drusillas Park in Alfriston, Sussex, England to keep the studbook for capybaras, to monitor captive populations in Europe.
The studbook includes information about all births, deaths and movements of capybaras, as well as how they are related.
Capybaras are farmed for meat and skins in South America.
capybaras are occasionally kept as pets in the United States.
The image of a capybara features on the 2-peso coin of Uruguay.
In Japan, following the lead of Izu Shaboten Park in 1982, multiple establishments in Japan that raise capybaras have adopted the practice of having them relax in onsen during the winter.
*Josephoartigasia monesi, an extinct species identified as the largest rodent ever
*Kurloff cell, a type of cell found in capybaras and guinea pigs
