The Yellow River or Huang He () is the second longest river in China, after the Yangtze River, and the sixth longest river system in the world at the estimated length of .
Originating in the Bayan Har Mountains in Qinghai province of Western China, it flows through nine provinces, and it empties into the Bohai Sea near the city of Dongying in Shandong province.
The Yellow River basin has an east-west extent of about and a north-south extent of about .
Its total drainage area is about .
Its basin was the birthplace of ancient Chinese civilization, and it was the most prosperous region in early Chinese history.
There are frequent devastating floods and course changes produced by the continual elevation of the river bed, sometimes above the level of its surrounding farm fields.
Name
Early Chinese literature including the Yu Gong or Tribute of Yu dating to the Warring States period (475-221 BC) refers to the Yellow River as simply (Old Chinese: *C.gˤaj, modern Chinese (Pinyin) Hé), a character that has come to mean "river" in modern usage.
The first appearance of the name (Old Chinese: *N-kʷˤaŋ C.gˤaj; Middle Chinese: Huang Ha because the river runs clear before it enters the Loess Plateau, but the current name of the river among Inner Mongolians is Ȟatan Gol (, "Queen River").
In Mongolia itself, it is simply called the Šar Mörön (, "Yellow River").
In Qinghai, the river's Tibetan name is "River of the Peacock" (; )
History
Dynamics
The Yellow River is one of several rivers that are essential for China's existence.
At the same time, however, it has been responsible for several deadly floods, including the only natural disasters in recorded history to have killed more than a million people.
Among the deadliest were the 1332-33 flood during the Yuan dynasty, the 1887 flood during the Qing dynasty which killed anywhere from 900,000 to 2 million people, and a Republic of China era 1931 flood that killed 1-4 million people.
The cause of the floods is the large amount of fine-grained loess carried by the river from the Loess Plateau, which is continuously deposited along the bottom of its channel.
The sedimentation causes natural dams to slowly accumulate.
These subaqueous dams were unpredictable and generally undetectable.
Eventually, the enormous amount of water has to find a new way to the sea, forcing it to take the path of least resistance.
When this happens, it bursts out across the flat North China Plain, sometimes taking a new channel and inundating any farmland, cities or towns in its path.
The traditional Chinese response of building higher and higher levees along the banks sometimes also contributed to the severity of the floods: When flood water did break through the levees, it could no longer drain back into the river bed as it would after a normal flood as the river bed was sometimes now higher than the surrounding countryside.
These changes could cause the river's mouth to shift as much as , sometimes reaching the ocean to the north of Shandong Peninsula and sometimes to the south.
Another historical source of devastating floods is the collapse of upstream ice dams in Inner Mongolia with an accompanying sudden release of vast quantities of impounded water.
There have been 11 such major floods in the past century, each causing tremendous loss of life and property.
Nowadays, explosives dropped from aircraft are used to break the ice dams before they become dangerous.
Before modern dams came to China, the Yellow River used to be extremely prone to flooding.
In the 2,540 years from 595 BC to 1946 AD, the Yellow River has been reckoned to have flooded 1,593 times, shifting its course 26 times noticeably and nine times severely.
These floods include some of the deadliest natural disasters ever recorded.
Before modern disaster management, when floods occurred, some of the population might initially die from drowning but then many more would suffer from the ensuing famine and spread of diseases.
Ancient times
In Chinese mythology, the giant Kua Fu drained the Yellow River and the Wei River to quench his burning thirst as he pursued the Sun.
Historical documents from the Spring and Autumn period and Qin dynasty indicate that the Yellow River at that time flowed considerably north of its present course.
These accounts show that after the river passed Luoyang, it flowed along the border between Shanxi and Henan Provinces, then continued along the border between Hebei and Shandong before emptying into Bohai Bay near present-day Tianjin.
Another outlet followed essentially the present course.
Sabotage of dikes, canals, and reservoirs and deliberate flooding of rival states became a standard military tactic during the Warring States period.
As the Yellow River valley was the major entryway to the Guanzhong area and the state of Qin from the North China Plain, Qin heavily fortified the Hangu Pass; it saw numerous battles and was also an important chokepoint protecting the Han capitals of Chang'an and Luoyang.
Major flooding in AD 11 is credited with the downfall of the short-lived Xin dynasty, and another flood in AD 70 returned the river north of Shandong on essentially its present course.
Breaches occurred regardless: one at Henglong in 1034 divided the course in three and repeatedly flooded the northern regions of Dezhou and Bozhou.
For the first time in recorded history, the Yellow River shifted completely south of Shandong Peninsula and flowed into the Yellow Sea.
By 1194, the mouth of the Huai River had been blocked.
The buildup of silt deposits was such that even after the Yellow River later shifted its course, the Huai could no longer flow along its historic course, but instead, its water pools into Hongze Lake and then runs southward toward the Yangtze River.
A flood in 1344 returned the Yellow River south of Shandong.
The Yuan dynasty was waning, and the emperor forced enormous teams to build new embankments for the river.
The terrible conditions helped to fuel rebellions that led to the founding of the Ming dynasty.
The 1642 flood was man-made, caused by the attempt of the Ming governor of Kaifeng to use the river to destroy the peasant rebels under Li Zicheng who had been besieging the city for the past six months.
He directed his men to break the dikes in an attempt to flood the rebels, but destroyed his own city instead: the flood and the ensuing famine and plague are estimated to have killed 300,000 of the city's previous population of 378,000.
The once-prosperous city was nearly abandoned until its rebuilding under the Kangxi Emperor in the Qing dynasty.
Recent times
Between 1851 and 1855, the Yellow River returned to the north amid the floods that provoked the Nien and Taiping Rebellions.
The 1887 flood has been estimated to have killed between 900,000 and 2 million people, and is the second-worst natural disaster in history (excluding famines and epidemics).
The Yellow River more or less adopted its present course during the 1897 flood.
The 1931 flood killed an estimated 1,000,000 to 4,000,000,
Geography
According to the China Exploration and Research Society, the source of the Yellow River is at 34° 29' 31.1" N, 96° 20' 24.6" E in the Bayan Har Mountains near the eastern edge of the Yushu Tibetan Autonomous Prefecture.
The source tributaries drain into Gyaring Lake and Ngoring Lake on the western edge of Golog Prefecture high in the Bayan Har Mountains of Qinghai.
In the Zoige Basin along the boundary with Gansu, the Yellow River loops northwest and then northeast before turning south, creating the "Ordos Loop", and then flows generally eastward across the North China Plain to the Gulf of Bohai, draining a basin of which nourishes 140 million people with drinking water and irrigation.
Upper reaches
The upper reaches of the Yellow River constitute a segment starting from its source in the Bayan Har Mountains and ending at Hekou Town (Togtoh County), Inner Mongolia just before it turns sharply to the south.
This segment has a total length of and total basin area of , 51.4% of the total basin area.
Along this length, the elevation of the Yellow River drops , with an average grade of 0.10%.
The source section flows mainly through pastures, swamps, and knolls between the Bayan Har Mountains, and the Anemaqen (Amne Machin) Mountains in Qinghai.
The river water is clear and flows steadily.
Crystal clear lakes are characteristic of this section.
The two main lakes along this section are Lake Zhaling () and Lake Eling (), with capacities of 4.7 billion and 10.8 billion m³ (166 and 381 billion ft3), respectively.
At elevations over ) above sea level they are the two largest plateau freshwater lakes nationwide.
A significant amount of land in the Yellow River's source area has been designated as the Sanjiangyuan ("'Three Rivers' Sources") National Nature Reserve, to protect the source region of the Yellow River, the Yangtze, and the Mekong.
Flowing east at the eastern edge of the Amne Machin Mountains, the Yellow River enters Maqu County in Gansu.
Here, the river skirts through the high-altitude peat bog known as the Zoigê Wetlands and makes a sharp turn towards the northwest forming the border between Maqu and Zoigê County in Sichuan.
Flowing now along the northern edge of Amne Machin, the river reenters Qinghai and gradually curves north towards the Longyang Gorge at Xinghai.
The valley section stretches from Longyang Gorge in Qinghai to Qingtong Gorge in Gansu.
Steep cliffs line both sides of the river.
The water bed is narrow and the average drop is large, so the flow in this section is extremely turbulent and fast.
There are 20 gorges in this section, the most famous of these being the Longyang, Jishi, Liujia, Bapan, and Qingtong gorges.
The flow conditions in this section makes it the best location for hydroelectric plants.
The Yellow River exits Qinghai for the second and final time in these gorges and enters Gansu for the second time just before Liujia Gorge.
Downstream from the Yanguo Gorge, the provincial capital of Lanzhou is built upon the Yellow River's banks.
The Yellow River flows northeasterly out of Gansu and into Ningxia before the Qingtong Gorge.
After emerging from the Qingtong Gorge, the river comes into a section of vast alluvial plains, the Yinchuan Plain and Hetao Plain.
In this section, the regions along the river are mostly deserts and grasslands, with very few tributaries.
The flow is slow.
The Hetao Plain has a length of and width of .
It is historically the most important irrigation plain along the Yellow River.
Middle reaches
The Ordos Loop formed by an enormous twist of the Yellow River, beginning at Zhongning County in Ningxia and ending with a drastic eastward turn at its confluence with the Wei at Tongguan in Shaanxi.
However, the official division for the middle reaches of the river run from Hekou in Togtoh County, Inner Mongolia, to Zhengzhou, Henan.
The middle reaches are long, with a basin area of , 45.7% of the total, with a total elevation drop of , an average drop of 0.074%.
There are 30 large tributaries along the middle reaches, and the water flow is increased by 43.5% on this stage.
The middle reaches contribute 92% of the river's silts.
The middle stream of the Yellow River passes through the Loess Plateau, where substantial erosion takes place.
The large amount of mud and sand discharged into the river makes the Yellow River the most sediment-laden river in the world.
The highest recorded annual level of silts discharged into the Yellow River is 3.91 billion tons in 1933.
The highest silt concentration level was recorded in 1977 at 920 kg ft3).
These sediments later deposit in the slower lower reaches of the river, elevating the river bed and creating the famous "river above ground".
From Hekou to Yumenkou, the river passes through the longest series of continuous valleys on its main course, collectively called the Jinshan Valley.
The abundant hydrodynamic resources stored in this section make it the second most suitable area to build hydroelectric power plants.
The famous Hukou Waterfall is in the lower part of this valley on the border of Shanxi and Shaanxi.
Lower reaches
In the lower reaches, from Zhengzhou, Henan to its mouth, a distance of , the river is confined to a levee-lined course as it flows to the northeast across the North China Plain before emptying into the Bohai Sea.
The basin area in this stage is only , a mere 3% of the total, because few tributaries add to the flow in this stage; nearly all rivers to the south drain into the Huai River, whereas those to the north drain into the Hai River.
The Huai River Basin, for example, is separated from the Yellow River Basin by the south dike of the Yellow River.
The total drop in elevation of the lower reaches is , with an average grade of 0.012%.
The silts received from the middle reaches form sediments here, elevating the river bed.
Excessive sediment deposits have raised the riverbed several meters above the surrounding ground.
At Kaifeng, Henan, the Yellow River is above the ground level.
Tributaries
Tributaries of the Yellow River listed from its source to its mouth include:
*Wei River (the Wei River is the largest of these tributaries)
Characteristics
The Yellow River is notable for the large amount of silt it carries-1.6 billion tons annually at the point where it descends from the Loess Plateau.
If it is running to the sea with sufficient volume, 1.4 billion tons are carried to the sea per year.
One estimate gives 34 kilograms of silt per cubic meter as opposed to 10 for the Colorado and 1 for the Nile.
The Yellow River delta totals 8,000 square kilometers (3,090 mi²).
However, with the decrease in silt reaching the sea, it has been reported to be shrinking slightly each year since 1996 through erosion.
The highest volume occurs during the rainy season from July to October, when 60% of the annual volume of the river flows.
Maximum demand for irrigation is needed between March and June.
In order to capture excess water for use when needed and for flood control and electricity generation, several dams have been built, but their expected life is limited due to the high silt load.
A proposed South-North Water Transfer Project involves several schemes to divert water from the Yangtze River: one in the western headwaters of the rivers where they are closest to one another, another from the upper reaches of the Han River, and a third using the route of the old Grand Canal.
Due to its heavy load of silt the Yellow River is a depositing streamthat is, it deposits part of its carried burden of soil in its bed in stretches where it is flowing slowly.
These deposits elevate the riverbed which flows between natural levees in its lower reaches.
Should a flood occur, the river may break out of the levees into the surrounding lower flood plain and take
a new channel.
Historically this has occurred about once every hundred years.
In modern times, considerable effort has been made to strengthen levees and control floods.
Hydroelectric power dams
Below is the list of hydroelectric power stations built on the Yellow River, arranged according to the first year of operation (in brackets):
*Qingtong Gorge hydroelectric power station (1968; Qingtongxia, Ningxia)
*Liujiaxia Dam (Liujia Gorge) (1974; Yongjing County, Gansu)
*Yanguoxia Dam (Yanguo Gorge) hydroelectric power station (1975; Yongjing County, Gansu)
*Bapanxia Dam (Bapan Gorge) (1980; Xigu District, Lanzhou, Gansu)
*Wanjiazhai Dam (1999; Pianguan County, Shaanxi and Inner Mongolia)
As reported in 2000, the 7 largest hydro power plants (Longyangxia, Lijiaxia, Liujiaxia, Yanguoxia, Bapanxia, Daxia and Qinglongxia) had the total installed capacity of 5,618 MW.
Crossings
(Luokou Pontoon Bridge ) over the Yellow River in Jinan, Shandong
The main bridges and ferries by the province names in the order of downstream to upstream are:
Shandong
* Binzhou-Laiwu Expressway Binzhou Yellow River Bridge (Binzhou-Zibo)
* G20 Qingdao-Yinchuan Expressway Jinan Yellow River Bridge (Jinan)
* Beijing-Shanghai High-speed Railway Jinan Yellow River Bridge (Jinan-Dezhou)
* Beijing-Taipei Expressway Jinan Yellow River Bridge (Jinan-Dezhou)
* Beijing-Shanghai Railway Jinan Yellow River New Bridge (Jinan-Dezhou)
Shandong-Henan
* Beijing-Kowloon Railway Sunkou Yellow River Bridge (Jining-Puyang)
* Juancheng Yellow River Highway Bridge (Heze-Puyang)
* Dongming Yellow River Highway Bridge (Heze-Puyang)
Henan
Shanxi-Henan
Shaanxi-Henan
Ningxia
Inner Mongolia
Gansu
Qinghai
Fauna
Fish
The Yellow River basin is rich in fish, being the home of more than 160 native species in 92 genera and 28 families, including 19 species found nowhere else in the world (endemic).
However, due to habitat loss, pollution, introduced species and overfishing many of the natives have declined or disappeared entirely; several are recognized as threatened on China's Red List.
Dams and their reservoirs have increased the habitat for species of slow-moving and static waters, while it excluded species of flowing waters and prevented the up- and down-stream breeding migration of others.
Of the 18 endemics in the Yellow River basin, 12 are (or were) found in the upper part.
Two turtle species are native to the Yellow River basin: the Chinese pond turtle and Chinese softshell turtle.
Both species-but especially the softshell-are widely farmed for food.
A variety of the Chinese softshell turtle popular in Chinese gourmets is called the Yellow River Turtle ().
Nowadays most of the Yellow River Turtles eaten in China's restaurants comes from turtle farms, which may or may not be near the Yellow River.
In 2007, construction started in Wangcun, Henan on a large farm for raising this turtle variety.
With the capacity for raising 5 million turtles a year, the facility was expected to become Henan's largest farm of this kind.
The huge, entirely aquatic Chinese giant salamander, a species that has declined drastically due primarily to persecution for food and traditional medicine, is native to the Yellow River and other Chinese rivers.
It is farmed in large numbers in several parts of China and genetic studies have revealed that the captive stock mostly is of Yellow River origin.
As these often are released back into the wild, the Yellow River type of the Chinese giant salamander has spread to other parts of China, which represents a problem to the other types.
Pollution
On 25 November 2008, Tania Branigan of The Guardian filed a report "China's Mother River: the Yellow River", claiming that severe pollution has made one-third of China's Yellow River unusable even for agricultural or industrial use, due to factory discharges and sewage from fast-expanding cities.
The Yellow River Conservancy Commission had surveyed more than of the river in 2007 and said 33.8% of the river system registered worse than "level five" according to the criteria used by the UN Environment Program.
Level five is unfit for drinking, aquaculture, industrial use, or even agriculture.
The report said waste and sewage discharged into the system last year totaled 4.29b tons.
Industry and manufacturing made up 70% of the discharge into the river with households accounting for 23% and just over 6% coming from other sources.
In culture
In ancient times, it was believed that the Yellow River flowed from Heaven as a continuation of the Milky Way.
In a Chinese legend, Zhang Qian is said to have been commissioned to find the source of the Yellow River.
After sailing up-river for many days, he saw a girl spinning and a cow herd.
Upon asking the girl where he was, she presented him with her shuttle with instructions to show it to the astrologer Yen Chün-p'ing.
When he returned, the astrologer recognized it as the shuttle of the Weaving Girl (Vega), and, moreover, said that at the time Zhang received the shuttle, he had seen a wandering star interpose itself between the Weaving Girl and the cow herd (Altair).
The provinces of Hebei and Henan derive their names from the Yellow River.
Their names mean, respectively, "North of the River" and "South of the River", although the border between them is never stable historically and currently the border between Hebei and Henan is not the Yellow River but the Zhang River instead.
;Mother river, China's Sorrow, and cradle of Chinese civilization.
Traditionally, it is believed that the Chinese civilization originated in the Yellow River basin.
The Chinese refer to the river as "the Mother River" and "the cradle of the Chinese civilization".
During the long history of China, the Yellow River has been considered a blessing as well as a curse and has been nicknamed both "China's Pride" and "China's Sorrow".
;When the Yellow River flows clear.
Sometimes the Yellow River is poetically called the "Muddy Flow" ().
The Chinese idiom "when the Yellow River flows clear" is used to refer to an event that will never happen and is similar to the English expression "when pigs fly".
"The Yellow River running clear" was reported as a good omen during the reign of the Yongle Emperor, along with the appearance of such auspicious legendary beasts as qilin (an African giraffe brought to China by a Bengal embassy aboard Zheng He's ships in 1414) and zouyu (not positively identified) and other strange natural phenomena.
* North China University of Water Conservancy and Electric Power
