Asthma is a common long-term inflammatory disease of the airways of the lungs.
Symptoms include episodes of wheezing, coughing, chest tightness, and shortness of breath.
These may occur a few times a day or a few times per week.
Environmental factors include exposure to air pollution and allergens.
Asthma is classified according to the frequency of symptoms, forced expiratory volume in one second (FEV1), and peak expiratory flow rate.
It may also be classified as atopic or non-atopic, where atopy refers to a predisposition toward developing a type 1 hypersensitivity reaction.
There is no cure for asthma.
Long-acting beta agonists (LABA) or antileukotriene agents may be used in addition to inhaled corticosteroids if asthma symptoms remain uncontrolled.
Treatment of rapidly worsening symptoms is usually with an inhaled short-acting beta-2 agonist such as salbutamol and corticosteroids taken by mouth.
In very severe cases, intravenous corticosteroids, magnesium sulfate, and hospitalization may be required.
In 2015, 358 million people globally had asthma, up from 183 million in 1990.
It caused about 397,100 deaths in 2015, most of which occurred in the developing world.
and the rates have increased significantly since the 1960s.
Asthma was recognized as early as Ancient Egypt.
The word "asthma" is from the Greek , ásthma, which means "panting".
Signs and symptoms
Asthma is characterized by recurrent episodes of wheezing, shortness of breath, chest tightness, and coughing.
Sputum may be produced from the lung by coughing but is often hard to bring up.
During recovery from an asthma attack (exacerbation), it may appear pus-like due to high levels of white blood cells called eosinophils.
Symptoms are usually worse at night and in the early morning or in response to exercise or cold air.
Some people with asthma rarely experience symptoms, usually in response to triggers, whereas others may react frequently and readily and experience persistent symptoms.
Associated conditions
A number of other health conditions occur more frequently in people with asthma, including gastro-esophageal reflux disease (GERD), rhinosinusitis, and obstructive sleep apnea.
Psychological disorders are also more common, with anxiety disorders occurring in between 16-52% and mood disorders in 14-41%.
It is not known whether asthma causes psychological problems or psychological problems lead to asthma.
Those with asthma, especially if it is poorly controlled, are at increased risk for radiocontrast reactions.
Causes
Asthma is caused by a combination of complex and incompletely understood environmental and genetic interactions.
These influence both its severity and its responsiveness to treatment.
It is believed that the recent increased rates of asthma are due to changing epigenetics (heritable factors other than those related to the DNA sequence) and a changing living environment.
Asthma that starts before the age of 12 years old is more likely due to genetic influence, while onset after age 12 is more likely due to environmental influence.
Environmental
Many environmental factors have been associated with asthma's development and exacerbation, including, allergens, air pollution, and other environmental chemicals.
Smoking during pregnancy and after delivery is associated with a greater risk of asthma-like symptoms.
Low air quality from environmental factors such as traffic pollution or high ozone levels has been associated with both asthma development and increased asthma severity.
Over half of cases in children in the United States occur in areas with air quality is below the EPA standards.
Low air quality is more common in low-income and minority communities.
Exposure to indoor volatile organic compounds may be a trigger for asthma; formaldehyde exposure, for example, has a positive association.
Phthalates in certain types of PVC are associated with asthma in both children and adults.
While exposure to pesticides is linked to the development of asthma, a cause and effect relationship has yet to be established.
The majority of the evidence does not support a causal role between acetaminophen (paracetamol) or antibiotic use and asthma.
A 2014 systematic review found that the association between acetaminophen use and asthma disappeared when respiratory infections were taken into account.
Acetaminophen use by a mother during pregnancy is also associated with an increased risk of the child developing asthma.
Maternal psychological stress during pregnancy is a risk factor for the child to develop asthma.
Asthma is associated with exposure to indoor allergens.
Common indoor allergens include dust mites, cockroaches, animal dander (fragments of fur or feathers), and mold.
Efforts to decrease dust mites have been found to be ineffective on symptoms in sensitized subjects.
Certain viral respiratory infections, such as respiratory syncytial virus and rhinovirus, Certain other infections, however, may decrease the risk.
It has been proposed that the reduced exposure to bacteria and viruses is due, in part, to increased cleanliness and decreased family size in modern societies.
Exposure to bacterial endotoxin in early childhood may prevent the development of asthma, but exposure at an older age may provoke bronchoconstriction.
Evidence supporting the hygiene hypothesis includes lower rates of asthma on farms and in households with pets.
Also, delivery via caesarean section is associated with an increased risk (estimated at 20-80%) of asthma - this increased risk is attributed to the lack of healthy bacterial colonization that the newborn would have acquired from passage through the birth canal.
There is a link between asthma and the degree of affluence which may be related to the hygiene hypothesis as less affluent individuals often have more exposure to bacteria and viruses.
Genetic
Family history is a risk factor for asthma, with many different genes being implicated.
If one identical twin is affected, the probability of the other having the disease is approximately 25%.
more continue to be found.
Some genetic variants may only cause asthma when they are combined with specific environmental exposures.
Medical conditions
A triad of atopic eczema, allergic rhinitis and asthma is called atopy.
Asthma has been associated with eosinophilic granulomatosis with polyangiitis (formerly known as Churg-Strauss syndrome), an autoimmune disease and vasculitis.
Individuals with certain types of urticaria may also experience symptoms of asthma.
There is a correlation between obesity and the risk of asthma with both having increased in recent years.
Several factors may be at play including decreased respiratory function due to a buildup of fat and the fact that adipose tissue leads to a pro-inflammatory state.
Beta blocker medications such as propranolol can trigger asthma in those who are susceptible.
Cardioselective beta-blockers, however, appear safe in those with mild or moderate disease.
Other medications that can cause problems in asthmatics are angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors, aspirin, and NSAIDs.
Use of acid suppressing medication (proton pump inhibitors and H2 blockers) during pregnancy is associated with an increased risk of asthma in the child.
Exacerbation
Some individuals will have stable asthma for weeks or months and then suddenly develop an episode of acute asthma.
Different individuals react to various factors in different ways.
Most individuals can develop severe exacerbation from a number of triggering agents.
Perfumes are a common cause of acute attacks in women and children.
Both viral and bacterial infections of the upper respiratory tract can worsen the disease.
Asthma exacerbations in school-aged children peak in autumn, shortly after children return to school.
This might reflect a combination of factors, including poor treatment adherence, increased allergen and viral exposure, and altered immune tolerance.
There is limited evidence to guide possible approaches to reducing autumn exacerbations, but while costly, seasonal omalizumab treatment from four to six weeks before school return may reduce autumn asthma exacerbations.
Pathophysiology
Asthma is the result of chronic inflammation of the conducting zone of the airways (most especially the bronchi and bronchioles), which subsequently results in increased contractability of the surrounding smooth muscles.
This among other factors leads to bouts of narrowing of the airway and the classic symptoms of wheezing.
The narrowing is typically reversible with or without treatment.
Occasionally the airways themselves change.
Spirometry is then used to confirm the diagnosis.
Spirometry
Spirometry is recommended to aid in diagnosis and management.
It is the single best test for asthma.
If the FEV1 measured by this technique improves more than 12% and increases by at least 200 milliliters following administration of a bronchodilator such as salbutamol, this is supportive of the diagnosis.
It however may be normal in those with a history of mild asthma, not currently acting up.
Single-breath diffusing capacity can help differentiate asthma from COPD.
Others
The methacholine challenge involves the inhalation of increasing concentrations of a substance that causes airway narrowing in those predisposed.
If negative it means that a person does not have asthma; if positive, however, it is not specific for the disease.
Testing peak expiratory flow is more variable than spirometry, however, and thus not recommended for routine diagnosis.
It may be useful for daily self-monitoring in those with moderate to severe disease and for checking the effectiveness of new medications.
It may also be helpful in guiding treatment in those with acute exacerbations.
Classification
Asthma is clinically classified according to the frequency of symptoms, forced expiratory volume in one second (FEV1), and peak expiratory flow rate.
Finding ways to identify subgroups that respond well to different types of treatments is a current critical goal of asthma research.
Unlike these diseases, the airway obstruction in asthma is usually reversible; however, if left untreated, the chronic inflammation from asthma can lead the lungs to become irreversibly obstructed due to airway remodeling.
In contrast to emphysema, asthma affects the bronchi, not the alveoli.
Asthma exacerbation
An acute asthma exacerbation is commonly referred to as an asthma attack.
The classic symptoms are shortness of breath, wheezing, and chest tightness.
While these are the primary symptoms of asthma, some people present primarily with coughing, and in severe cases, air motion may be significantly impaired such that no wheezing is heard.
Signs occurring during an asthma attack include the use of accessory muscles of respiration (sternocleidomastoid and scalene muscles of the neck), there may be a paradoxical pulse (a pulse that is weaker during inhalation and stronger during exhalation), and over-inflation of the chest.
A blue color of the skin and nails may occur from lack of oxygen.
In a mild exacerbation the peak expiratory flow rate (PEFR) is ≥200 L min, or 25% and 50% of the predicted best, while severe is defined as ≤ 80 L/min, or ≤25% of the predicted best.
Brittle asthma is a kind of asthma distinguishable by recurrent, severe attacks.
Type 1 brittle asthma is a disease with wide peak flow variability, despite intense medication.
Type 2 brittle asthma is background well-controlled asthma with sudden severe exacerbations.
It occurs in most people with asthma and up to 20% of people without asthma.
While it may occur with any weather conditions, it is more common when it is dry and cold.
Inhaled beta2-agonists do not appear to improve athletic performance among those without asthma, however, oral doses may improve endurance and strength.
Occupational
Asthma as a result of (or worsened by) workplace exposures is a commonly reported occupational disease.
It is estimated that 5-25% of asthma cases in adults are work-related.
A few hundred different agents have been implicated, with the most common being: isocyanates, grain and wood dust, colophony, soldering flux, latex, animals, and aldehydes.
The employment associated with the highest risk of problems include: those who spray paint, bakers and those who process food, nurses, chemical workers, those who work with animals, welders, hairdressers and timber workers.
Aspirin-induced asthma
Aspirin-exacerbated respiratory disease (AERD), also known as aspirin-induced asthma, affects up to 9% of asthmatics.
AERD consists of asthma, nasal polyps, sinus disease, and respiratory reactions to aspirin and other NSAID medications (such as ibuprofen and naproxen).
People often also develop loss of smell and most experience respiratory reactions to alcohol.
Alcohol-induced asthma
Alcohol may worsen asthmatic symptoms in up to a third of people.
Nonallergic asthma
Nonallergic asthma, also known as intrinsic or nonatopic asthma, makes up between 10 and 33% of cases.
There is negative skin test to common inhalant allergens and normal serum concentrations of IgE.
Often it starts later in life, and women are more commonly affected than men.
Usual treatments may not work as well.
Differential diagnosis
Many other conditions can cause symptoms similar to those of asthma.
In children, other upper airway diseases such as allergic rhinitis and sinusitis should be considered as well as other causes of airway obstruction including foreign body aspiration, tracheal stenosis, laryngotracheomalacia, vascular rings, enlarged lymph nodes or neck masses.
In adults, COPD, congestive heart failure, airway masses, as well as drug-induced coughing due to ACE inhibitors should be considered.
In both populations vocal cord dysfunction may present similarly.
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease can coexist with asthma and can occur as a complication of chronic asthma.
After the age of 65, most people with obstructive airway disease will have asthma and COPD.
In this setting, COPD can be differentiated by increased airway neutrophils, abnormally increased wall thickness, and increased smooth muscle in the bronchi.
However, this level of investigation is not performed due to COPD and asthma sharing similar principles of management: corticosteroids, long-acting beta-agonists, and smoking cessation.
It closely resembles asthma in symptoms, is correlated with more exposure to cigarette smoke, an older age, less symptom reversibility after bronchodilator administration, and decreased likelihood of family history of atopy.
Prevention
The evidence for the effectiveness of measures to prevent the development of asthma is weak.
Other efforts that show promise include: limiting smoke exposure in utero, breastfeeding, and increased exposure to daycare or large families, but none are well supported enough to be recommended for this indication.
Early pet exposure may be useful.
Results from exposure to pets at other times are inconclusive and it is only recommended that pets be removed from the home if a person has allergic symptoms to said pet.
Reducing or eliminating compounds known to sensitive people from the work place may be effective.
Immunization, however, is recommended by the World Health Organization.
Smoking bans are effective in decreasing exacerbations of asthma.
Management
While there is no cure for asthma, symptoms can typically be improved.
A specific, customized plan for proactively monitoring and managing symptoms should be created.
This plan should include the reduction of exposure to allergens, testing to assess the severity of symptoms, and the usage of and adjustments to medications.
The treatment plan should be written down and advise adjustments to treatment according to changes in symptoms.
The most effective treatment for asthma is identifying triggers, such as cigarette smoke, pets, or aspirin, and eliminating exposure to them.
If trigger avoidance is insufficient, the use of medication is recommended.
Pharmaceutical drugs are selected based on, among other things, the severity of illness and the frequency of symptoms.
Specific medications for asthma are broadly classified into fast-acting and long-acting categories.
Bronchodilators are recommended for short-term relief of symptoms.
In those with occasional attacks, no other medication is needed.
If mild persistent disease is present (more than two attacks a week), low-dose inhaled corticosteroids or alternatively, a leukotriene antagonist or a mast cell stabilizer by mouth is recommended.
For those who have daily attacks, a higher dose of inhaled corticosteroids is used.
In a moderate or severe exacerbation, corticosteroids by mouth are added to these treatments.
This is associated with poorer asthma control.
Improving people's knowledge about asthma and using a written action plan has been identified as an important component of managing asthma.
Providing educational sessions that include information specific to a person's culture is likely effective.
More research is necessary to determine if increasing preparedness and knowledge of asthma among school staff and families using home-based and school interventions results in long term improvements in safety for children with asthma.
School-based asthma self-management interventions, which attempt to improve knowledge of asthma, its triggers and the importance of regular practitioner review, may reduce hospital admissions and emergency department visits.
These interventions may also reduce the number of days children experience asthma symptoms and may lead to small improvements in asthma-related quality of life.
More research is necessary to determine if shared-decision-making is helpful for managing adults with asthma or if a personalized asthma action plan is effective and necessary.
Some people with asthma use pulse oximeters to monitor their own blood oxygen levels during an asthma attack.
However, there is no evidence regarding the use in these instances.
Lifestyle modification
Avoidance of triggers is a key component of improving control and preventing attacks.
The most common triggers include allergens, smoke (from tobacco or other sources), air pollution, non selective beta-blockers, and sulfite-containing foods.
Cigarette smoking and second-hand smoke (passive smoke) may reduce the effectiveness of medications such as corticosteroids.
Laws that limit smoking decrease the number of people hospitalized for asthma.
Dust mite control measures, including air filtration, chemicals to kill mites, vacuuming, mattress covers and others methods had no effect on asthma symptoms.
There is insufficient evidence to suggest that dehumidifiers are helpful for controlling asthma.
Overall, exercise is beneficial in people with stable asthma.
Yoga could provide small improvements in quality of life and symptoms in people with asthma.
More research is necessary to determine how effective weight loss is on improving quality of life, the usage of health care services, and adverse effects for people of all ages with asthma.
Medications
Medications used to treat asthma are divided into two general classes: quick-relief medications used to treat acute symptoms; and long-term control medications used to prevent further exacerbation.
Fast-acting
* Short-acting beta2-adrenoceptor agonists (SABA), such as salbutamol (albuterol USAN) are the first line treatment for asthma symptoms.
* Anticholinergic medications, such as ipratropium, provide additional benefit when used in combination with SABA in those with moderate or severe symptoms and may prevent hospitalizations.
Anticholinergic bronchodilators can also be used if a person cannot tolerate a SABA.
For children over 2 years old with acute asthma symptoms, inhaled anticholinergic medications taken alone is safe but is not as effective as inhaled SABA or SABA combined with inhaled anticholinergic medication.
They are however not recommended due to concerns regarding excessive cardiac stimulation.
*A short course of corticosteroids after an acute asthma exacerbation may help prevent relapses and reduce hospitalizations.
For adults and children who are in the hospital due to acute asthma, systematic (IV) corticosteroids improve symptoms.
Long-term control
* Corticosteroids are generally considered the most effective treatment available for long-term control.
It is usually recommended that inhaled formulations be used once or twice daily, depending on the severity of symptoms.
* Long-acting beta-adrenoceptor agonists (LABA) such as salmeterol and formoterol can improve asthma control, at least in adults, when given in combination with inhaled corticosteroids.
In children this benefit is uncertain.
and with corticosteroids they may slightly increase the risk.
Evidence suggests that for children who have persistent asthma, a treatment regime that includes LABA added to inhaled corticosteroids may improve lung function but does not reduce the amount of serious exacerbations.
Children who require LABA as part of their asthma treatment may need to go to the hospital more frequently.
Evidence is insufficient to support use in acute exacerbations.
For adults or adolescents who have persistent asthma that is not controlled very well, the addition of anti-leukotriene agents along with daily inhaled corticosteriods improves lung function and reduces the risk of moderate and severe asthma exacerbations.
In those under five years of age, anti-leukotriene agents were the preferred add-on therapy after inhaled corticosteroids by the British Thoracic Society in 2009.
A 2013 Cochrane systematic review concluded that anti-leukotriene agents appear to be of little benefit when added to inhaled steroids for treating children.
A similar class of drugs, 5-LOX inhibitors, may be used as an alternative in the chronic treatment of mild to moderate asthma among older children and adults.
As of 2013 there is one medication in this family known as zileuton.
Aminophylline treatment is associated with more adverse effects compared to inhaled beta-2 agonist treatment.
In adults who have stable asthma while they are taking a combination of LABA and inhaled corticosteroids (ICS), stopping LABA may increase the risk of asthma exacerbations that require treatment with corticosteroids by mouth.
Stopping LABA probably makes little or no important difference to asthma control or asthma-related quality of life.
but is not suggested for routine treatment of chronic asthma in adults.
*There is no strong evidence to recommend chloroquine medication as a replacement for taking corticosteroids by mouth (for those who are not able to tolerate inhaled steroids).
Methotrexate is not suggested as a replacement for taking corticosteriods by mouth ("steroid sparing") due to the adverse effects associated with taking methotrexate and the minimal relief provided for asthma symptoms.
Delivery methods
Medications are typically provided as metered-dose inhalers (MDIs) in combination with an asthma spacer or as a dry powder inhaler.
The spacer is a plastic cylinder that mixes the medication with air, making it easier to receive a full dose of the drug.
A nebulizer may also be used.
Nebulizers and spacers are equally effective in those with mild to moderate symptoms.
However, insufficient evidence is available to determine whether a difference exists in those with severe disease.
For delivering short-acting beta-agonists in acute asthma in children, spacers may have advantages compared to nebulisers, but children with life-threatening asthma have not been studied.
There is no strong evidence for the use of intravenous LABA for adults or children who have acute asthma.
There is insufficient evidence to directly compare the effectiveness of a metered-dose inhaler attached to a homemade spacer compared to commercially available spacer for treating children with asthma.
Adverse effects
Long-term use of inhaled corticosteroids at conventional doses carries a minor risk of adverse effects.
Risks include thrush, the development of cataracts, and a slightly slowed rate of growth.
Higher doses of inhaled steroids may result in lower bone mineral density.
Others
Inflammation in the lungs can be estimated by the level of exhaled nitric oxide.
When asthma is unresponsive to usual medications, other options are available for both emergency management and prevention of flareups.
Additional options include:
* Oxygen to alleviate hypoxia if saturations fall below 92%.
* Corticosteroid by mouth are recommended with five days of prednisone being the same 2 days of dexamethasone.
One review recommended a seven-day course of steroids.
* Magnesium sulfate intravenous treatment increases bronchodilation when used in addition to other treatment in moderate severe acute asthma attacks.
In adults intravenous treatment results in a reduction of hospital admissions.
Low levels of evidence suggest that inhaled (nebulised) magnesium sulfate may have a small benefit for treating acute asthma in adults.
Overall, high quality evidence do not indicate a large benefit for combining magnesium sulfate with standard inhaled treatments for adults with asthma.
The dissociative anesthetic ketamine is theoretically useful if intubation and mechanical ventilation is needed in people who are approaching respiratory arrest; however, there is no evidence from clinical trials to support this.
* For those with severe persistent asthma not controlled by inhaled corticosteroids and LABAs, bronchial thermoplasty may be an option.
It involves the delivery of controlled thermal energy to the airway wall during a series of bronchoscopies.
While it may increase exacerbation frequency in the first few months it appears to decrease the subsequent rate.
Effects beyond one year are unknown.
* Monoclonal antibody injections such as mepolizumab, dupilumab, or omalizumab may be useful in those with poorly controlled allergic asthma.
However, as of 2019 these medications are expensive and their use is therefore reserved for those with severe symptoms to achieve cost-effectiveness.
Monoclonal antibodies targeting interleukin-5 (IL-5) or its receptor (IL-5R), including mepolizumab, reslizumab or benralizumab, in addition to standard care in severe asthma is effective in reducing the rate of asthma exacerbations.
There is limited evidence for improved health-related quality of life and lung function.
* Evidence suggests that sublingual immunotherapy in those with both allergic rhinitis and asthma improve outcomes.
* It is unclear if non-invasive positive pressure ventilation in children is of use as it has not been sufficiently studied.
Alternative medicine
Many people with asthma, like those with other chronic disorders, use alternative treatments; surveys show that roughly 50% use some form of unconventional therapy.
There is little data to support the effectiveness of most of these therapies.
Evidence is insufficient to support the usage of vitamin C or vitamin E for controlling asthma.
There is tentative support for use of vitamin C in exercise induced bronchospasm.
Fish oil dietary supplements (marine n-3 fatty acids) and reducing dietary sodium do not appear to help improve asthma control.
In people with mild to moderate asthma, treatment with vitamin D supplementation may reduce the risk of asthma exacerbations, however, it is not clear if this is only helpful for people who have low vitamin D levels to begin with (low baseline vitamin D).
There is no strong evidence to suggest that vitamin D supplements improve day-to-day asthma symptoms or a person's lung function.
There have not been enough high-quality studies performed to determine if children with asthma should avoid eating food that contains MSG.
Air ionisers show no evidence that they improve asthma symptoms or benefit lung function; this applied equally to positive and negative ion generators.
Manual therapies, including osteopathic, chiropractic, physiotherapeutic and respiratory therapeutic maneuvers, have insufficient evidence to support their use in treating asthma.
The Buteyko breathing technique for controlling hyperventilation may result in a reduction in medication use; however, the technique does not have any effect on lung function.
There is no clear evidence that breathing exercises are effective for treating children with asthma.
Prognosis
for asthma per 100,000 inhabitants in 2004.
The prognosis for asthma is generally good, especially for children with mild disease.
Mortality has decreased over the last few decades due to better recognition and improvement in care.
In 2010 the death rate was 170 per million for males and 90 per million for females.
Rates vary between countries by 100 fold.
Of asthma diagnosed during childhood, half of cases will no longer carry the diagnosis after a decade.
Early treatment with corticosteroids seems to prevent or ameliorates a decline in lung function.
Asthma in children also has negative effects on quality of life of their parents.
Epidemiology
File:Prevalence of Clinical Asthma world map - GINA2004.svg|thumb|upright
1.2|left|alt
A map of the world with Europe, North America, Australia and much of South America shaded red, much of Asia is yellow, and most of Africa is grey|Rates of asthma in different countries of the world as of 2004.
As of 2011, 235-330 million people worldwide are affected by asthma, and approximately 250,000-345,000 people die per year from the disease.
Rates vary between countries with prevalences between 1 and 18%.
While asthma is twice as common in boys as girls, In contrast adult women have a higher rate of asthma than men
Global rates of asthma have increased significantly between the 1960s and 2008 with it being recognized as a major public health problem since the 1970s.
Asthma affects approximately 7% of the population of the United States Canada, Australia and New Zealand have rates of about 14-15%.
The average death rate from 2011 to 2015 from asthma in the UK was about 50% higher than the average for the European Union and had increased by about 5% in that time.
Child are more likely see a physician due to asthma symptoms after school starts in September.
Economics
From 2000 to 2010, the average cost per asthma-related hospital stay in the United States for children remained relatively stable at about $3,600, whereas the average cost per asthma-related hospital stay for adults increased from $5,200 to $6,600.
In 2010, Medicaid was the most frequent primary payer among children and adults aged 18-44 years in the United States; private insurance was the second most frequent payer.
In 1873, one of the first papers in modern medicine on the subject tried to explain the pathophysiology of the disease while one in 1872, concluded that asthma can be cured by rubbing the chest with chloroform liniment.
Medical treatment in 1880 included the use of intravenous doses of a drug called pilocarpine.
In 1886, F. H. Bosworth theorized a connection between asthma and hay fever.
Epinephrine was first referred to in the treatment of asthma in 1905.
Oral corticosteroids began to be used for this condition in the 1950s while inhaled corticosteroids and selective short acting beta agonist came into wide use in the 1960s.
A notable and well-documented case in the 19th century was that of young Theodore Roosevelt (1858-1919).
At that time there was no effective treatment.
Roosevelt's youth was in large part shaped by his poor health partly related to his asthma.
He experienced recurring nighttime asthma attacks that caused the experience of being smothered to death, terrifying the boy and his parents.
During the 1930s to 1950s, asthma was known as one of the "holy seven" psychosomatic illnesses.
Its cause was considered to be psychological, with treatment often based on psychoanalysis and other talking cures.
Notes
