Lansing is the capital of the U.S. state of Michigan.
It is mostly in Ingham County, although portions of the city extend west into Eaton County and north into Clinton County.
The 2010 Census placed the city's population at 114,297, making it the fifth largest city in Michigan.
The population of its Metropolitan Statistical Area (MSA) was 464,036, while the even larger Combined Statistical Area (CSA) population, which includes Shiawassee County, was 534,684.
It was named the new state capital of Michigan in 1847, ten years after Michigan became a state.
The Lansing metropolitan area, colloquially referred to as "Mid-Michigan", is an important center for educational, cultural, governmental, commercial, and industrial functions.
Neighboring East Lansing is home to Michigan State University, a public research university with an enrollment of more than 50,000.
The area features two medical schools, one veterinary school, two nursing schools, and two law schools.
It is the site of the Michigan State Capitol, the state Supreme Court, the Court of Appeals, a federal court, the Library of Michigan and Historical Center, and headquarters of four national insurance companies.
Lansing is the only U.S. state capital (among the 47 located in counties) that is not also a county seat.
The seat of government of Ingham County is Mason, but the county maintains some offices in Lansing.
History
The first recorded person of European descent to travel through the area that is now Lansing was British fur trader Hugh Heward and his French-Canadian team on April 24, 1790 while canoeing the Grand River.
The land that was to become Lansing was surveyed as "Township 4 North Range 2 West" in February 1827 in what was then dense forest.
It was the last of the county's townships to be surveyed, and the land was not offered for sale until October 1830.
There would be no roads to this area for decades to come.
In the winter of 1835 and early 1836, two brothers from New York plotted the area now known as REO Town just south of downtown Lansing and named it "Biddle City".
This land lay in a floodplain and was underwater during the majority of the year.
Nevertheless, the brothers went back to Lansing, New York, to sell plots for the town that did not exist.
They told the New Yorkers this new "city" had an area of 65 blocks, a church and a public and academic square.
16 men bought plots in the nonexistent city, and upon reaching the area later that year found they had been scammed.
Many in the group too disappointed to stay ended up settling around what is now metropolitan Lansing.
Those who stayed quickly renamed the area "Lansing Township" in honor of their home village in New York.
The settlement of fewer than 20 people would remain dormant until the winter of 1847 when the state constitution required the capital be moved from Detroit to a more central and safer location in the state's interior; many were concerned about Detroit's proximity to British-controlled Canada, which had captured Detroit in the War of 1812.
The United States had recaptured the city in 1813, but these events led to the dire need to have the center of government relocate from hostile British territory.
There was also concern with Detroit's strong influence over Michigan politics, being the state's largest city as well as the capital city.
Unable to publicly reach a consensus because of constant political wrangling, the Michigan House of Representatives privately chose the Township of Lansing out of frustration.
When announced, many present openly laughed that such an insignificant settlement was now Michigan's capital.
Two months later, Governor William L. Greenly signed into law the act of the legislature making Lansing Township the state capital.
Within months after it became the capital city, individual settlements began to develop along three key points along the Grand River in the township:
* "Upper Village/Town", where present-day REO Town stands at the confluence of the Grand River and the Red Cedar River.
It began to take off in 1847 when the Main Street Bridge was constructed over the Grand River.
This village's focal point was the Benton House, a 4-story hotel which opened in 1848.
It was the first brick building in Lansing and was later razed in 1900.
Over the next decades, the city would be transformed into a major American industrial center for the manufacturing of automobiles and parts, among other industries.
The city also continued to grow in area.
By 1956, the city had grown to , and doubled in size over the next decade to its current size of roughly .
Today, the city's economy is diversified among government service, healthcare, manufacturing, insurance, banking, and education.
Notable events
Elephant incident
On September 26, 1963, a 12-year-old, 3,000-pound female dancing elephant named Rajje (alternately reported as Raji and Little Rajjee, among other variations) rebelled against her trainer during a performance in a shopping-center circus near what was then Logan Street and Holmes Road in Lansing, and escaped into the streets, aggravated by the frenzied pursuit of nearly 4,000 local residents.
The incident ended with the shooting of the elephant by Lansing police.
Provoked by the growing crowd, Rajje's rampage took her through the men's wear, sporting goods and gift departments of a local Arlan's discount store before leading police on a two-mile chase in which she knocked down and injured a 67-year-old man, tried to move a car, and caused thousands of dollars in damage before being killed.
Life Magazine quoted Rajje's trainer, William Pratt, as shouting at the scene, "Damn these people ...
They wouldn't leave her alone."
the Detroit Free Press noted that witnesses cried out "Murderers!
Murderers!"
as police fired eight shots.
Author Nelson Algren cites the injustice and sad end of the pursuit of "Raji, the Pixie-Eared Elephant" in continuity with the ambush of Bonnie Parker and Clyde Barrow in his introduction to a 1968 biography of the outlaws.
Then teenage Lansing residents who had goaded the elephant on recalled the incident with sober regret in a local newspaper retrospective in 2011.
* 1896 -
A group of local women form the Women's Hospital Association, the organization that will go on to found Sparrow Hospital, a hospital in operation to this day
* 1897 - Ransom E. Olds drives his first car down a Lansing street.
Later that year he founds the Olds Motor Vehicle Company, which would become the Oldsmobile division of General Motors in 1908.
He was also the founder of the REO Motor Car Company in 1904, both headquartered in Lansing.
* 1901 - Oldsmobile Curved Dash (first mass-produced car) introduced.
* 1904 - The "most extensive flood in 135 years of local history" causes the Grand River to overflow its banks on March 24-27, leading to major damage and one death.
Bridges at Logan Street, Kalamazoo Street, Cedar Street and Mt. Hope Road are all washed away.
The Kalamazoo Street bridge lodges against the Michigan Avenue bridge; it is later salvaged and re-erected at Kalamazoo Street.
* 1910 - The population of the city nearly doubles from the 1900 census to 31,229.
* 1912 -
The Accident Fund Insurance Company of America founded.
* 1931 - The Boji Tower was completed, (originally Olds Tower) the tallest building in Lansing.
* 1934 - The Kern's Hotel in downtown burns.
It remains to this day Lansing's deadliest fire.
* 1936 - Quality Dairy Company, Lansing's Only Dairy (now operating 31 stores in the area) is founded.
* 1940 - Lansing's population stagnates, only rising by 356 over the decade to 78,753.
* 1954 - Frandor Mall opens - first in the area, and second in the state.
* 1959 - New City Hall and Police Department buildings are opened.
* 1960 -
The city's population finally breaks the 100,000 mark at 107,807.
* 1961 - Jackson National Life Insurance Company founded.
* 1970 - Lansing reaches its peak population of 131,546.
* 1978 -
The Great Blizzard of 1978 hits Lansing in February of that year.
* 1980 - Lansing's population declines for the first time, losing 989 to hit 130,414.
* 1989 - The Library of Michigan and Historical Center near the Capitol Complex are dedicated.
* 1992 -
The Michigan State Capitol completes an extensive renovation to restore it to its original grandeur.
* 1996 - Oldsmobile Park, now Cooley Law School Stadium is completed
* 1998 - Mayor David Hollister signs a 425 Agreement with Alaiedon Township in September to facilitate the development of the headquarters of Jackson National Life Insurance Company.
* 1999 - Mayor David Hollister signs a 425 Agreement with Meridian Township in November to facilitate the development of the Governor's Collection/College Fields upscale housing development and golf course.
* 2000 - Lansing's population experiences its greatest drop in its history, falling over 6% over the preceding decade to 119,128.
* 2001 - GM opens a new assembly plant, the Lansing Grand River Assembly.
It manufactures the Cadillac CTS, STS, SRX and V-Series.
The architecture of the assembly plant resembles a high-tech research facility instead of a traditional factory.
* 2002 - The Hall of Justice (Michigan Supreme Court building) at the west end of the Capitol Complex is dedicated.
* 2004 - Last Oldsmobile rolls off the assembly line at Lansing Car Assembly on April 29.
This same year the Thomas M. Cooley Law School becomes the largest law school in the nation.
* 2005 - Mayor Tony Benavides signs a series of three 425 Agreements with Delta Township and General Motors facilitating the development General Motors' Lansing Delta Township Assembly Plant.
* 2006 - GM opens a state-of-the-art facility in nearby Delta Charter Township.
As with the 2001 assembly plant built in Lansing, the Delta plant resembles a high-tech research facility and not a traditional factory.
* 2006 - Lansing's Potter Park Zoo becomes regionalized after a ballot proposal passed to transfer the zoo's operation and maintenance to Ingham County.
* 2007 - Mayor Virg Bernero's Southside Citizen Action Team conducts a comprehensive destination search for the Southside Community Center, which was established at the Lansing School District's Hill Center.
* 2008 - Accident Fund Insurance Company of America announces the renovation of the Ottawa Street Power Station and addition of modern buildings connected by an atrium for their new headquarters.
* 2009 - Lansing's Sesquicentennial (150 Years) is celebrated.
* 2009 - Auto-Owners Insurance Co. announces it will invest $105.3 million into expanding its Lansing headquarters and adding 800 new jobs.
* 2010 - The Eyde Development Company announces they will be spending $22-$24 million to renovate the landmark Knapp's Building in downtown Lansing.
* 2010 - Kiplinger names Lansing one of the "10 Great Cities for Young Adults".
* 2012 - Parade Magazine ranks Lansing as one of America's hardest-working towns.
Lansing was noted for a long average work week and scored several points above the national average in workers giving up their personal time and weekends for work.
* 2015 - GM's Lansing Grand River Plant begins producing Chevrolet Camaros, the first Camaros built in the U.S. since 1992.
The plant made $175 million in upgrades and hired 500 new workers to make these Camaros.
Geography
Lansing is the centerpiece of a region of Michigan known as Mid-Michigan or Central Michigan.
According to the United States Census Bureau, the city has a total area of , of which is land and is water.
This figure includes two 425 Agreements with Alaiedon Township and Meridian Township, and the four 425 Agreements with Delta Township since 2000.
Since the 2010 Census, the city has entered into two additional 425 Agreements.
The first agreement consisted of the temporary transfer of 1,888.2 acres of Lansing Capital Region International Airport to the city from DeWitt Township in 2011.
The second agreement consisted of the temporary transfer of in Alaiedon Township for the expansion of the headquarters of Jackson National Life Insurance Company in 2013 bringing the area either fully or conditionally under control of the city to .
There are two lakes in the area, Park Lake and Lake Lansing, both northeast of the city.
Lake Lansing is approximately in size and is a summer favorite for swimmers, boaters, and fishermen.
Michigan State University Sailing Club and the Lansing Sailing Club are located on Lake Lansing, where sailing regattas are hosted throughout the summer.
The City of Lansing operates a total of of parkland, of which is parkland, are golflands, and are cemetery lands.
However, this figure includes the Waverly Hills Golf Course and adjacent Michigan Avenue Park, whose are located within neighboring Lansing Township, but operated by the City of Lansing, and does not include the of the combined Hawk Island County Park and adjacent Soldan Dog Park operated by Ingham County within the city of Lansing.
All together then, of the city (or approximately 10%) is publicly administered open space.
Climate
Lansing has a Midwestern humid continental climate (Köppen Dfb/Dfa) that is influenced by the Great Lakes, and is part of USDA Hardiness zone 5b.
Winters are cold with moderate to heavy snowfall, while summers are very warm and humid.
The monthly daily average temperature in July is , while the same figure for January is ; the annual mean is .
On average, temperatures reach or exceed on 8.8 days of the year and drop to or below on 10−11 nights.
with the last or colder reading occurred on February 27, 1994; the record low maximum is on January 22, 1883, while, conversely, the record high minimum is on August 1, 2006 and July 18, 1942.
Upriver and north of downtown is historic Old Town Lansing with many architecturally significant buildings dating to the mid-19th century.
Directly south of downtown on the other side of I-496 along Washington Avenue lies "REO Town", the birthplace of the automobile in the United States, is where Ransom Eli Olds built factories along Washington Avenue.
Ransom Eli Olds' home, which once overlooked the factories along Washington Avenue, was displaced by I-496.
Lansing is generally divided into four sections: Eastside, Westside, Northwestside, and the Southside.
Each section contains a diverse array of neighborhoods.
The Eastside, located east of the Grand River and north of the Red Cedar River, is the most ethnically diverse side of Lansing, with foreign-born citizens making up more of its population than any other side in the city.
The Eastside's commercial districts are located mainly along Michigan Avenue, and to a lesser extent along Kalamazoo Street.
It is anchored by Frandor Shopping Center on the very eastern edge of the eastside.
The Westside, roughly located north, west, and south of the Grand River as it curves through the city, is sometimes regarded the city's most socio-economically diverse section.
This side also contains Lansing's downtown area, though this neighborhood is often included as an area all its own.
Outside downtown, this side is largely a collection of residential neighborhoods and is served by only one other commercial area along Saginaw Street.
However, it also includes a small part of the Old Town Commercial Association.
The Northwestside, generally located north of the Grand River, with the city limits defining its north and western borders, is physically the smallest side of the city.
This part of the city includes moderate-density residential areas and some green areas.
North of Grand River Avenue, the main street of the side, lie warehouses and light industrial areas served by a major rail line that runs through Lansing.
The most notable landmark of this side is Lansing's airport: Capital Region International Airport.
The Southside, usually described as the neighborhoods located south of the Grand and Red Cedar rivers and the I-496 freeway, is physically the largest and most populous side of the city.
The area is largely residential in nature (south of Mount Hope Road near the northern edge), and is served by numerous commercial strips along Cedar Street, Martin Luther King, Jr. Boulevard, Pennsylvania Avenue, and Waverly Road, which run north/south.
The large Edgewood District is located in the southernmost part of the Southside and is sometimes referred to as South Lansing.
Though it is the largest area of the city by both physical size and population, it has often been regarded by Southside citizens as Lansing's most overlooked and forgotten area, as most of Lansing's attention in recent decades has been put into the revitalization of the city's historic core located mostly on small parts of both the East and Westsides.
The middle of the Southside-South-Central Lansing-contains the Old Everett Area.
This location once contained the Everett School District and was annexed into the city in 1948.
Districts
Demographics
2010 census
As of the census
2000 census
As of the census
There were 49,505 households out of which 30.0% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 35.8% were married couples living together, 17.0% had a female householder with no husband present, and 42.7% were non-families.
33.2% of all households were made up of individuals and 8.1% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older.
The average household size was 2.39 and the average family size was 3.08.
In the city, the population was spread out with 26.8% under the age of 18, 11.4% from 18 to 24, 32.7% from 25 to 44, 19.3% from 45 to 64, and 9.7% who were 65 years of age or older.
The median age was 31 years.
For every 100 females, there were 92.3 males.
For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 87.9 males.
The median income for a household in the city was $34,833, and the median income for a family was $41,283.
Males had a median income of $32,648 versus $27,051 for females.
The per capita income for the city was $17,924.
About 13.2% of families and 16.9% of the population were below the poverty line, including 23.2% of those under age 18 and 9.0% of those age 65 or over.
Immigration and refugee resettlement
The Brookings Institution has ranked Greater Lansing among the top 10 "medium-sized metropolitan areas" in the United States for refugee resettlement, with 5,369 refugees resettled from 1983 to 2004.
St. Vincent Catholic Charities and Lutheran Social Services handle the adult and unaccompanied minor resettlement processes, respectively, while other organizations, such as the Refugee Development Center, focus on providing educational and social support services to refugees in the Lansing area.
Nearby Michigan State University provides a source of volunteers for many of these programs.
, the Lansing area has about 2,000 Arab Americans, mostly second generation Christian Lebanese Americans as well as some Palestinian Americans.
The city is also home to a large number of temporary foreign residents enrolled as international students at Lansing Community College and nearby Michigan State University, with the city's visitors bureau specifically promoting Mandarin-language video tours of Lansing, touting the "more than 6,000" Chinese students enrolled at MSU.
The Lansing School District offers language immersion programs for its students in both Spanish and Chinese.
Government
Lansing is administered under a mayor-council government, more specifically a "strong mayor" setup in which the mayor holds most of the city's administrative powers, such as appointment of department heads and drafting and administering a city budget, though the council must approve his/her actions.
The mayor is elected at-large every four years.
The city clerk is also elected every four years.
The city council consists of eight members, and includes four members elected from the city's four wards, as well as four "at-large" members elected citywide.
The city levies an income tax of 1 percent on residents and 0.5 percent on nonresidents.
The city largely supports the Democratic Party.
It has not had a Republican mayor in office for more than a decade, and the last two mayoral elections have hosted only Democratic candidates.
State and federal representation
Lansing currently lies mostly within the boundaries of Michigan's 8th congressional district, which is represented by Democratic congresswoman Elissa Slotkin, who was elected in the 2018 midterm election.
The small portion of the city that extends into Eaton County is located in Michigan's 7th congressional district, which has been represented by Republican congressman Tim Walberg since 2011.
The small portion of the city that extends into Clinton County is located in Michigan's 4th congressional district, which has been represented by Republican congressman John Moolenaar since 2015.
At the state level, most of Lansing is located in the 23rd district of the Michigan Senate, which has been represented by Democratic state senator Curtis Hertel Jr. since 2015.
The small portions of the city that extend into Eaton County and Clinton County is located in the 24th district of the Michigan Senate, are currently represented by Republican state senator Tom Barrett.
The city lies in the 67th, 68th, 71st, and 93rd districts of the Michigan State House of Representatives, represented by state representatives Kara Hope (D-67), Sarah Anthony (D-68), Angela Witwer (D-71), and Graham Filler (R-93).
Though Lansing is not the designated county seat, some Ingham County offices are located in downtown Lansing, including a branch office of the county clerk, the county personnel office, and some courtrooms.
Economy
The Lansing metropolitan area's major industries are government, education, insurance, healthcare, and automobile manufacturing.
Being the state capital, many state government workers reside in the area.
Michigan State University, Thomas M. Cooley Law School, and Lansing Community College are significant employers in the region.
General Motors has offices and a hi-tech manufacturing facility in Lansing and several manufacturing facilities immediately outside the city, as well, in nearby Lansing and Delta townships.
The Lansing area is headquarters to four major national insurance companies: Auto-Owners Insurance Company, Jackson National Life, the Accident Fund, and Michigan Millers Insurance Company.
Other insurers based in Lansing include Farm Bureau Insurance of Michigan.
Locally owned and operated convenience store chain Quality Dairy is a significant presence in the Lansing market.
The recent decline of the auto industry in the region has increased the region's awareness of the importance of a strategy to foster the high-technology sector.
Early availability of high-speed Internet in 1996, as well as the MSU, Cooley Law School, and Lansing Community College student body population, fostered an intellectual environment for information technology companies to incubate.
Lansing has a number of technology companies in the fields of information technology and biotechnology.
Healthcare
Sparrow Hospital is a 740-bed hospital affiliated with Michigan State University and its College of Human Medicine and College of Osteopathic Medicine.
In February 2009 it was announced that Sparrow and MSU formalized their partnership to increase research and faculty recruitment.
Sparrow Hospital is the Regional Center for pediatrics, cancer care, including radiation therapy, trauma care, neurological care, high-risk obstetrics and neonatal intensive care.
The Sparrow Tower was finished January 2008 and includes but is not limited to: a dedicated pediatric emergency room (the only one in the region), the largest adult emergency room in the region, state-of-the-art operating rooms, a rooftop helipad, oncology center, heart and vascular center and orthopedic department.
In addition, 4,500 deliveries are performed at Sparrow Hospital annually, rehabilitation, and emergency treatment is more than any other hospital in mid-Michigan.
The Sparrow Health System Laboratory performs over 3 million tests per year, at various laboratory sites, which include four remote testing facilities and thirteen patient service centers.
Sparrow Hospital is certified as a Level I Trauma Center by the American College of Surgeons.
In May 2009 Sparrow announced that it now has its own helicopter service based at its downtown Lansing hospital's new $2.5 million helipad.
The addition is expected to increase helicopter patient transport to the hospital from four a month to 400 a year.
McLaren-Greater Lansing Hospital is also a university affiliated teaching hospital.
Ingham enjoys a special affiliation in radiation oncology with the University of Michigan and Michigan State University; McLaren-Greater Lansing is part of the Great Lakes Cancer Institute (GLCI).
McLaren received five-star ratings for: Coronary bypass surgery; Cardiac interventions; Treatment of heart attacks; Total knee replacement; Total hip replacement; Back and neck surgery; Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease care; Community-Acquired pneumonia care.
Urban renewal and downtown redevelopment
Several urban renewal projects by private developers are adding higher end apartments and condominiums to the Lansing market.
The Arbaugh, a former department store across from Cooley Law School, was converted into apartments in 2005.
Motor Wheel Lofts, a former industrial site, was converted into loft-style living spaces in mid-2006.
A combination retail and residential complex immediately south of Cooley Law School Stadium (formerly Oldsmobile Park) called "The Stadium District", was completed in 2007.
The Stadium District was redeveloped using a grant from the Michigan State Housing Development Authority through the Cool Cities Initiative.
In May 2006 the historically significant Mutual Building located on Capitol Avenue was purchased by The Christman Company to be renovated back to its original grandeur and used as the company's headquarters.
Additional downtown developments include the renovation of the historic Hollister Building and the expansion of the former Abrams Aerial Building.
As of August 2008, an 18-story condominium high-rise called Capitol Club Tower was in the design phase with the adjacent parking structure having been approved by city council and purchased by the developer.
The city market, in existence since 1909, was approved to be sold for a multi-building mixed-use development called MarketPlace, right next to the current market on the adjacent riverfront.
The MarketPlace project was redeveloped along with BallPark North, another mixed-use development that will be immediately north of Oldsmobile Stadium.
The new city market is just north of the Lansing Center, across the river from where the Accident Fund Insurance Company renovated the former Ottawa Street Powerplant into their new headquarters.
In addition to the renovation, Accident Fund Insurance Company built a modern addition to the north of the historic portion that is connected by an atrium for more office space, as well as a parking structure.
In 2009, the restaurant Troppo began construction on a new 2-story building that will have an open air patio on the roof facing the Capitol building.
Developer Eyde Co. announced plans on April 6, 2010, to renovate the historical and prominent Knapp's building in downtown Lansing for first floor retail, office space and apartments/condos on the top floor (5th) in a $22-24 million project.
Emergent was founded on September 5, 1998.
Emergent operates a subsidiary known as Emergent BioDefense Operations
Lansing LLC that is headquartered in Lansing.
The Lansing facility is a 12-acre research and manufacturing campus.
Between 1998 and 2002, the company partnered with the federal government to provide anthrax vaccine to the military and first responders.
Providing the vaccine is a component of the federal government's anti-terrorism strategy, and more specifically, a vehicle for protecting first responders.
Top employers and companies headquartered in Lansing
Other major companies headquartered in Lansing include Accident Fund, , Biggby Coffee, Elderly Instruments, Fraser Trebilcock, Go Solutions Group, Inc., ICS Marketing Support Services, Jackson National Life, Lake Trust Credit Union, and Quality Dairy Company.
Retail
The Lansing area has two major malls: Lansing Mall and Meridian Mall.
Other major retail centers include Eastwood Towne Center and Frandor Shopping Center.
Education
Michigan State University, a member of the Big Ten Conference, is known as "the pioneer land grant college", located in neighboring East Lansing.
MSU has the largest land campus in the United States and is home to several nationally and internationally recognized academic and research oriented programs.
Michigan State offers over 200 programs of study and is home to fourteen different degree-granting schools and colleges including two medical schools, a veterinary school, a law school, and numerous PhD programs.
It is the only university in the nation with three medical schools.
MSU is consistently one of the top three programs in the United States for study abroad programs.
The MSU College of Education is also consistently rated as the top education program in the nation.
Michigan State University is the oldest agricultural college in the United States.
The MSU School of Criminal Justice is the oldest continuous degree granting criminal justice program in the nation.
In 2008, the Department of Energy announced MSU won the contest for a $550 million Facility for Rare Isotope Beams that will attract top researchers from around the world to conduct experiments in nuclear science, astrophysics and applications of isotopes to other fields.
The Thomas M. Cooley Law School is the largest law school in the nation and is located in downtown Lansing.
Cooley is fully accredited by the American Bar Association.
A majority of Cooley students are from out-of-state.
Lansing Community College offers more than 500 areas of study to over 18,000 students at its main facilities in Lansing, and another 5,000 students at twenty-nine extension centers and a site in Otsu, Japan.
LCC's new, state-of-the-art University Center enables students to take courses with the goal of eventually earning an undergraduate or graduate degree from other Michigan institutions.
The University Center stands on the former site of "Old Central", Lansing's first public high school, which was established in 1875 as Lansing High School.
Other institutions of higher education include Western Michigan University (branch campus in Delta Township), Davenport University in Downtown Lansing, Central Michigan University (branch campus), and Great Lakes Christian College (campus in Delta Township).
Schools
;Public schools
*Shabazz Public School Academy (named after Malcolm X)
;Private schools
Cultural celebrations
Parades
Each year in August, the Michigan Pride festival includes a LGBT pride parade from Riverfront Park to the capitol.
The Capital City African American Cultural Association hosts an African American Parade and Heritage Festival every year for over a decade.
The chair of the CCAACA is the Rev. Dr. Michael C. Murphy, who was pastor of St. Stephen's Community Church and is currently the pastor of Peoples Congregational, United Church of Christ, Washington D.C.
He is a former State Representative for the 68th House District in Michigan, former President of the Lansing City Council, and a long-time community leader.
The parade highlights African American culture, its influence in Michigan, and recognizes prominent African American individuals in the community and their contributions to Lansing as the grand marshal of each parade.
The festival immediately following the parade consists of live entertainment, soul food and lots of fun for adults and children.
It is held every year on the first Saturday in August and begins at 11:00 a.m. in downtown Lansing, Michigan.
The festival is held at Ferris Park in downtown Lansing.
In 2009 they celebrated 10 years.
The annual Silver Bells in the City Electric Light Parade proceeds through the streets of downtown Lansing every November, the Friday before Thanksgiving.
It is followed by the lighting of Michigan's official Christmas tree in front of the State Capitol and a firework show (weather permitting) over the State Capitol.
Music
The Lansing Symphony Orchestra has been entertaining generations of Lansing-area residents since 1929.
The current music director is Timothy Muffett.
The Lansing JazzFest and the Old Town BluesFest host leading musicians, and are two of the larger music festivals held each year in the state.
Old Town's Festival of the Moon and Sun is a two-day festival of food and live music.
Old Town Oktoberfest is a two-day event drawing hundreds to the Old Town neighborhood for live polka music, authentic German food and world-renowned German-style beer.
It was announced in May 2007 that the city would host "Blues on the Square", a series of summertime blues concerts featuring national acts Thursday nights along Washington Square in downtown Lansing.
In 2008 the event regularly drew crowds over 500.
The Common Ground Festival is a musical event held over a week every July at the Adado Riverfront Park in downtown Lansing pulling in crowds over 90,000 for the week.
It began in 2000 and replaced the Michigan Festival that was held in nearby East Lansing.
It has wide range of musical acts.
In 2008 acts included Staind, Drowning Pool, Sammy Hagar, The Hard Lessons, Snoop Dogg, REO Speedwagon, Kellie Pickler, Seether and Trace Adkins.
2012 acts included The Flaming Lips, Man Man, Motion City Soundtrack, Joshua Davis, mewithoutyou, with local ensembles https:/ 517luvs vandalaymusic/ Vandalay on the bill.
Every year City Pulse names the "Top Original Act" in the Top of the Town Awards.
The 2010 winner was Eastside neighborhood native indie rock band Loune.
The 2011 winner was pop punk act Frank and Earnest.
On June 23, 2018, REO Town hosted the https:/ threestacksfest/ Three Stacks Music Festival featuring Against Me!, Murder by Death, Pup, mewithoutyou, Screaming Females, Camp Cove, Petal, Oceanator, City Mouse, Worn Spirit, Stefanie Haapala, Ness Lake, and Secret Forte.
Other notable Lansing musicians include https:/ tellyomama RootDoctorBand Jen-Sygit-134728803232708 JamesGardinMusic The-Further-Adventures-of-FatBoy-and-JiveTurkey-204570717258 ProfessorsofJazz joehertlermusic TheJahshuaSmith BlatPack IWBLLC/
Deacon Earl and Frontier Ruckus.
Points of interest
Farmers' markets
Lansing has several farmers' markets throughout the city in the summer months.
These markets include the Allen Street Farmer's Market on the city's eastside, the Westside Farmers' Market, the Old Town Farmer's Market, the South Lansing Farmer's Market, and the year-round historic Lansing City Market is a children's science center located in a historic wagon works factory on the Grand River.
The Michigan Library and Historical Center contains one of the 10 largest genealogy collections in the nation, has a museum dedicated to Michigan's history among other attractions.
*The Michigan Women's Hall of Fame is a museum dedicated to the historical accomplishments and achievements of Michigan women.
The house is located directly south of downtown in the 1903-built Cooley-Haze House.
The museum is surrounded by Cooley Gardens.
* The R. E. Olds Transportation Museum is dedicated to the education of Lansing's role in the development of transportation, particularly the automobile.
The Turner-Dodge House is a museum dedicated to Lansing's early pioneers.
The museum sits in the Classical Revival-styled Turner-Dodge Mansion, built in 1858 for James and Marion Turner, and later by their daughter and her husband.
It is on the National Register of Historic Places.
Theatre
* The Riverwalk Theatre, (formerly the Okemos Barn Theatre), the Lansing Civic Players, and the now defunct BoarsHead Theater are or were all located in downtown.
* Peppermint Creek Theatre Company is a well established "new" award-winning theater company.
*Happendance, Michigan's longest-running professional modern dance company, has been based in Greater Lansing since 1976.
*The Greater Lansing Ballet Company is an award-winning ballet and dance company.
* The Creole Gallery brings in various musicians and hosts the Icarus Falling Theater group.
Potter Park Zoo
The historic Potter Park Zoo, located along the Red Cedar River in Lansing, is a 102 acre park that has more than 160 species of animals.
The park holds numerous programs and events for children and families to enjoy.
With annual attendance increasing every year since 2006 (110,167 in 2006, 137,237 in 2008, and 167,000 in 2009) there are $667,100 in capital improvements planned for 2009 including a giant walk-in aviary and a new female tiger.
In 2009 the zoo began a $1.4 million renovation to its rhinoceros exhibit.
This is in addition to $1.3 million spent on capital improvements in 2008.
In 2011 the Black Rhino exhibit opened; and three tiger cubs were born.
In 2016 a 3 acre moose exhibit opened in the park.
Other area destinations
In October 2009 the Wharton Center for Performing Arts completed a , $18.5 million expansion and renovation, having already spent over $1.3 million in 2008.
Many Broadway shows come to The Wharton Center before traveling to theaters in larger places such as Chicago.
The Kresge Art Museum, the MSU Museum, and the Abrams Planetarium are highly acclaimed cultural destinations located on the campus of Michigan State University in East Lansing.
In June 2007 MSU announced the plans to build a new art museum after a $26 million gift from Eli and Edythe Broad.
Internationally known Pritzker Prize winning architect Zaha Hadid of London won the design competition for the East Lansing museum that was completed in November 2012.
Media
Newspapers and magazines
Television
Cable slots listed reflect the Comcast cable system in Lansing.
* WKAR 23 (PBS) (Cable 13) DT3 (Create) (Cable 18) / DT4 (PBS Kids) (Cable 293)
WILX maintains WSYM's News programming.
Both affiliates broadcast their newscasts at the News 10 studios in Lansing.
Often the same reporters are used on both broadcasts.
Radio
Note: If the station has no city listed before the format, it is licensed to Lansing.
* 88.1 WLGH - (Leroy Township, contemporary Christian) "Smile FM"
* 88.5 WJOM - (Eagle, contemporary Christian) "Smile FM"
* 88.9 WDBM -
* 90.5 WKAR - (East Lansing, public radio/Michigan State University)
Note: WKAR has an effective radiated power of 86,000 watts
* 92.9 WLMI - (Grand Ledge, classic hits) "Lansing's Greatest Hits"
Note: WBCT has an effective radiated power 320,000 watts
* 94.1 WWDK - (Jackson, Classic Country)
"94.1 Duke FM"
* 99.9 W260BX - (religious/southern gospel) "Family Life Radio"
* 105.7 WSRW - (Grand Rapids, adult contemporary) "Star 105.7"
* 730 AM WVFN - (East Lansing, sports talk)
"The Game"
* 1110 AM WUNN - "Lansing's Big Talker"
* 1320 AM WILS - (news/talk)
"More Compelling Talk Radio"
Note: The daytime power of WILS is 25,000 watts, making it Lansing's most powerful radio station.
* 1580 AM WWSJ - (St. Johns, urban contemporary gospel) "Joy 1580"
* 162.400 WXK81 - NOAA Weather Radio (Onondaga, weather)
Radio stations from Ann Arbor, Grand Rapids, Kalamazoo, Saginaw, and Flint can also be heard in the Lansing area.
Sports
The Lansing Lugnuts are a Class A Midwest League, Minor League Baseball team, currently affiliated with the Toronto Blue Jays.
The team plays its home games at Cooley Law School Stadium, which was built at a cost of $12.7 million and opened in 1996 in downtown Lansing.
It was partially renovated in 2006.
Cooley Law School Stadium has a seating capacity of 11,215 fans, and was built to accommodate additional expansion.
The team has won two Midwest League championships, their first in 1997 and their second in 2003.
Previously known as Oldsmobile Park, the facility was renamed Thomas M. Cooley Law School Stadium in April 2010, in reference to the park's new sponsor.
The Summit at the Capital Centre is a hockey arena and convention center located in the suburb of Dimondale that hosts youth and high school hockey.
The Lansing Capitals began play in the International Basketball League in 2006 but eventually disband for a few seasons.
The team recently resumed playing in the newly formed Independent Basketball Association in 2011.
Michigan State University, located in East Lansing, is the largest university in the State of Michigan.
MSU sponsors both men's and women's sports, usually competing as a member of the Big Ten Conference.
The Spartans have won National Titles in Men's Basketball, Football, Men's Boxing, Men's Cross Country, Men's Gymnastics, Men's Ice Hockey, Men's Soccer, and Men's Wrestling.
On November 27, 2011, MSU beat Northwestern in their Big Ten Football finale to secure the top Big Ten record at 7-1 in conference play, and qualified to play in the first ever Big Ten Football Championship Game which was held December 3, 2011, at Lucas Stadium in Indianapolis, Indiana against the Wisconsin Badgers.
Lansing Community College also sponsors many sports, competing as members of the Michigan Community College Athletic Association.
The Stars have won NJCAA titles in the following sports: Women's Softball, Men's Basketball, Women's Basketball, Men's Cross Country, Women's Cross Country, Women's Marathon and Men's Marathon.
The Lansing area is also known for its many golf courses, with two courses owned by Michigan State University, four municipal courses, and many additional public and private courses in the area.
Walnut Hills Country Club in nearby East Lansing formerly hosted the LPGA's Oldsmobile Classic from 1992 to 2000.
The Michigan PGA recently relocated from the Detroit area to Bath, Michigan, which is on the northern edge of Lansing.
The Capital City Stealth, Lansing's Semi-pro Football team was founded in 2010.
The Stealth have posted winning seasons in every year of their existence.
They play in the Great Lakes Football League which is nationally known as one of the top leagues in the country.
The Stealth appeared in the USFA AA National Championship game for 3 straight seasons from 2012-2014 and won the USFA AA National Championship in 2014 over the Pioneer Valley Knights (New England Football League) by the score of 22-13.
The team is made up of Lansing area athletes who play for the love of the game - none of the Stealth coaches or players are paid.
In the 1980s and 1990s Lansing was a major player in semi-pro football.
The Lansing Crusaders won MFL/MCFL championships in 1982, 1983, 1985, 1987, 1989, and 1990.
The team finished second in 1984, 1986, and 1991.
Other past sports teams include:
* Lansing - Michigan State League (baseball) - 1889 to 1890
* Lansing Senators - Michigan State League (baseball) - 1895 and 1902
** renamed the Lansing Lancers - Michigan State League - 1940
** and then back as the Lansing Senators - Michigan State League - 1941
* Lansing Capitals - North American Basketball League - 1966-67 to 1967-68
* Lansing Lancers - International Hockey League - 1974 to 1975
* Capital City Cardinals - Michigan Charity Football League - 1980
* Lansing Crusaders - Michigan Charity Football League - 1980 to 1988
* Capital City Cowboys - Michigan Football League - 1992
* Lansing Ice Nuts - International Independent Hockey League - 2003 to 2004
Transportation
Airports
Scheduled commercial airline service is offered from Capital Region International Airport (formerly known as Capital City Airport).
Delta Air Lines maintains routes to Detroit and Minneapolis.
United Airlines maintains routes to Chicago O'Hare.
American Airlines offers non-stop flights to Washington, D.C. and Chicago O'Hare.
Apple Vacations provides seasonal flights to Cancún, Mexico; Montego Bay, Jamaica; and Punta Cana, Dominican Republic.
UPS has a freight hub at Capital Region International Airport making up part of the 42 million pounds of annual cargo moving through the airport.
In 2008 the airport received a port of entry designation - known as Port Lansing - and now has a permanent customs facility, thus changing its name to reflect the port of entry status.
The same year a extension to the largest of the three runways - now - was completed to allow for larger aircraft to use the airport.
Major Highways
* runs from Indianapolis north to Lansing and east to Flint and Port Huron, connecting to Canada.
* runs from Muskegon, past Grand Rapids and Lansing, to Detroit.
* loops through downtown Lansing, connecting with I-96 on either end.
* is a loop route running through Lansing and East Lansing.
* a loop route off I-496 serving the state capitol and other downtown facilities.
* is a north-south highway passing between the city and neighboring East Lansing, continuing northerly toward Clare and Grayling and southerly toward Jackson, Michigan and into Ohio.
Railways
* Amtrak provides intercity passenger rail service at a stop in nearby East Lansing, on the Blue Water line from Chicago to Port Huron.
Three freight railroads serve Lansing including Canadian National Railway, CSX Transportation, and the Jackson & Lansing Railroad.
Public transportation
* Capital Area Transportation Authority (CATA) provides public transit bus service to the Lansing-East Lansing Metropolitan area on 33 routes.
CATA boasts the second highest ridership in the state of Michigan after Detroit with 53,000 daily rides in September 2008 and 11,306,339 rides in fiscal year 2008.
CATA also provides paratransit services through Spec-Tran and the "Night Owl."
Also, the "Entertainment Express" (CATA route 4) runs Thursday through Saturday from 7 pm to 2 am connecting downtown Lansing's and East Lansing's entertainment districts.
CATA won APTA's America's Best Transit Award in the medium-size category (4-30 million rides) in 2007.
CATA has two transportation centers (CTC), one in downtown Lansing and one on the campus of Michigan State University.
In 2010, a http:/ AboutCATA tabid newsid948 mid Does-CATA-study-point-to-Bus-Rapid-Transit-Light-Rail-or-Streetcar-/Default.aspx study was conducted to consider ways of enhancing the Lansing-to-East Lansing route (currently known as Route 1), with options including enhanced bus service, single-car trolley service and light rail service.
* Greyhound Lines provides inter-city bus service.
CATA and Greyhound are both located in the CATA Transportation Center (CTC) in downtown Lansing.
* Several taxicab companies serve the area.
In 2001, Big Daddy Taxi opened using large vans to address the safety concerns of drunk driving and offered $3 rides for students of Michigan State University.
In 2008 the Green Cab Company opened using Toyota Prius hybrid cars to provide "green" cabs to Lansing.
The Michigan Flyer provides bus service between Lansing and Detroit Metro Airport 12 times daily, with a stop in Ann Arbor along the way.
Bicycling
* The , non-motorized Lansing River Trail runs along the Grand River and the Red Cedar River, running as far east as Michigan State University, and passes Potter Park Zoo, the Capitol Loop, and several other destinations of interest, and as far west as Moores Park.
The trail is accessible at many points along it, some with car parking lots.
The trails breadth is extended from time to time.
Currently, the trailheads are: North - Dietrich Park; East - Kircher Park; South - Maguire Park; West - Moores Park.
All segments are hard-surfaced.
The River Trail connects to other pathways/trails in the Lansing-metro area: East - Michigan State University path system; South - Sycamore Trail.
Since the trail follows a river, most street crossings use platforms under existing street bridges to provide an uncommon amount of grade separation, to the benefit of both trail users and automobile traffic.
As of February 2015, the River Trail is under construction to add paths as far as Holt.
Utilities
Water supply, power and steam are municipally owned utilities which are provided by Lansing Board of Water & Light.
In 2008 the Lansing BWL constructed Michigan's largest solar array towards the goal of increasing renewable energy in the energy grid.
Natural gas is provided by Consumers Energy.
Notable people
* Joel Bakan, Canadian law professor and documentary filmmaker
* Terry Brunk, ex-WWE, ECW, TNA/WCW professional wrestler known as "Sabu"
* Timothy Busfield, actor and director, thirtysomething, Field of Dreams, West Wing
* Charles G. Callard, co-founder of Callard Madden & Associates and a pioneer developer of corporate valuation models
* Jim Cash, screenwriter of Top Gun and other commercially successful films
* Carolyn Cassady, writer, wife of beat generation icon Neal Cassady
* Doc Corbin Dart, singer of punk band The Crucifucks
* Ed Emshwiller, visual artist and founder of CalArts computer animation Lab
* Ed Farhat, professional wrestler known as "The Sheik"
* Joel Higgins, actor, graduated from Michigan State
* John Hughes, film writer and director, born in Lansing
* Magic Johnson, Michigan State University and NBA basketball star, Hall of Famer, president of Los Angeles Lakers, co-owner of Los Angeles Dodgers
* Jacquelyn Kelley, All-American Girls Professional Baseball League player
* Jef Mallett, creator and artist of the comic strip Frazz
* Pop McKale, athlete and coach; University of Arizona arena bears his name
* Kelly Miller, NHL player, ranks third all-time for the Washington Capitals in games played
* Kip Miller, NHL player, 1990 recipient of Hobey Baker Memorial Award
* Ransom E. Olds, automobile manufacturer, founded Olds Motor Vehicle Company
* DJ Perry, film writer, actor and director, born in Lansing
* Alice Pollitt, All-American Girls Professional Baseball League player
* Merv Pregulman, NFL player for Green Bay Packers, Detroit Lions
* Burt Reynolds, Oscar-nominated and Golden Globe award-winning actor, film and television star, born and raised in Lansing
* Steven Seagal, actor and martial artist, born in Lansing
* Frederic L. Smith, co-founder of General Motors, born in Lansing
* John Smoltz, MLB pitcher, 1996 Cy Young Award winner, Hall of Famer
* Jim "Soni" Sonefeld, drummer and percussionist for Hootie & the Blowfish
* Lori Nelson Spielman, Author of the best seller Life List
* George Teague, NFL player for Green Bay Packers, Dallas Cowboys, Miami Dolphins
Gretchen Whitmer, Governor of Michigan and former Speaker of the Michigan House of Representatives
* Howard Wolpe, Congressman who was a Lansing resident during his term in office.
International relations
Sister cities
Lansing was a sister city of Kubyashi District in Saint Petersburg, Russia.
The agreement began in 1992 and ended in practice when a change to the political structure of Saint Petersburg cancelled the district.
The relations were officially severed by Lansing in 2013 as a protest of the laws against LGBT rights in Russia.
"Friendship cities"
Lansing also has four "friendship cities":
Notes
Further reading
* Balaskovitz, Andy.
"Despite hurdles, consolidating Lansing, East Lansing and Lansing Township makes sense."
Lansing City Pulse.
Wednesday, November 28, 2012.
News section.
Available on NewsBank, Record Number: 33658e6f3e435749c466e59bf44dd1b692752.
