John Wilkes Booth (May 10, 1838 - April 26, 1865) was an American actor who assassinated President Abraham Lincoln at Ford's Theatre in Washington, D.C. on April 14, 1865.
He was a member of the prominent 19th-century Booth theatrical family from Maryland and a well-known actor in his own right.
He was also a Confederate sympathizer, vehement in his denunciation of Lincoln, and strongly opposed to the abolition of slavery in the United States.
Robert E. Lee's Army of Northern Virginia had surrendered four days earlier, but Booth believed that the American Civil War was not yet over because Confederate General Joseph E. Johnston's army was still fighting the Union Army.
Booth was completely successful in carrying out his part of the plot.
He shot Lincoln once in the back of the head, and the President died the next morning.
Seward was severely wounded but recovered, and Vice President Johnson was never attacked.
After the assassination, Booth fled on horseback to southern Maryland and, 12 days later, arrived at a farm in rural northern Virginia where he was tracked down.
Booth's companion gave himself up, but Booth refused and was shot by Union soldier Boston Corbett after the barn in which he was hiding was set ablaze.
Eight other conspirators were tried and convicted, and four were hanged shortly after.
Background and early life
Booth's parents were noted British Shakespearean actor Junius Brutus Booth and his mistress Mary Ann Holmes, who moved to the United States from England in June 1821.
They purchased a farm near Bel Air, Maryland, where John Wilkes Booth was born in a four-room log house on May 10, 1838, the ninth of ten children.
He was named after English radical politician John Wilkes, a distant relative.
Junius' wife Adelaide Delannoy Booth was granted a divorce in 1851 on grounds of adultery, and Holmes legally wed Junius on May 10, 1851, John Wilkes' 13th birthday.
Nora Titone suggests in her book My Thoughts Be Bloody (2010) that the shame and ambition of Junius Brutus Booth's illegitimate actor sons Edwin and John Wilkes eventually spurred them to strive for achievement and acclaim as rivals-Edwin as a Unionist and John Wilkes as the assassin of Abraham Lincoln.
Booth's father built Tudor Hall on the Harford County property as the family's summer home in 1851, while also maintaining a winter residence on Exeter Street in Baltimore.
The Booth family was listed as living in Baltimore in the 1850 census.
As a boy, Booth was athletic and popular, and he became skilled at horsemanship and fencing.
He attended the Bel Air Academy and was an indifferent student whom the headmaster described as "not deficient in intelligence, but disinclined to take advantage of the educational opportunities offered him.
Each day he rode back and forth from farm to school, taking more interest in what happened along the way than in reaching his classes on time".
In 1850-1851, he attended the Quaker-run Milton Boarding School for Boys located in Sparks, Maryland, and later St. Timothy's Hall, an Episcopal military academy in Catonsville, Maryland.
At the Milton school, students recited classical works by such authors as Cicero, Herodotus, and Tacitus.
Students at St. Timothy's wore military uniforms and were subject to a regimen of daily formation drills and strict discipline.
While attending the Milton Boarding School, Booth met a Gypsy fortune-teller who read his palm and pronounced a grim destiny, telling him that he would have a grand but short life, doomed to die young and "meeting a bad end".
His sister recalled that he wrote down the palm-reader's prediction, showed it to his family and others, and often discussed its portents in moments of melancholy.
By age 16, Booth was interested in the theater and in politics, and he became a delegate from Bel Air to a rally by the Know Nothing Party for Henry Winter Davis, the anti-immigrant party's candidate for Congress in the 1854 elections.
Booth aspired to follow in the footsteps of his father and his actor brothers Edwin and Junius Brutus, Jr.
He began practicing elocution daily in the woods around Tudor Hall and studying Shakespeare.
Theatrical career
1850s
Booth made his stage debut at age 17 on August 14, 1855 in the supporting role of the Earl of Richmond in Richard III at Baltimore's Charles Street Theatre.
The audience jeered at him when he missed some of his lines.
He also began acting at Baltimore's Holliday Street Theater, owned by John T. Ford, where the Booths had performed frequently.
In 1857, he joined the stock company of the Arch Street Theatre in Philadelphia, where he played for a full season.
At his request, he was billed as "J.B. Wilkes", a pseudonym meant to avoid comparison with other members of his famous thespian family.
Jim Bishop wrote that Booth "developed into an outrageous scene stealer, but he played his parts with such heightened enthusiasm that the audiences idolized him."
Later that year, Booth played the part of Mohegan Indian Chief Uncas in a play staged in Petersburg, Virginia, and then became a stock company actor at the Richmond Theatre in Virginia, where he became increasingly popular with audiences for his energetic performances.
On October 5, 1858, he played the part of Horatio in Hamlet, alongside his older brother Edwin in the title role.
Afterward, Edwin led him to the theater's footlights and said to the audience, "I think he's done well, don't you?"
In response, the audience applauded loudly and cried, "Yes!
Yes!"
Some critics called Booth "the handsomest man in America" and a "natural genius", and noted his having an "astonishing memory"; others were mixed in their estimation of his acting.
He stood tall, had jet-black hair, and was lean and athletic.
Noted Civil War reporter George Alfred Townsend described him as a "muscular, perfect man" with "curling hair, like a Corinthian capital".
Booth's stage performances were often characterized by his contemporaries as acrobatic and intensely physical, with him leaping upon the stage and gesturing with passion.
He was an excellent swordsman, although a fellow actor once recalled that Booth occasionally cut himself with his own sword.
As the 1850s drew to a close, Booth was becoming wealthy as an actor, earning $20,000 a year (equivalent to about $ more recently).
1860s
Booth embarked on his first national tour as a leading actor after finishing the 1859-1860 theatre season in Richmond, Virginia.
He engaged Philadelphia attorney Matthew Canning to serve as his agent.
By mid-1860, he was playing in such cities as New York, Boston, Chicago, Cleveland, St. Louis, Columbus, Georgia, Montgomery, Alabama, and New Orleans.
Poet and journalist Walt Whitman said of Booth's acting, "He would have flashes, passages, I thought of real genius."
The Philadelphia Press drama critic said, "Without having his brother Edwin's culture and grace, Mr. Booth has far more action, more life, and, we are inclined to think, more natural genius."
When the Civil War began on April 12, 1861, Booth was starring in Albany, New York.
He was outspoken in his admiration for the South's secession, publicly calling it "heroic."
This so enraged local citizens that they demanded that he be banned from the stage for making "treasonable statements".
Albany's drama critics were kinder, giving him rave reviews.
One called him a genius, praising his acting for "never failing to delight with his masterly impressions."
As the Civil War raged across the divided land in 1862, Booth appeared mostly in Union and border states.
In January, he played the title role in Richard III in St. Louis and then made his Chicago debut.
In March, he made his first acting appearance in New York City.
In May 1862, he made his Boston debut, playing nightly at the Boston Museum in Richard III (May 12, 15 and 23), Romeo and Juliet (May 13), The Robbers (May 14 and 21), Hamlet (May 16), The Apostate (May 19), The Stranger (May 20), and The Lady of Lyons (May 22).
Following his performance of Richard III on May 12, the Boston Transcript's review the next day called Booth "the most promising young actor on the American stage".
Starting in January 1863, he returned to the Boston Museum for a series of plays, including the role of villain Duke Pescara in The Apostate, that won him acclaim from audiences and critics.
Back in Washington in April, he played the title roles in Hamlet and Richard III, one of his favorites.
He was billed as "The Pride of the American People, A Star of the First Magnitude," and the critics were equally enthusiastic.
The National Republican drama critic said that Booth "took the hearts of the audience by storm" and termed his performance "a complete triumph".
At the beginning of July 1863, Booth finished the acting season at Cleveland's Academy of Music, as the Battle of Gettysburg raged in Pennsylvania.
Between September and November, 1863, Booth played a hectic schedule in the northeast, appearing in Boston, Providence, Rhode Island, and Hartford, Connecticut.
Every day he received fan mail from infatuated women.
Family friend John T. Ford opened 1,500-seat Ford's Theatre on November 9 in Washington, D.C.
Booth was one of the first leading men to appear there, playing in Charles Selby's The Marble Heart.
In this play, Booth portrayed a Greek sculptor in costume, making marble statues come to life.
from his box.
At one point during the performance, Booth was said to have shaken his finger in Lincoln's direction as he delivered a line of dialogue.
Lincoln's sister-in-law was sitting with him in the same presidential box where he was later slain; she turned to him and said, "Mr. Lincoln, he looks as if he meant that for you."
He played Mark Antony and his brother Edwin had the larger role of Brutus in a performance acclaimed as "the greatest theatrical event in New York history."
The proceeds went towards a statue of William Shakespeare for Central Park, which still stands today (2019).
In January 1865, he acted in Shakespeare's Romeo and Juliet in Washington, again garnering rave reviews.
The National Intelligencer called Booth's Romeo "the most satisfactory of all renderings of that fine character," especially praising the death scene.
Booth made the final appearance of his acting career at Ford's on March 18, 1865, when he again played Duke Pescara in The Apostate.
Business ventures
Booth invested some of his growing wealth in various enterprises during the early 1860s, including land speculation in Boston's Back Bay section.
initially calling their venture Dramatic Oil but later renaming it Fuller Farm Oil.
The partners invested in a site along the Allegheny River at Franklin, Pennsylvania in late 1863 for drilling.
Civil War years
Booth was strongly opposed to the abolitionists who sought to end slavery in the U.S.
He attended the hanging of abolitionist leader John Brown on December 2, 1859, who was executed for leading a raid on the Federal armory at Harpers Ferry in present-day West Virginia.
Booth had been rehearsing at the Richmond Theatre when he abruptly decided to join the Richmond Grays, a volunteer militia of 1,500 men traveling to Charles Town for Brown's hanging, to guard against an attempt by abolitionists to rescue Brown from the gallows by force.
When Brown was hanged without incident, Booth stood in uniform near the scaffold and afterwards expressed great satisfaction with Brown's fate, although he admired the condemned man's bravery in facing death stoically.
Lincoln was elected president on November 6, 1860, and the following month Booth drafted a long speech, apparently undelivered, that decried Northern abolitionism and made clear his strong support of the South and the institution of slavery.
On April 12, 1861, the Civil War began, and eventually 11 Southern states seceded from the Union.
In Booth's native Maryland, some of the slaveholding portion of the population favored joining the Confederate States of America.
Although the Maryland legislature voted decisively (53-13) against secession on April 28, 1861, it also voted not to allow federal troops to pass south through the state by rail, and it requested that Lincoln remove the growing numbers of federal troops in Maryland.
The legislature seems to have wanted to remain in the Union while also wanting to avoid involvement in a war against Southern neighbors.
Many Marylanders, including Booth, agreed with the ruling of Marylander and U.S. Supreme Court Chief Justice Roger B. Taney, in Ex parte Merryman, that Lincoln's suspension of habeas corpus in Maryland was unconstitutional.
As a popular actor in the 1860s, Booth continued to travel extensively to perform in the North and South, and as far west as New Orleans.
According to his sister Asia, Booth confided to her that he also used his position to smuggle the anti-malarial drug quinine, which was crucial to the lives of residents of the Gulf coast, to the South during his travels there, since it was in short supply due to the Northern blockade.
Booth was pro-Confederate, but his family was divided, like many Marylanders.
He was outspoken in his love of the South, and equally outspoken in his hatred of Lincoln.
As the Civil War went on, Booth increasingly quarreled with his brother Edwin, who declined to make stage appearances in the South and refused to listen to John Wilkes' fiercely partisan denunciations of the North and Lincoln.
He was charged with making "treasonous" remarks against the government, but was released when he took an oath of allegiance to the Union and paid a substantial fine.
In February 1865, Booth became infatuated with Lucy Lambert Hale, the daughter of U.S. Senator John P. Hale of New Hampshire, and they became secretly engaged when Booth received his mother's blessing for their marriage plans.
"You have so often been dead in love," his mother counseled Booth in a letter, "be well assured she is really and truly devoted to you."
Booth composed a handwritten Valentine card for his fiancée on February 13, expressing his "adoration".
She was unaware of Booth's deep antipathy towards Lincoln.
He began to formulate plans to kidnap Lincoln from his summer residence at the Old Soldiers Home, from the White House, and to smuggle him across the Potomac River and into Richmond, Virginia.
Once in Confederate hands, Lincoln would be exchanged for Confederate Army prisoners of war held in Northern prisons and, Booth reasoned, bring the war to an end by emboldening opposition to the war in the North or forcing Union recognition of the Confederate government.
Throughout the Civil War, the Confederacy maintained a network of underground operators in southern Maryland, particularly Charles and St. Mary's Counties, smuggling recruits across the Potomac River into Virginia and relaying messages for Confederate agents as far north as Canada.
Booth recruited his friends Samuel Arnold and Michael O'Laughlen as accomplices.
They met often at the house of Confederate sympathizer Maggie Branson at 16 North Eutaw Street in Baltimore.
No conclusive proof has linked Booth's kidnapping or assassination plots to a conspiracy involving the leadership of the Confederate government, but historian David Herbert Donald states that "at least at the lower levels of the Southern secret service, the abduction of the Union President was under consideration."
Historian Thomas Goodrich concludes that Booth entered the Confederate Secret Service as a spy and courier.
Lincoln won a landslide re-election in early November, 1864, on a platform that advocated abolishing slavery altogether, by Constitutional Amendment.
Booth, meanwhile, devoted increased energy and money to his kidnapping plot.
He assembled a loose-knit band of Southern sympathizers, including David Herold, George Atzerodt, Lewis Powell (also known as Lewis Payne or Paine), and rebel agent John Surratt.
They began to meet routinely at the boarding house of Surratt's mother Mary Surratt.
Asia recalled that he decried Lincoln's re-election, "making himself a king", and that he went on "wild tirades" in 1865, as the Confederacy's defeat became more certain.
Booth attended Lincoln's second inauguration on March 4 as the guest of his secret fiancée Lucy Hale.
In the crowd below were Powell, Atzerodt, and Herold.
There was no attempt to assassinate Lincoln during the inauguration.
Later, Booth remarked about his "excellent chance...to kill the President, if I had wished."
Booth later learned that Lincoln had changed his plans at the last moment to attend a reception at the National Hotel in Washington - where Booth was staying.
The previous day, Booth was in the crowd outside the White House when Lincoln gave an impromptu speech from his window.
Lincoln stated that he was in favor of granting suffrage to the former slaves, and Booth declared that it would be the last speech that Lincoln would ever make.
On the morning of Good Friday, April 14, 1865, Booth went to Ford's Theatre to get his mail.
While there, he was told by John Ford's brother that President and Mrs. Lincoln would be attending the play Our American Cousin at Ford's Theatre that evening, accompanied by Gen. and Mrs. Ulysses S. Grant.
He immediately set about making plans for the assassination, which included making arrangements with livery stable owner James W. Pumphrey for a getaway horse and an escape route.
Booth informed Powell, Herold, and Atzerodt of his intention to kill Lincoln.
He assigned Powell to assassinate Secretary of State William H. Seward and Atzerodt to do so to Vice President Andrew Johnson.
Herold would assist in their escape into Virginia.
By targeting Lincoln and his two immediate successors to the presidency, Booth seems to have intended to decapitate the Union government and throw it into a state of panic and confusion.
The possibility of assassinating the Union Army's commanding general as well was foiled when Grant declined the theatre invitation at his wife's insistence.
Instead, the Grants departed Washington by train that evening for a visit to relatives in New Jersey.
Booth had free access to all parts of the theater as a famous and popular actor who had frequently performed at Ford's Theatre and who was well known to its owner John T. Ford, even having his mail sent there.
He bored a spyhole into the door of the presidential box earlier that day, so that he could observe the box's occupants and verify that the President had made it to the play.
Booth slipped into Lincoln's box that evening at around 10p.m. as the play progressed and shot the President in the back of the head with a .41 caliber Deringer pistol.
Booth's escape was almost thwarted by Major Henry Rathbone, who was in the presidential box with Mary Todd Lincoln.
Booth stabbed Rathbone when the startled officer lunged at him.
Some witnesses reported that Booth fractured or otherwise injured his leg when his spur snagged a decorative U.S. Treasury Guard flag while leaping to the stage.
Historian Michael W. Kauffman questioned this legend in his book American Brutus: John Wilkes Booth and the Lincoln Conspiracies, writing that eyewitness accounts of Booth's hurried stage exit made it unlikely that his leg was broken then.
Kauffman contends that Booth was injured later that night during his flight to escape when his horse tripped and fell on him, calling Booth's claim to the contrary an exaggeration to portray his own actions as heroic.
Booth was the only one of the assassins to succeed.
Powell was able to stab Seward, who was bedridden as a result of an earlier carriage accident.
Seward was badly wounded but he survived.
Atzerodt lost his nerve and spent the evening drinking alcohol; he never made an attempt to kill Johnson.
Reaction and pursuit
In the ensuing pandemonium inside Ford's Theatre, Booth fled by a stage door to the alley, where his getaway horse was held for him by Joseph "Peanuts" Burroughs.
The owner of the horse had warned Booth that the horse was high spirited and would break halter if left unattended.
Booth left the horse with Edmund Spangler and Spangler arranged for Burroughs to hold it.
The fleeing assassin galloped into southern Maryland, accompanied by David Herold, having planned his escape route to take advantage of the sparsely settled area's lack of telegraphs and railroads, along with its predominantly Confederate sympathies.
He thought that the area's dense forests and the swampy terrain of Zekiah Swamp made it ideal for an escape route into rural Virginia.
At midnight, Booth and Herold arrived at Surratt's Tavern on the Brandywine Pike, from Washington, where they had stored guns and equipment earlier in the year as part of the kidnap plot.
The fugitives then continued southward, stopping before dawn on April 15 for treatment of Booth's injured leg at the home of Dr. Samuel Mudd in St. Catharine, from Washington.
The next day, Booth and Herold arrived at the home of Samuel Cox around 4 am.
As the two fugitives hid in the woods nearby, Cox contacted Thomas A. Jones, his foster brother and a Confederate agent in charge of spy operations in the southern Maryland area since 1862.
The War Department advertised a $100,000 reward ($ in USD) by order of Secretary of War Edwin M. Stanton for information leading to the arrest of Booth and his accomplices, and Federal troops were dispatched to search southern Maryland extensively, following tips reported by Federal intelligence agents to Col. Lafayette Baker.
Federal troops combed the rural area's woods and swamps for Booth in the days following the assassination, as the nation experienced an outpouring of grief.
On April 18, mourners waited seven abreast in a mile-long line outside the White House for the public viewing of the slain president, reposing in his open walnut casket in the black-draped East Room.
A cross of lilies was at the head and roses covered the coffin's lower half.
Thousands of mourners arriving on special trains jammed Washington for the next day's funeral, sleeping on hotel floors and even resorting to blankets spread outdoors on the Capitol's lawn.
Prominent African-American abolitionist leader and orator Frederick Douglass called the assassination an "unspeakable calamity".
Historian Dorothy Kunhardt writes: "Almost every family who kept a photograph album on the parlor table owned a likeness of John Wilkes Booth of the famous Booth family of actors.
After the assassination Northerners slid the Booth card out of their albums: some threw it away, some burned it, some crumpled it angrily."
Even in the South, sorrow was expressed in some quarters.
In Savannah, Georgia, the mayor and city council addressed a vast throng at an outdoor gathering to express their indignation, and many in the crowd wept.
Confederate general Joseph E. Johnston called Booth's act "a disgrace to the age".
Robert E. Lee also expressed regret at Lincoln's death by Booth's hand.
Not all were grief-stricken.
In New York City, a man was attacked by an enraged crowd when he shouted, "It served Old Abe right!"
after hearing the news of Lincoln's death.
By April 20, he was aware that some of his co-conspirators had already been arrested: Mary Surratt, Powell (or Paine), Arnold, and O'Laughlen.
Booth was surprised to find little public sympathy for his action, especially from those anti-Lincoln newspapers that had previously excoriated the President in life.
News of the assassination reached the far corners of the nation, and indignation was aroused against Lincoln's critics, whom many blamed for encouraging Booth to act.
The San Francisco Chronicle editorialized:
QTEMPLATE |Booth has simply carried out what...secession politicians and journalists have been for years expressing in words...who have denounced the President as a "tyrant," a "despot," a "usurper," hinted at, and virtually recommended.
Booth wrote of his dismay in a journal entry on April 21, as he awaited nightfall before crossing the Potomac River into Virginia (see map):
QTEMPLATE |For six months we had worked to capture.
But our cause being almost lost, something decisive and great must be done.
I struck boldly, and not as the papers say.
I can never repent it, though we hated to kill.
That same day, the nine-car funeral train bearing Lincoln's body departed Washington on the Baltimore and Ohio Railroad, arriving at Baltimore's Camden Station at 10 am, the first stop on a 13-day journey to Springfield, Illinois, its final destination.
The funeral train slowly made its way westward through seven states, stopping en route at Harrisburg, Philadelphia, Trenton, New York, Albany, Buffalo, Cleveland, Columbus, Cincinnati, and Indianapolis during the following days.
About 7 million people lined the railroad tracks along the route, holding aloft signs with legends such as "We mourn our loss," "He lives in the hearts of his people," and "The darkest hour in history."
In the cities where the train stopped, 1.5 million people viewed Lincoln in his coffin.
Mourners were viewing Lincoln's remains when the funeral train steamed into Harrisburg at 8:20 pm, while Booth and Herold were provided with a boat and compass by Jones to cross the Potomac at night on April 21.
The 23-year-old Herold knew the area well, having frequently hunted there, and recognized a nearby farm as belonging to a Confederate sympathizer.
The farmer led them to his son-in-law, Col. John J. Hughes, who provided the fugitives with food and a hideout until nightfall, for a second attempt to row across the river to Virginia.
Booth wrote in his diary:
QTEMPLATE |With every man's hand against me, I am here in despair.
And why; For doing what Brutus was honored for...
And yet I for striking down a greater tyrant than they ever knew am looked upon as a common cutthroat.
There, they made contact with Thomas Harbin, whom Booth had previously brought into his erstwhile kidnapping plot.
Harbin took Booth and Herold to another Confederate agent in the area named William Bryant who supplied them with horses.
While Lincoln's funeral train was in New York City on April 24, Lieutenant Edward P. Doherty was dispatched from Washington at 2 p.m. with a detachment of 26 Union soldiers from the 16th New York Cavalry Regiment to capture Booth in Virginia, accompanied by Lieutenant Colonel Everton Conger, an intelligence officer assigned by Lafayette Baker.
The detachment steamed down the Potomac River on the boat John S. Ide, landing at Belle Plain, Virginia, at 10 pm.
The pursuers crossed the Rappahannock River and tracked Booth and Herold to Richard H. Garrett's farm, about south of Port Royal, Virginia.
Booth and Herold had been led to the farm on April 24 by William S. Jett, a former private in the 9th Virginia Cavalry, whom they had met before crossing the Rappahannock.
Garrett's 11-year-old son Richard was an eyewitness.
In later years, he became a Baptist minister and widely lectured on the events of Booth's demise at his family's farm.
According to his account, Booth and Herold arrived at the Garretts' farm, located on the road to Bowling Green, around 3 p.m. on Monday afternoon.
Confederate mail delivery had ceased with the collapse of the Confederate government, he explained, so the Garretts were unaware of Lincoln's assassination.
The Garretts also finally learned of Lincoln's death and the substantial reward for Booth's capture.
Booth, said Garrett, displayed no reaction other than to ask if the family would turn in the fugitive should they have the opportunity.
Still not aware of their guest's true identity, one of the older Garrett sons averred that they might, if only because they needed the money.
The next day, Booth told the Garretts that he intended to reach Mexico, drawing a route on a map of theirs.
Death
Conger tracked down Jett and interrogated him, learning of Booth's location at the Garrett farm.
Before dawn on April 26, the soldiers caught up with the fugitives, who were hiding in Garrett's tobacco barn.
David Herold surrendered, but Booth refused Conger's demand to surrender, saying, "I prefer to come out and fight."
The soldiers then set the barn on fire.
As Booth moved about inside the blazing barn, Sergeant Boston Corbett shot him.
According to Corbett's later account, he fired at Booth because the fugitive "raised his pistol to shoot" at them.
In Booth's pockets were found a compass, a candle, pictures of five women (actresses Alice Grey, Helen Western, Effie Germon, Fannie Brown, and Booth's fiancée Lucy Hale), and his diary, where he had written of Lincoln's death, "Our country owed all her troubles to him, and God simply made me the instrument of his punishment."
Shortly after Booth's death, his brother Edwin wrote to his sister Asia, "Think no more of him as your brother; he is dead to us now, as he soon must be to all the world, but imagine the boy you loved to be in that better part of his spirit, in another world."
Asia also had in her possession a sealed letter that Booth had given her in January 1865 for safekeeping, only to be opened upon his death.
In the letter, Booth had written:
QTEMPLATE |I know how foolish I shall be deemed for undertaking such a step as this, where, on one side, I have many friends and everything to make me happy ... to give up all ... seems insane; but God is my judge.
I love justice more than I do a country that disowns it, more than fame or wealth.
Aftermath
Booth's body was shrouded in a blanket and tied to the side of an old farm wagon for the trip back to Belle Plain.
There, his corpse was taken aboard the ironclad USS Montauk and brought to the Washington Navy Yard for identification and an autopsy.
The body was identified there as Booth's by more than ten people who knew him.
Among the identifying features used to make sure that the man that was killed was Booth was a tattoo on his left hand with his initials J.W.B., and a distinct scar on the back of his neck.
Mary Surratt, Lewis Powell, David Herold, and George Atzerodt were hanged in the Old Arsenal Penitentiary on July 7, 1865.
Samuel Mudd, Samuel Arnold, and Michael O'Laughlen were sentenced to life imprisonment at Fort Jefferson in Florida's isolated Dry Tortugas.
Edmund Spangler was given a six-year term in prison.
Forty years later, when the centenary of Lincoln's birth was celebrated in 1909, a border state official reflected on Booth's assassination of Lincoln: "Confederate veterans held public services and gave public expression to the sentiment, that 'had Lincoln lived' the days of Reconstruction might have been softened and the era of good feeling ushered in earlier."
A century later, Goodrich concluded in 2005, "For millions of people, particularly in the South, it would be decades before the impact of the Lincoln assassination began to release its terrible hold on their lives".
Theories of Booth's motivation
Author Francis Wilson was 11 years old at the time of Lincoln's assassination.
He wrote an epitaph of Booth in his 1929 book John Wilkes Booth: "In the terrible deed he committed, he was actuated by no thought of monetary gain, but by a self-sacrificing, albeit wholly fanatical devotion to a cause he thought supreme."
Others have seen less unselfish motives, such as shame, ambition, and sibling rivalry for achievement and fame.
Booth, said Bates, assumed the pseudonym "John St. Helen" and settled on the Paluxy River near Glen Rose, Texas, and later moved to Granbury, Texas.
He fell gravely ill and made a deathbed confession that he was the fugitive assassin, but he then recovered and fled, eventually committing suicide in 1903 in Enid, Oklahoma, under the alias "David E. George".
By 1913, more than 70,000 copies of the book had been sold, and Bates exhibited St. Helen's mummified body in carnival sideshows.
Others positively identified this body as Booth at the funeral home, including Booth's mother, brother, and sister, along with his dentist and other Baltimore acquaintances.
The Lincoln Conspiracy (1977) contended that there was a government plot to conceal Booth's escape, reviving interest in the story and prompting the display of St. Helen's mummified body in Chicago that year.
The book sold more than one million copies and was made into a feature film called The Lincoln Conspiracy which was theatrically released later that year.
The 1998 book The Curse of Cain: The Untold Story of John Wilkes Booth contended that Booth had escaped, sought refuge in Japan, and eventually returned to the United States.
In 1994 two historians together with several descendants sought a court order for the exhumation of Booth's body at Green Mount Cemetery which was, according to their lawyer, "intended to prove or disprove longstanding theories on Booth's escape" by conducting a photo-superimposition analysis.
The application was blocked by Baltimore Circuit Court Judge Joseph H. H. Kaplan, who cited, among other things, "the unreliability of petitioners' less-than-convincing escape/cover-up theory" as a major factor in his decision.
The Maryland Court of Special Appeals upheld the ruling.
In December 2010, descendants of Edwin Booth reported that they obtained permission to exhume the Shakespearean actor's body to obtain DNA samples to compare with a sample of his brother John's DNA to refute the rumor that John had escaped after the assassination.
Bree Harvey, a spokesman from the Mount Auburn Cemetery in Cambridge, Massachusetts, where Edwin Booth is buried, denied reports that the family had contacted them and requested to exhume Edwin's body.
The family hoped to obtain samples of John Wilkes's DNA from remains such as vertebrae stored at the National Museum of Health and Medicine in Maryland.
On March 30, 2013, museum spokeswoman Carol Johnson announced that the family's request to extract DNA from the vertebrae had been rejected.
In popular culture
Film
*Booth was portrayed by Raoul Walsh in the 1915 film Birth of a Nation.
*John Wilkes Booth is played by John Derek in the film Prince of Players (1955), a biography of Edwin Booth (played by Richard Burton).
*Booth is played by Rob Morrow in the television film The Day Lincoln Was Shot (1998).
*James Marsden plays Booth in a flashback cameo in the comedy Zoolander (2001)
*Chris Conner portrayed John Wilkes Booth in the director's cut of the 2003 film Gods and Generals.
*Booth is portrayed by Toby Kebbell in the Robert Redford film The Conspirator (2010).
*Jesse Johnson plays Booth in the telefim Killing Lincoln (2013), where he is the main character.
Literature
*In David O. Stewart's novel, The Lincoln Deception (), two people in 1900 try to discover the true motive behind Booth's plot.
* In G. J. A. O'Toole's 1979 historical fiction-mystery novel The Cosgrove Report, a present-day private detective investigates the authenticity of a 19th-century manuscript that alleges Booth survived the aftermath of the Lincoln assassination.
*In Abraham Lincoln, Vampire Hunter by Seth Grahame-Smith, Booth is transformed into a vampire a few years before the Civil War, and assassinates Lincoln out of natural sympathy for the Confederate States, whose slave population provides America's vampires with an abundant source of blood.
* Booth, along with Lincoln, are depicted in Dan Gutman's children's novel Flashback Four, where four children from the 21st Century travel back in time to photograph Lincoln during the Gettysburg Address and return with the photo for an eccentric rich lady.
Stage productions
*Booth is featured as a central character of Stephen Sondheim's musical Assassins, in which his assassination of Lincoln is depicted in a musical number called "The Ballad of Booth".
*Austin-based theatre company The Hidden Room developed a staged reading of John Wilkes Booth's Richard III based on the manuscript promptbook in the collection of the Harry Ransom Center.
The promptbook is one of only two known surviving promptbooks created by John Wilkes Booth, and uses the Colley Cibber adaptation of Shakespeare's text.
The full book with the actor's handwritten notations has been digitized.
The other promptbook is also for Richard III, and can be found in the Harvard Theatre Collection.
Television
*The Wagon Train episode "The John Wilbot Story" (1958) is based on the premise that Booth survived and moved west; the character John Wilbot is played by Dane Clark.
*Booth was portrayed by John Lasell in The Twilight Zone episode "Back There" (1961).
*All three Booth brothers interact with the Morehouses and with Elizabeth in New York City in episode 9 of season 1 ("A Day to Give Thanks") of the BBC America series Copper.
John Wilkes is particularly taken with Elizabeth, who is helping them raise funds for the brothers' 1864 benefit performance of Julius Caesar at the Winter Garden Theatre.
*Booth is portrayed by Kelly Blatz in "The Assassination of Abraham Lincoln" episode (S01E02) of Timeless.
*In the early 1990s, an episode of the American TV show, Unsolved Mysteries, presented originally by Robert Stack, examined sympathetically the theory that John Wilkes Booth was not killed in Maryland but escaped, dying in Oklahoma in 1903.
The episode was re-edited and hosted by Dennis Farina in 2009.
In The Simpsons episode "I Love Lisa" (9F13), Bart Simpson plays the part of John Wilkes Booth in a condensed version of Lincoln's assassination, and Lincoln is played by Milhouse Van Houten.
Bart jokingly models his performance after The Terminator and his most famous line ("Hasta La Vista, Abey") before being dragged off stage.
In Touched by an Angel, the episode Beautiful Dreamer (1998) shows the angels with Lincoln during his final days.
As Booth is dying at the barn in Virginia, Andrew, the angel of death, encourages him to repent but Booth dies unrepentant.
Music
*"John Wilkes Booth" is a song written by Mary Chapin Carpenter, commissioned and notably interpreted by Tony Rice.
The song is included on his recording Native American.
The commissioning originated with Rice's interest in this historical figure.
Video games
*In the 2013 video game BioShock Infinite, John Wilkes Booth is viewed as a hero in the fictional airborne city of Columbia.
A cult's headquarters features a large statue of Booth in its lobby, as well as a painting depicting Booth as a saint while assassinating a devil version of Abraham Lincoln.
References
Footnotes
Bibliography
Further reading
For younger readers
