An apple pie is a pie in which the principal filling ingredient is apple.
It is, on occasion, served with whipped cream, ice cream (which is known as apple pie a la mode), or cheddar cheese.
The pastry part is generally used top-and-bottom, making it a double-crust pie; the upper crust may be circular or latticed (woven of crosswise strips).
Depending on the baker's preference, the bottom crust may be baked first (before baking the whole pie) to prevent it from getting soggy.
Exceptions are: deep-dish apple pie (with a top crust only) and the open-faced French dessert tarte Tatin.
Apple pie is an unofficial symbol of the United States and one of its signature comfort foods.
The fruit for the pie can be fresh, canned, or reconstituted from dried apples.
These different types of apples (canned, dried, fresh) affects the final texture and the length of cooking time required will vary, therefore people disagree on if it affects the flavour or not.
Dried or preserved apples were originally substituted only at times when fresh fruit was unavailable.
Along with the apples people commonly use, cinnamon, salt, butter, and most importantly sugar.
Though most of the old recipes don't include sugar due to the price or having a better sweetener option, most people definitely use it today.
Apple pie is often served in the style of "à la Mode" (topped with ice cream).
Alternatively, a piece of sharp cheddar cheese is, at times, placed on top of or alongside a slice of the finished pie.
Apple pie with cheddar is popular in the American Midwest and New England, particularly in Vermont, where it is considered the state dish.
documents a recipe for Appeltaerten and a lattice style pie.
Both recipes are distinct in that they typically call for flavourings of cinnamon and lemon juice to be added and differ in texture, not taste.
Dutch apple pies may include ingredients such as full-cream butter, raisins and almond paste, in addition to ingredients such as apples and sugar, which they have in common with other recipes.
The basis of Dutch apple pie is a crust on the bottom and around the edges.
This crust is then filled with pieces or slices of apple, usually a crisp and mildly tart variety such as Goudreinet or Elstar.
Cinnamon and sugar are generally mixed in with the apple filling.
Atop the filling, strands of dough cover the pie in a lattice holding the filling in place but keeping it visible or cover the pie with crumbs.
It can be eaten warm or cold, sometimes with a dash of whipped cream or vanilla ice cream.
In the US, "Dutch apple pie" refers specifically to the apple pie style with a crumb, streusel, topping.
English style
English apple pie recipes go back to the time of Chaucer.
The 1381 recipe (see illustration at right) is the earliest known apple pie recipe in the world, In the meantime, the colonists were more likely to make their pies, or "pasties", from meat, calling them coffins (meaning basket) rather than fruit; and the main use for apples, once they were available, was in cider.
However, there are American apple pie recipes, both manuscript and printed, from the 18th century, and it has since become a very popular dessert.
Apple varieties are usually propagated by grafting, as clones, but in the New World, planting from seeds was more popular, which quickly led to the development of hundreds of new native varieties.
Apple pie was a common food in 18th-century Delaware.
As noted by the New Sweden historian Dr. Israel Acrelius in a letter: "Apple pie is used throughout the whole year, and when fresh Apples are no longer to be had, dried ones are used.
It is the evening meal of children."
The mock apple pie, made from crackers, was probably invented for use aboard ships, as it was known to the British Royal Navy as early as 1812.
The earliest known published recipes for mock apple pie date from the antebellum period of the 1850s.
In the 1930s, and for many years afterwards, Ritz Crackers promoted a recipe for mock apple pie using its product, along with sugar and various spices.
Although eaten in Europe since long before the European colonization of the Americas, apple pie as used in the phrase "as American as apple pie" describes something as being "typically American."
" In the nineteenth and twentieth centuries, apple pie became a symbol of American prosperity and national pride.
A newspaper article published in 1902 declared that "No pie-eating people can be permanently vanquished."
The dish was also commemorated in the phrase "for Mom and apple pie" - supposedly the stock answer of American soldiers in World War II, whenever journalists asked why they were going to war.
Jack Holden and Frances Kay sang in their patriotic 1950 song “The Fiery Bear”, creating contrast between this symbol of U.S. culture and the Russian bear of the Soviet Union:
:We love our baseball and apple pie
:We love our county fair
:We'll keep Old Glory waving high
:There's no place here for a bear
Advertisers exploited the patriotic connection in the 1970s with the commercial jingle "baseball, hot dogs, apple pie and Chevrolet".
Modern American recipes for apple pie usually indicate a pastry that is 9 inches in diameter in a fluted pie plate, with an apple filling spiced with cinnamon, nutmeg, and lemon juice, and it may or may not have a lattice or shapes cut out of the top for decoration.
One out of five Americans surveyed (19%) prefer apple pie over all others, followed by pumpkin (13%)
and pecan (12%).
The unincorporated community of Pie Town, New Mexico is named after apple pie.
Gallery
File:Caramel Rose Apple Pie.jpg|Rose Apple Pie
File:Caramel Apple Roses Cake.jpg|Apple Roses Pie
*Apple strudel (German Apfelstrudel), a large Austrian pastry made with apples, sugar and spices; similar to pie in that the filling is encased by the pastry, but it is rectangular rather than round and cut like coffee cake or stollen rather than like pie
* Apple turnover, similar to strudel but much smaller and triangular in shape, with a higher proportion of pastry to filling
