Henry V is a history play by William Shakespeare, believed to have been written near 1599.
It tells the story of King Henry V of England, focusing on events immediately before and after the Battle of Agincourt (1415) during the Hundred Years' War.
In the First Quarto text, it was titled The Cronicle History of Henry the fift,
Date and text
On the basis of an apparent allusion to Essex's mission to quell Tyrone's Rebellion, the play is thought to date from early 1599.
Shakespeare presents it in all its complexity.
The American critic Norman Rabkin described the play as a picture with two simultaneous meanings.
Rabkin argues that the play never settles on one viewpoint towards warfare, Henry himself switching his style of speech constantly, talking of "rape and pillage" during Harfleur, but of patriotic glory in his St Crispin's Day Speech.
Some critics connect the glorification of nationalistic pride and conquest with contemporary English military ventures in Spain and Ireland.
The Chorus directly refers to the looked-for military triumphs of Robert Devereux, 2nd Earl of Essex, in the fifth act.
Henry V himself is sometimes seen as an ambivalent representation of the stage machiavel, combining apparent sincerity with a willingness to use deceit and force to attain his ends.
Other commentators see the play as looking critically at the reason for Henry's violent cause.
The noble words of the Chorus and Henry are consistently undermined by the actions of Pistol, Bardolph, and Nym.
Pistol talks in a bombastic blank verse that seems to parody Henry's own style of speech.
Pistol and his friends, thus, show up the actions of their rulers.
Indeed, the presence of the Eastcheap characters from Henry IV has been said to emphasise the element of adventurer in Henry's character as monarch.
The play's ambiguity has led to diverse interpretations in performance.
Laurence Olivier's 1944 film, made during the Second World War, emphasises the patriotic side, ignoring the fact that the enemy of the play, the French, were in fact allies in that conflict, while Kenneth Branagh's 1989 film stresses the horrors of war.
A 2003 Royal National Theatre production featured Henry as a modern war general, ridiculing the Iraq invasion.
In recent years, there has been scholarly debate about whether or not Henry V can be labeled a war criminal.
Some denounce the question as anachronistic, arguing that contemporary legal terminology can't be applied to historical events or figures like those depicted in the play.
However, other scholars have pushed back on this view.
For instance, Christopher N. Warren looks to Alberico Gentili’s De armis Romanis, along with Henry V itself, to show how early modern thinkers (including Shakespeare) were themselves using juridical approaches to engage with the past.
As a result, Warren argues, the question of whether Henry V was a war criminal is not only legitimate, but also “historically appropriate.”
On the other hand, Henry V is portrayed as a great leader, as he keeps his temper when insulted, "we are glad the Dauphin is pleasant with us".
Henry V also admits to his past mistakes, "did give ourselves to barbarous licence" and is shown to have great confidence, "we will rise there with so full a glory that we will dazzle all the eyes of France".
Henry intercepts plots against him and allows his traitors to choose their own punishment, showing no mercy towards them.
A mock trial of Henry V for the crimes associated with the legality of the invasion and the slaughter of prisoners was held in Washington, DC in March 2010, drawing from both historical record and Shakespeare's play.
Titled "The Supreme Court of the Amalgamated Kingdom of England and France", participating judges were Justices Samuel Alito and Ruth Bader Ginsburg.
The outcome was originally to be determined by an audience vote, but due to a draw, it came down to a judges' decision.
The court was divided on Henry's justification for war, but unanimously found him guilty on the killing of the prisoners after applying “the evolving standards of the maturing society”.
Previously, the fictional "Global War Crimes Tribunal" ruled that Henry's war was legal, no noncombatant was killed unlawfully, and Henry bore no criminal responsibility for the death of the POWs.
The fictional "French Civil Liberties Union", who had instigated the tribunal, then attempted to sue in civil court.
The judge concluded that he was bound by the GWCT's conclusions of law and also ruled in favour of the English.
The Court of Appeals affirmed without opinion, thus leaving the matter for the Supreme Court's determination.
Performance history
The Chorus refers to Essex's 1599 campaign in Ireland without any sense that it would end in disaster.
The campaign began in late March and was scuttled by late June, strongly suggesting that the play was first performed during that three-month period.
A tradition, impossible to verify, holds that Henry V was the first play performed at the new Globe Theatre in the spring of 1599-the Globe would have been the "wooden O" mentioned in the Prologue-but Shapiro argues that the Chamberlain's Men were still at The Curtain when the work was first performed, and that Shakespeare himself probably acted the Chorus.
In 1600, the first printed text states that the play had been played "sundry times".
The earliest performance for which an exact date is known, however, occurred on 7 January 1605, at Court at Whitehall Palace.
Samuel Pepys saw a Henry V in 1664, but it was written by Roger Boyle, 1st Earl of Orrery, not by Shakespeare.
Shakespeare's play returned to the stage in 1723, in an adaptation by Aaron Hill.
The longest-running production of the play in Broadway history was the staging starring Richard Mansfield in 1900 which ran for 54 performances.
Other notable stage performances of Henry V include Charles Kean (1859), Charles Alexander Calvert (1872), and Walter Hampden (1928).
Major revivals in London during the 20th and 21st centuries include:
* 1916 His Majesty's Theatre, Martin Harvey as Henry
* 1928 Lyric, Hammersmith, Lewis Casson as Henry (Old Vic Company)
* 1965 Aldwych Theatre, Ian Holm as Henry (Royal Shakespeare Company)
* 1972 Aldwych Theatre, Timothy Dalton as Henry (Prospect Theatre Company), also in 1974 in Roundhouse Theatre
* 1976 Aldwych Theatre, Alan Howard as Henry (Royal Shakespeare Company)
* 1985 Barbican Theatre, Kenneth Branagh as Henry (Royal Shakespeare Company)
* 2013 Noël Coward Theatre, Jude Law as Henry V (Michael Grandage Company)
* 2015 RSC and The Barbican, Alex Hassell as Henry V
In the Shakespeare's Globe's 2012 Globe to Globe festival, Henry V was the UK entry, one of 37 and the only one performed in spoken English.
Jamie Parker performed the role of Henry.
On British television, the play has been performed as:
* 1951 Clement McCallin as Henry, Marius Goring as Chorus, Willoughby Gray as Pistol
* 1953
Colin George as Henry, Toby Robertson as Chorus, Frank Windsor as Pistol
* 1957 John Neville as Henry, Bernard Hepton as Chorus, Geoffrey Bayldon as Pistol
* 1960 Robert Hardy as Henry, William Squire as Chorus, George A. Cooper as Pistol
* 1979 David Gwillim as Henry, Alec McCowen as Chorus, Bryan Pringle as Pistol
* 2012 Tom Hiddleston as Henry, John Hurt as Chorus, Paul Ritter as Pistol
In 2017, the Pop-up Globe, the world's first temporary replica of the second Globe Theatre, based in Auckland, New Zealand, performed 34 Henry V shows.
London-trained Australian actor Chris Huntly-Turner took on the role of Henry, Irish actor Michael Mahony as Chorus, and UK-New Zealand actor Edward Newborn as Pistol/King of France.
Adaptations
Film
Three major film adaptations have been made.
The first, directed by and starring Laurence Olivier in 1944, is a colourful and highly stylised version which begins in the Globe Theatre and then gradually shifts to a realistic evocation of the Battle of Agincourt.
Olivier's film was made during the Second World War and was intended as a patriotic rallying cry at the time of the invasion of Normandy.
It has been revived three times-in 2005, 2007, and 2011-playing cities across the United States, and received a National Endowment for the Arts American Masterpieces in Dance Award.
Music
Suite from Henry V is a 1963 orchestral arrangement of music that composer William Walton wrote for the 1944 Olivier film.
The arrangement is by Muir Mathieson, and is in five movements.
Henry V - A Shakespeare Scenario is a 50-minute work for narrator, SATB chorus, boys' choir (optional), and full orchestra.
The musical content is taken from Walton's score for the Olivier film, edited by David Lloyd-Jones and arranged by Christopher Palmer.
It was first performed at the Royal Festival Hall in London, in May 1990.
Performers for this premiere were Christopher Plummer (narrator), the Academy Chorus, Choristers of Westminster Cathedral, and Academy of St Martin-in-the-Fields.
The conductor was Sir Neville Marriner.
A CD of the work with these performers was released by Chandos in 1990.
O For a Muse of Fire is a symphonic overture for full orchestra and vocal soloist, written by Darryl Kubian.
The work is 12 minutes long, and was premiered by the New Jersey Symphony Orchestra in March 2015.
The work is scored for full orchestra, with vocal soloist.
The vocal part incorporates selected lines from the text, and the vocal range is adaptable to different voice types.
The soloist for the premiere performances with the New Jersey Symphony was former October Project lead singer Mary Fahl.
Notes
Further reading
