Harry Potter and the Philosopher's Stone is a fantasy novel written by British author J. K. Rowling.
The first novel in the Harry Potter series and Rowling's debut novel, it follows Harry Potter, a young wizard who discovers his magical heritage on his eleventh birthday, when he receives a letter of acceptance to Hogwarts School of Witchcraft and Wizardry.
Harry makes close friends and a few enemies during his first year at the school, and with the help of his friends, Harry faces an attempted comeback by the dark wizard Lord Voldemort, who killed Harry's parents, but failed to kill Harry when he was just 15 months old.
The book was first published in the United Kingdom on 26 June 1997 by Bloomsbury.
It was published in the United States the following year by Scholastic Corporation under the title Harry Potter and the Sorcerer's Stone.
It won most of the British book awards that were judged by children and other awards in the US.
The book reached the top of the New York Times list of best-selling fiction in August 1999 and stayed near the top of that list for much of 1999 and 2000.
It has been translated into at least 73 other languages, and has been made into a feature-length film of the same name, as have all six of its sequels.
Most reviews were very favourable, commenting on Rowling's imagination, humour, simple, direct style and clever plot construction, although a few complained that the final chapters seemed rushed.
The writing has been compared to that of Jane Austen, one of Rowling's favourite authors; Roald Dahl, whose works dominated children's stories before the appearance of Harry Potter; and the Ancient Greek story-teller Homer.
While some commentators thought the book looked backwards to Victorian and Edwardian boarding school stories, others thought it placed the genre firmly in the modern world by featuring contemporary ethical and social issues, as well as overcoming obstacles like bullies.
Harry Potter and the Philosopher's Stone, along with the rest of the Harry Potter series, has been attacked by some religious groups and banned in some countries because of accusations that the novels promote witchcraft under the guise of a heroic, moral story.
Other religious commentators have written that the book exemplifies important viewpoints, including the power of self-sacrifice and the ways in which people's decisions shape their personalities.
The series has been used as a source of and marketing.
Synopsis
Plot
Harry Potter has been living an ordinary life, constantly abused by his surly and cold aunt and uncle, Vernon and Petunia Dursley and bullied by their spoiled son Dudley since the death of his parents ten years prior.
His life changes on the day of his eleventh birthday when he receives a letter of acceptance into Hogwarts School of Witchcraft and Wizardry, delivered by a half-giant named Rubeus Hagrid after previous letters had been destroyed by Harry's Uncle Vernon and his Aunt Petunia.
Hagrid explains Harry's hidden past as the wizard son of James and Lily Potter, who were a wizard and witch respectively, and how they were murdered by the most evil and powerful dark wizard of all time, Lord Voldemort, which resulted in the one-year-old Harry being sent to live with his aunt and uncle.
Voldemort was not only unable to kill Harry, but his powers were also destroyed in the process, forcing him into exile and sparking Harry's immense fame among the magical community.
Hagrid introduces Harry to the wizarding world, bringing him to places such as Diagon Alley, a hidden street in London where Harry uncovers a fortune left to him by his parents at Gringotts Wizarding Bank, gets his owl Hedwig, various school supplies, and his wand.
There, he is surprised to discover how famous he truly is among witches and wizards.
A month later, Harry leaves the Dursleys' home to catch the Hogwarts Express from King's Cross railway station's secret Hogwarts platform, Platform .
On the train, he quickly befriends fellow first-year Ronald Weasley and the two boys meet Hermione Granger, whose snobbiness and affinity for spells initially causes the two boys to dislike her.
There, Harry also makes an enemy of yet another first-year, Draco Malfoy, who shows prejudice against Ron for his family's financial difficulties.
Arriving at Hogwarts, the first-years are assigned by the magical Sorting Hat to Houses that best suit their personalities, the four Houses being Gryffindor, Slytherin, Hufflepuff and Ravenclaw.
Harry hears from Ron about Slytherin's dark reputation which is known to house potential dark witches and wizards, and thus objects to being sorted into Slytherin despite the Hat claiming that Harry has potential to develop under that House.
He winds up in Gryffindor with Ron and Hermione, while Draco is sorted into Slytherin like his family before him.
As classes begin at Hogwarts, Harry discovers his innate talent for flying on broomsticks despite no prior experience, and is recruited into his House's team for Quidditch (a competitive wizards' sport sharing similarities to football, but played on flying broomsticks) as a Seeker.
He also comes to dislike the school's Potions master, Severus Snape, who is also the Head of Slytherin House who acts with bias in favour of members of his House while perpetually looking for opportunities to fail Harry and his friends.
Malfoy tricks Harry and Ron into a duel in the trophy room to get them out of their rooms at night and secretly tells Filch, the school's caretaker, where they will be.
Hermione unintentionally is forced to come along after her failed attempts to stop them, and they find Gryffindor student Neville asleep outside the common area because he had forgotten the password to get in.
After realizing the duel was a set-up to get them in trouble, they run away.
They then discover a huge three-headed dog standing guard over a trapdoor in a forbidden corridor.
The school's Halloween celebrations are interrupted by the entrance of a troll into the school, which enters the girls' bathroom where Hermione was.
However, she is saved by Harry and Ron and, as a result, Hermione is grateful and the three become best friends.
Coupled with Snape's recent leg injury as well as behaviour, the recent events prompt Harry, Hermione and Ron to suspect him to be looking for a way to enter the trapdoor.
Hermione forbids the boys from investigating for fear of expulsion, and instead makes Harry direct his attention to his first ever Quidditch game, where his broomstick begins to lose control and threatens to throw him off.
This leads Hermione to suspect that Snape is jinxing Harry's broom due to his strange behaviour during the match.
After the excitement of winning the match has died down, Christmas approaches and Harry receives an invisibility cloak for Christmas from an anonymous source claiming that the cloak belonged to Harry's father.
Using the cloak to explore the school at night to investigate what is under the trapdoor, he discovers the Mirror of Erised, in which the viewer sees his or her deepest desires come true.
A visit to Hagrid's hut at the foot of the school leads the trio to find a newspaper report stating there had been an attempted robbery of a Gringotts vault-the same vault that Hagrid and Harry had visited when the latter was getting his school supplies.
A further indiscretion from Hagrid allows them to work out that the object kept under that trapdoor is a Philosopher's Stone, which grants its user immortality as well as the ability to turn any metal into pure gold.
Harry is also informed by a centaur named Firenze in the forest that a plot to steal the Stone is being orchestrated by none other than Voldemort himself, who schemes to use it to be restored back to his body and return to power.
When the school's headmaster Albus Dumbledore is lured from Hogwarts under false pretences, Harry, Hermione and Ron fear that the theft is imminent and descend through the trapdoor themselves.
They encounter a series of obstacles, each of which requires unique skills possessed by one of the three, one of which requires Ron to sacrifice himself in a life-sized game of wizard's chess.
In the final room, Harry, now alone, finds Quirinus Quirrell, the Defence Against the Dark Arts teacher, who reveals he had been the one working behind the scenes to kill Harry by first jinxing his broom and then letting a troll into the school, while Snape had been trying to protect Harry instead.
Quirrell is helping Voldemort, whose face has sprouted on the back of Quirrell's head but is constantly concealed by his oversized turban, to attain the Philosopher's Stone so as to restore his body.
Quirrell uses Harry to get past the final obstacle, the Mirror of Erised, by forcing him to stand before the Mirror.
It recognises Harry's lack of greed for the Stone and surreptitiously deposits it into his pocket.
As Quirrell attempts to seize the stone and kill Harry, his flesh burns on contact with the boy's skin and breaks into blisters.
Harry's scar suddenly burns with pain and he passes out.
Three days later, he awakens in the school's infirmary, where Dumbledore explains his survival against Voldemort is due to his mother's sacrificing her life in order for him to live.
This left a powerful protective charm on Harry that lives in his blood, which caused Quirrell's hands to burn on contact with Harry due to him being possessed by hatred and greed.
He also reveals himself as the one who sent Harry his father's invisibility cloak, while Quirrell has been left to die by Voldemort, who still lives, and the Stone has now been destroyed.
The eventful school year ends at the final feast, during which Gryffindor wins the House Cup.
Harry returns to Privet Drive for the summer, neglecting to tell the Dursleys that the use of spells is forbidden by under-aged wizards and witches and thus anticipating some fun and peace over the holidays.
Main characters
* Harry Potter is an orphan whom Rowling imagined as a "scrawny, black-haired, green eyed and bespectacled boy who didn't know he was a wizard."
She developed the series' story and characters to explain how Harry came to be in this situation and how his life unfolded from there.
Apart from the first chapter, the events of this book take place just before and in the year following Harry's eleventh birthday.
Voldemort's attack left a lightning bolt-shaped scar on Harry's forehead, He is freckled, red-haired and quite tall.
He grew up in a fairly large pure-blood family as the sixth born of seven children.
Although his family is quite poor, they still live comfortably and happily.
His loyalty and bravery in the face of a game of Wizards Chess plays a vital part in finding the Philosopher's Stone.
* Hermione Granger, the daughter of an all-Muggle family, is a bossy girl who has apparently memorised most of the textbooks before the start of term.
Rowling described Hermione as a "very logical, upright and good" character with "a lot of insecurity and a great fear of failure beneath her swottiness".
* Professor Minerva McGonagall, a tall, severe-looking woman with black hair tied in a tight bun, teaches Transfiguration, and is able to transform herself into a cat.
She is Deputy Headmistress, and Head of Gryffindor House and, according to the author, "under that gruff exterior" is "a bit of an old softy".
* Petunia Dursley, the sister of Harry's mother Lily, is a thin woman with a long neck that she uses for spying on the neighbours.
As a muggle, she regards her magical sister as a freak and tries to pretend that she never existed.
* Vernon Dursley, the husband of Petunia Dursley, is a heavily built man whose irascible bluster covers a narrow mind and a fear of anything unusual.
* Dudley Dursley is an overweight, spoiled bully and Harry's cousin.
* Draco Malfoy is a slim, pale boy who speaks in a bored drawl.
He is arrogant about his skill in Quidditch, and despises anyone who is not a pure-blood wizard - and wizards who do not share his views.
His parents had supported Voldemort, but changed sides after the dark wizard's disappearance, claiming they had been bewitched.
Draco avoids direct confrontations, and tries to get Harry and his friends into trouble.
* Oliver Wood is Harry's Quidditch captain and keeper for the Gryffindor Quidditch team.
* Professor Quirrell is a twitching, stammering and nervous man who teaches Defence Against the Dark Arts.
Reputedly he was a brilliant scholar, but his nerve was shattered by an encounter with vampires.
Quirrell wears a turban to conceal the fact that he is voluntarily possessed by Voldemort, whose face appears on the back of Quirrell's head.
* Professor Severus Snape, who has a hooked nose, sallow complexion and greasy black hair, teaches Potions, but would prefer to teach Defence Against the Dark Arts.
Snape favours pupils in Slytherin, his own House but seizes every opportunity to humiliate others, especially Harry.
Several incidents, beginning with the shooting pain in Harry's scar during the start-of-term feast, lead Harry and his friends to think Snape is aiding Voldemort.
* Argus Filch, the school caretaker who knows the school's secret passages better than anyone else except, perhaps, the Weasley twins.
His cat, Mrs. Norris, aids his constant hunt for misbehaving pupils.
Other members of staff include the dumpy Herbology teacher and Head of Hufflepuff House Professor Sprout, Professor Flitwick, the tiny and excitable Charms teacher, and Head of Ravenclaw House, the soporific History of Magic teacher, Professor Binns, a ghost who does not seem to have noticed his own death; and Madam Hooch, the Quidditch coach, who is strict, but a considerate and methodical teacher.
The poltergeist Peeves wanders around the castle causing trouble wherever he can.
In the book, Rowling introduces an eclectic cast of characters.
The first character to be introduced is Vernon Dursley, Harry's uncle.
Most of the actions centre on the eponymous hero Harry Potter, an orphan who escapes his miserable childhood with the Dursley family.
Rowling imagined him as a "scrawny, black-haired, bespectacled boy who didn't know he was a wizard", Professor Quirrell is also featured in the novel.
The main antagonists are Draco Malfoy, an elitist, bullying classmate and Lord Voldemort, the most powerful evil wizard who becomes disembodied when he tries to kill baby Harry.
According to a 1999 interview with Rowling, the character of Voldemort was created as a literary foil for Harry, and his backstory was intentionally not fleshed-out at first:
Development, publication and reception
Development
The book, which was Rowling's debut novel, was written between approximately June 1990 and some time in 1995.
In 1990 Jo Rowling, as she preferred to be known, wanted to move with her boyfriend to a flat in Manchester and in her words, "One weekend after flat hunting, I took the train back to London on my own and the idea for Harry Potter fell into my head...
A scrawny, little, black-haired, bespectacled boy became more and more of a wizard to me...
I began to write Philosopher's Stone that very evening.
Although, the first couple of pages look nothing like the finished product."
Then Rowling's mother died and, to cope with her pain, Rowling transferred her own anguish to the orphan Harry.
She sent the book to an agent and a publisher, and then the second agent she approached spent a year trying to sell the book to publishers, most of whom thought it was too long at about 90,000 words.
Barry Cunningham, who was building a portfolio of distinctive fantasies by new authors for Bloomsbury Children's Books, recommended accepting the book,
Publication and reception in the United Kingdom
Bloomsbury accepted the book, paying Rowling a £2,500 advance,
Lindsey Fraser, who had previously supplied one of the blurb comments, wrote what is thought to be the first published review, in The Scotsman on 28 June 1997.
She described Harry Potter and the Philosopher's Stone as "a hugely entertaining thriller" and Rowling as "a first-rate writer for children".
Another early review, in The Herald, said, "I have yet to find a child who can put it down."
Newspapers outside Scotland started to notice the book, with glowing reviews in The Guardian, The Sunday Times and The Mail on Sunday, and in September 1997 Books for Keeps, a magazine that specialised in children's books, gave the novel four stars out of five.
The Smarties award, which is voted for by children, made the book well known within six months of publication, while most children's books have to wait for years.
but did not win.
Sandra Beckett commented that books which were popular with children were regarded as undemanding and as not of the highest literary standards - for example the literary establishment disdained the works of Dahl, an overwhelming favourite of children before the appearance of Rowling's books.
Harry Potter and the Philosopher's Stone won two publishing industry awards given for sales rather than literary merit, the British Book Awards Children's Book of the Year and the Booksellers' Association / Bookseller Author of the Year.
and the story was still the UK's best-selling title in December 2001.
A Braille edition was published in May 1998 by the Scottish Braille Press.
Platform , from which the Hogwarts Express left London, was commemorated in the real-life King's Cross railway station with a sign and a trolley apparently passing through the wall.
U.S. publication and reception
Scholastic Corporation bought the U.S. rights at the Bologna Book Fair in April 1997 for US$105,000, an unusually high sum for a children's book.
and after some discussion (including the proposed title "Harry Potter and the School of Magic"), the American edition was published in September 1998 under the title Rowling suggested, Harry Potter and the Sorcerer's Stone.
Philip Nel has pointed out that the change lost the connection with alchemy, and the meaning of some other terms changed in translation, for example from "crumpet" to "muffin".
While Rowling accepted the change from both the British English "mum" and Seamus Finnigan's Irish variant "mam" to "mom" in Harry Potter and the Sorcerer's Stone, she vetoed this change in the later books, which was then reversed in later editions of Philosopher's Stone.
However, Nel considered that Scholastic's translations were considerably more sensitive than most of those imposed on British English books of the time, and that some other changes could be regarded as useful copyedits.
Since the British editions of early titles in the series were published months prior to the American versions, some American readers became familiar with the British English versions owing to having bought them from online retailers.
At first the most prestigious reviewers ignored the book, leaving it to book trade and library publications such as Kirkus Reviews and Booklist, which examined it only by the entertainment-oriented criteria of children's fiction.
However, more penetrating specialist reviews (such as one by Cooperative Children's Book Center Choices, which pointed out the complexity, depth and consistency of the world that Rowling had built) attracted the attention of reviewers in major newspapers.
they and most other American reviewers gave glowing praise.
and stayed near the top of the list for much of 1999 and 2000, until the New York Times split its list into children's and adult sections under pressure from other publishers who were eager to see their books given higher placings.
Publishers Weeklys report in December 2001 on cumulative sales of children's fiction placed Harry Potter and the Sorcerer's Stone 19th among hardbacks (over 5 million copies) and 7th among paperbacks (over 6.6 million copies).
In May 2008, Scholastic announced the creation of a 10th Anniversary Edition of the book that was released on 1 October 2008 to mark the tenth anniversary of the original American release.
Translations
By mid-2008, official translations of the book had been published in 67 languages.
By November 2017, the book had been translated into 80 languages, the 80th being Lowland Scots.
It was translated by Matthew Fitt, who said that he was honoured to be the Scots translator, and that he "wanted to do it for a long time".
The translation is considered significant by Heart, who described it as "probably the most incredible version so far", and Stylist.
Bloomsbury have published translations in Latin and in Ancient Greek, and the latter was described as "one of the most important pieces of Ancient Greek prose written in many centuries".
Style and themes
Philip Nel highlighted the influence of Jane Austen, whom Rowling has greatly admired since the age of twelve.
Both novelists greatly encourage re-reading, because details that look insignificant foreshadow important events or characters much later in the story-line - for example Sirius Black is briefly mentioned near the beginning of Harry Potter and the Philosopher's Stone, and then becomes a major character in the third to fifth books.
Like Austen's heroines, Harry often has to re-examine his ideas near the ends of books.
Some social behaviour in the Harry Potter books is remininiscent of Austen, for example the excited communal reading of letters.
Both authors satirise social behaviour and give characters names that express their personalities.
However in Nel's opinion Rowling's humour is more based on caricature and the names she invents are more like those found in Charles Dickens's stories, Rowling, like the Narnia series' author C.S. Lewis, thinks there is no rigid distinction between stories for children and for adults.
Nel also noted that, like many good writers for children, Rowling combines literary genresfantasy, young adult fiction, boarding school stories, Bildungsroman and many others.
Nicholas Tucker described the early Harry Potter books as looking back to Victorian and Edwardian children's stories: Hogwarts was an old-style boarding school in which the teachers addressed pupils formally by their surnames and were most concerned with the reputations of the houses with which they were associated; characters' personalities were plainly shown by their appearances, starting with the Dursleys; evil or malicious characters were to be crushed rather than reformed, including Filch's cat Mrs Norris; and the hero, a mistreated orphan who found his true place in life, was charismatic and good at sports, but considerate and protective towards the weak.
Several other commentators have stated that the books present a highly stratified society including many social stereotypes.
However Karin Westerman drew parallels with 1990s
Britain: a class system that was breaking down but defended by those whose power and status it upheld; the multi-ethnic composition of Hogwarts' students; the racial tensions between the various intelligent species; and school bullying.
Susan Hall wrote that there is no rule of law in the books, as the actions of Ministry of Magic officials are unconstrained by laws, accountability or any kind of legal challenge.
This provides an opportunity for Voldemort to offer his own horrific version of order.
As a side-effect Harry and Hermione, who were brought up in the highly regulated Muggle world, find solutions by thinking in ways unfamiliar to wizards.
For example, Hermione notes that one obstacle to finding the Philosopher's Stone is a test of logic rather than magical power, and that most wizards have no chance of solving it.
Nel suggested that the unflattering characterisation of the extremely conventional, status-conscious, materialistic Dursleys was Rowling's reaction to the family policies of the British government in the early 1990s, which treated the married heterosexual couple as the "preferred norm", while the author was a single mother.
Harry's relationships with adult and juvenile wizards are based on affection and loyalty.
This is reflected in his happiness whenever he is a temporary member of the Weasley family throughout the series, and in his treatment of first Rubeus Hagrid and later Remus Lupin and Sirius Black as father-figures.
Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban was then published a year later in the UK on July 8, 1999 and in the US on September 8, 1999.
Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix is the longest book in the series at 766 pages in the UK version and 870 pages in the US version.
It was published worldwide in English on June 21, 2003.
Harry Potter and the Half-Blood Prince was published on July 16, 2005 and sold 11 million copies in the first 24 hours of its worldwide release.
The seventh and final novel, Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows, was published on July 21, 2007.
The book sold 11 million copies within 24 hours of its release: 2.7 million copies in the UK and 8.3 million in the US.
Illustrated version
An illustrated version of Harry Potter and the Philosopher's Stone was released on October 6, 2015, with illustrations by Jim Kay.
The book carries over 100 illustrations and will be followed by illustrated versions of all seven books from the series by the same artist.
Film version
In 1999, Rowling sold the film rights of the first four Harry Potter books to Warner Bros. for a reported £1 million ($1.65 million in 1999).
Rowling demanded that the principal cast be kept strictly British but allowed for the casting of Irish actors such as the late Richard Harris as Dumbledore and of foreign actors as characters of the same nationalities in later books.
After extensive casting, filming began in September 2000 at Leavesden Film Studios and in London, with production ending in July 2001.
Harry Potter and the Philosopher's Stone was released in London on 14 November 2001.
Reviewers' comments were positive, as reflected by an 80% Fresh rating on Rotten Tomatoes and by a score of 64% at Metacritic, representing "generally favourable reviews".
Video games
Five unique video games by different developers were released between 2001 and 2003 by Electronic Arts, that were loosely based on the film and book:
Uses in education and business
Writers on education and business subjects have used the book as an .
Writing about clinical teaching in medical schools, Jennifer Conn contrasted Snape's technical expertise with his intimidating behaviour towards students.
Quidditch coach Madam Hooch on the other hand, illustrated useful techniques in the teaching of physical skills, including breaking down complex actions into sequences of simple ones and helping students to avoid common errors.
Joyce Fields wrote that the books illustrate four of the five main topics in a typical first-year sociology class: "sociological concepts including culture, society, and socialisation; stratification and social inequality; social institutions; and social theory".
For example, a real-world analogue of Bertie Bott's Every Flavour Beans was introduced under licence in 2000 by toymaker Hasbro.
Release history
Footnotes
Notes
References
