The is a video game console developed by Nintendo, released on March 3, 2017.
It is a hybrid console that can be used as a stationary and portable device.
Its wireless Joy-Con controllers, with standard buttons and directional analog sticks for user input, motion sensing, and tactile feedback, can attach to both sides of the console to support handheld-style play.
They can also connect to a Grip accessory to provide a traditional home console gamepad form, or be used individually in the hand like the Wii Remote and Nunchuk, supporting local multiplayer modes.
The Nintendo Switch's software supports online gaming through Internet connectivity, as well as local wireless ad hoc connectivity with other Switch consoles.
Nintendo Switch games and software are available on both physical flash-based ROM cartridges and digital distribution via Nintendo eShop; the system does not use region locking.
As an eighth-generation console, the Nintendo Switch competes with Microsoft's Xbox One and Sony's PlayStation 4.
Known in development by its codename NX, the concept of the Switch came about as Nintendo's reaction to several quarters of financial losses into 2014, attributed to poor sales of its previous console, the Wii U, and market competition from mobile gaming.
Nintendo's then-president Satoru Iwata pushed the company towards mobile gaming and novel hardware.
The Nintendo Switch's design is aimed at a wide demographic of video game players through the multiple modes of use.
Nintendo opted to use more standard electronic components, such as a chipset based on Nvidia's Tegra line, to make development for the console easier for programmers and more compatible with existing game engines.
As the Wii U had struggled to gain external support, leaving it with a weak software library, Nintendo preemptively sought the support of many third-party developers and publishers to help build out the Switch's game library alongside Nintendo's own first-party titles, including many independent video game studios.
While Nintendo initially anticipated around 100 titles for its first year, over 320 titles from first-party, third-party, and independent developers were released by the end of 2017.
The Nintendo Switch was unveiled in October 2016 and was released in most areas worldwide on March 3, 2017.
The console shipped nearly three million in the first month of its launch, exceeding Nintendo's initial projection of two million, and within a year of release achieved over 14 million units sold worldwide, outselling total lifetime sales of the Wii U. By the start of 2018, the Switch became the fastest-selling home console in both Japan and the United States. , the Nintendo Switch has sold more than 41 million units worldwide.
Switch sales have been strongly tied to sales of Nintendo's first-party titles, with five games, The Legend of Zelda: Breath of the Wild,
Super Smash Bros. Ultimate, Super Mario Odyssey, Mario Kart 8 Deluxe, and having sold over ten million units each.
A handheld-focused revision of the system, called the Nintendo Switch Lite, was released on September 20, 2019.
History
Background
Nintendo had seen record revenues, net sales and profits in 2009 as a result of the release of the Wii and Nintendo DS in 2006 and 2004 respectively, but in Nintendo's subsequent years, its revenues had declined.
The company had posted its first loss as a video game company in 2012 prior to the Wii U's introduction that year, and had similar losses in the following years due to the console's poor uptake.
The New York Times attributed Nintendo lowering financial forecasts in 2014 to weak hardware sales against mobile gaming.
Previously, the company had been hesitant about this market, with then-president Satoru Iwata considering that they would "cease to be Nintendo" and lose their identity if they attempted to enter it.
About three years prior to the Switch's announcement, Iwata, Tatsumi Kimishima, Genyo Takeda, and Shigeru Miyamoto crafted a strategy for revitalizing Nintendo's business model, which included approaching the mobile market, creating new hardware, and "maximizing their intellectual property".
Following Iwata's death in July 2015, Kimishima was named as president of Nintendo, while Miyamoto was promoted to the title of "Creative Fellow".
Kimishima stated that when Nintendo was evaluating what new hardware they wanted to produce, they "didn't just want a successor" to either the Nintendo 3DS or Wii U, but instead asked "what kind of new experience can we create?"
In an interview with Asahi Shimbun, Kimishima stated that the Switch was designed to provide a "new way to play" that would "have a larger impact than the Wii U".
Nintendo of America president and COO Reggie Fils-Aimé emphasized the console's appeal as a device that would provide gamers the option to play at home or on the go, and noted that it would enable developers to create new types of games.
This approach continued Nintendo's blue ocean strategy for the competitive console marketplace, as rather than compete feature for feature with the other consoles, they would establish unique and difficult-to-copy devices.
Miyamoto said that some broad concepts of the Switch extend from the "lateral thinking with seasoned technology" design philosophy of Gunpei Yokoi that Nintendo has used over the last couple of decades.
Part of the inspiration of the Switch's form and design was from feedback players had given Nintendo on the Wii Remote, according to Shinya Takahashi.
With the release of games like Wii Sports and Wii Fit, players had asked Nintendo if they could make the Wii Remote in a smaller form factor, potentially strapped to a part of their body.
This led to Nintendo envisioning what a smaller form-factor controller could provide in both hardware and gameplay, and led to the idea of a console that was small enough with these new controllers to also be portable.
Other concepts came out of consumer feedback that was critical of the Wii U. Fils-Aimé said that one common criticism they had for the Wii U was that while players did enjoy using the Wii U GamePad and would want to play games on it anywhere, it became functionless if they moved a distance away from the main console.
This served for Nintendo to design a home console that the player could take with them anywhere.
Around five different prototypes were developed for the Switch before they finalized on the released design.
This included developing different methods of how the Joy-Con controllers would physically connect to the console, including using magnets to hold them in place.
Koizumi served as the general producer of the Switch during development.
Miyamoto, Takeda, and Iwata were less involved, but provided necessary oversight on the Switch's development principally around the cost of implementing new features that would make the Switch stand out.
For Miyamoto, his limited involvement allowed him to spend more time on Nintendo's software titles being developed at the time, such as Super Mario Run.
At an investor's meeting in April 2016, Nintendo announced that it planned to release the NX worldwide in March 2017.
While Nintendo did not unveil the NX's hardware at E3 2016 in June, it did announce that The Legend of Zelda: Breath of the Wild, which was originally announced as a Wii U-exclusive, would also be released for the NX.
At a Nintendo shareholders' meeting following the conference, Miyamoto stated that the company had concerns that competitors could copy ideas from the NX if they revealed it too soon.
The following month, rumors began to surface surrounding the nature of the console, including its use of Nvidia Tegra hardware, being a "hybrid" device intended for both home and mobile use, controllers that can detach from the main device and be played separately, and that Nintendo would distribute games on the console via cartridges and digital downloads.
On October 20, 2016, Nintendo officially announced the console under the name Nintendo Switch, alongside a trailer that demonstrated the hardware's nature as a hybrid device.
At the time of the trailer's release, Nintendo did not provide many details on features of the platform, though they planned to have events in 2017 to provide more details about the console.
The company did state that there are additional features that were not presented in the introductory trailer.
Miyamoto and Fils-Aimé presented the Switch to host Jimmy Fallon on a broadcast of The Tonight Show Starring Jimmy Fallon in December 2016.
In addition to showing more of the console's hardware and functionality, Fallon was given the opportunity to play part of Breath of the Wild live.
Nintendo revealed technical details of the Switch, including its worldwide launch date and price, at a press event in Tokyo on January 13, 2017.
The event was livestreamed, with an English voiceover provided by Nintendo of America through their broadcast and regional Twitter accounts relaying details in other languages.
A Nintendo Treehouse event occurred the following day to reveal the full launch lineup and upcoming games for the Switch.
Release
The Switch was officially released on March 3, 2017 worldwide, notably in all key markets, but excluding some parts of Asia, including India and Mainland China.
The set includes a Switch console, a dock, two Joy-Con controllers (left and right) and straps, a Joy-Con Grip, an AC power adapter and an HDMI cable.
There were two Switch bundles available at launch, one with grey Joy-Con and one with neon red and blue Joy-Con.
Nintendo feared that a higher price would harm sales, which prompted them to not include any additional hardware or games.
and in South Korea and Taiwan on December 1.
Independent resellers have been trading the console in Brazil since March 2017 due to Nintendo's exit from the Brazilian market in 2015.
Nintendo has since assigned NC Games as their local game distributor in May 2017, and the local company has committed to sell some officially imported Nintendo Switch units in small quantities.
In April 2018, CD Media, Nintendo's official distributor in Greece and the Balkans since 2016, announced after opening their new offices in Istanbul, that Nintendo's products will officially be distributed in Turkey later in the year.
Nintendo abruptly withdrew from the Turkish market back in June 2012 when then-distributor Nortec Eurasia closed.
CD Media released the Nintendo Switch in Turkey in July 2018.
In early-2019, Nintendo of Europe signed a partnership with Tel Aviv-based distributor TorGaming Ltd., making them Nintendo's official distributor in Israel, and launched their products in the market, including the Nintendo Switch, on March 1, 2019.
Although the Nintendo Switch had not officially been released in China prior to April 2019, it is still widely available in the country due to grey market imports from Hong Kong and other regions.
In January 2018, former Nintendo president Tatsumi Kimishima said in an interview with Chinese news website QQ that Nintendo has tried to release the Switch in China, but has been unable to do so.
Nintendo partnered with Tencent to gain the necessary approvals to release the Switch in China by April 2019, along with a test version of New Super Mario Bros. U Deluxe; other Switch games would otherwise need to proceed through China's approval process via National Radio and Television Administration.
In addition, Tencent will help localize various titles, and help implement the Nintendo Switch Online service within the country, integrating its offerings with the WeChat payment systems.
Post-release
A Splatoon 2-themed bundle was released in Europe on July 21, 2017 and in Japan; additionally, a separate bundle that included "neon" green and pink Joy-Con (matching the color schemes from Splatoon 2) was offered in Japan.
In May 2018, the "2nd Unit Set" was released in Japan, exclusively on the My Nintendo Store at a reduced price of .
The bundle was positioned towards households which already owned a Switch and.
as such, it did not include a dock, AC adapter, HDMI cable, and Joy-Con Grip.
A Mario Tennis Aces and 1-2-Switch pack-in bundle with neon red and blue Joy-Con was released in North America on September 5, exclusively at Walmart.
A Fortnite bundle with red and blue Joy-Con which included Fortnite Battle Royale exclusive items and in-game currency was released in North America on October 5 and in Japan on November 22.
A Minecraft pack-in bundle with gray Joy-Con and Minecraft stickers was released in Japan on November 30.
A Super Smash Bros. Ultimate-themed bundle, including a branded Dock and Joy-Con, was released the same day, which includes a download code for the game.
A .
A red and blue Joy-Con bundle with Nintendo eShop credit was released on February 15, 2019.
Hardware
The Nintendo Switch is a hybrid video game console, consisting of a console unit, a dock, and two Joy-Con controllers.
Although it is a hybrid console, Nintendo classifies it as "a home console that you can take with you on the go".
Furthermore, the company has stated that the Switch and the Nintendo 3DS are meant to co-exist, considering the 3DS as an entry-level product for younger players.
The unit itself measures and weighs .
The screen supports ten-point multi-touch capacitive sensing and includes haptic technology from Immersion Corporation.
The LCD screen supports resolutions up to 720p (1280×720 px).
The unit also includes slots for a game card and a microSD card slot located under the kickstand.
The Switch Console itself includes three buttons, all on the top of the device, Volume +/- and Power.
The Console has rails on the side, into which the Joy-Con controllers can be slid into to attach them to the Switch unit.
There are three gameplay modes that can be used with the Switch; "TV Mode" with the Console slid into the Dock to support play on a television, "Tabletop Mode" with the Console placed on a table or other flat surface using its kickstand for shared gaming away from a dedicated screen, or in "Handheld Mode" as a standard portable tablet device.
Support for controllers and TV Mode was later added to Voez in January 2018 via an update for the game.
Another example is Super Mario Party, which does not support Handheld Mode.
Nintendo stated that the Switch is a "single-screen experience", in that the player either sees the content on the Console when it is out of the Dock, or on the screen attached to the Dock when the Console is docked.
The Switch cannot feature dual-screen functionality that was offered through the Wii U via its GamePad.
Nintendo patented a means of using multiple Switch consoles to create a multi-monitor configuration, by arranging them on a flat surface and spanning a single gameplay environment across their screens.
This technology was first seen in Super Mario Party.
Dock
The Console, with or without Joy-Con attached, can be placed into the Switch Dock, a docking station with electrical connectors to connect the Console to a power supply to charge its battery, and to a television via an HDMI connection for video/audio output.
While docked, the unit can support resolutions up to 1080p and a maximum frame rate of 60 frames per second, though the maximum resolution varies depending on the game.
As an example, The Legend of Zelda: Breath of the Wild runs at a maximum 900p and 30 frames per second while the Switch is docked.
The Dock measures and weighs .
Controllers
Joy-Con
The Nintendo Switch comes with two controllers collectively called Joy-Con, individually called the "Joy-Con L" and "Joy-Con R".
Straps can be attached to the sides of Joy-Con when they are detached.
Pro Controller
The Switch also supports a wireless controller, called Nintendo Switch Pro Controller, which has a more traditional design reminiscent of the Wii Classic Controller Pro and Wii U Pro Controller.
The Pro Controller connects to the Switch via wireless Bluetooth communication, and is charged through a standard USB-C port on the controller.
Other
The Nintendo Switch supports a wide array of additional accessories, according to Kimishima.
Kimishima suggested that the Switch is part of a large ecosystem of devices, though the Switch unit remains the core console element.
Takahashi suggested the possibility of other units besides the Joy-Con that could attach and/or connect to the Console to serve as alternate input devices and change how the Switch can be used.
Nintendo offers a Joy-Con Wheel, a small steering wheel-like unit that a Joy-Con can slot into, allowing it to be used for racing games such as Mario Kart 8 Deluxe.
The 4.0.0 system update enabled support for GameCube controllers attached via USB with the GameCube adapter that was available for the Wii U as well as the upcoming adapter for the Switch, allowing the user to play games with a GameCube controller with most games compatible with the Switch's Pro controller such as Super Smash Bros. Ultimate.
USB computer keyboards have also been supported for certain tasks, such as text entry.
Special Joy-Con controllers based on the design of both the NES and SNES controllers were available to those that subscribed to the Nintendo Switch Online service as to play the NES and SNES libraries.
In January 2018, Nintendo announced Nintendo Labo, a child-oriented platform that combines games coupled with do-it-yourself cardboard projects that attach or wrap around the Switch Console and Joy-Con, effectively creating toys around the Switch hardware to interact with games.
These cardboard units, which may also include string, rubber bands, and other pieces, are referred to as Toy-Con.
The game software provides instructions for the Toy-Con construction and provides the interface to control the Toy-Con.
Such examples given include a remote-controlled "car", where the two Joy-Con attach to the car and their vibration feedback provide the motion for the car, controlled from the Switch, a fishing rod where the Joy-Con are part of the reel and handle of the rod and their motion controls used to simulate the act of fishing in the mini-game, and a small toy piano.
Nintendo released Ring Fit Adventure in October 2019, which includes a Leg Strap to mount a Joy-Con to a leg, and the Ring-Con, a flexible hard plastic ring with Joy-Con mounting.
The player interacts with the game, fashioned after a console role-playing game, by doing various exercises, such as running in place, squatting, and squeezing the ring, to perform in-game actions of running, jumping, and attacking and defending, respectively.
Such features are part of Nintendo's "quality of life" goals to incorporate physical activity alongside the Switch, similar to past titles like Wii Fit.
In February 2017, Nintendo president Tatsumi Kimishima stated that it had been "studying" virtual reality solutions, but felt that comfort was a main concern.
Nintendo of America president and COO Reggie Fils-Aimé also cited that existing VR solutions were not "fun" or "social".
Nintendo ultimately unveiled a new Labo VR kit in March 2019, using a cardboard headset and viewer placed in front of the console's screen, in combination with attached accessories.
Stands and alternate docks have also been created for the Switch to overcome the limitations of the device's own kickstand for tabletop play, including an official "Adjustable Charging Stand" that can be connected to the device's AC adapter.
Technical specifications
The Switch uses a system-on-chip from the Tegra family of products, developed in partnership with Nvidia.
No specific details were revealed beyond that it is a "custom" Tegra chip "based on the same architecture as the world's top-performing GeForce gaming graphics cards" that are common in personal computers, and has a custom API known as "NVN", which is designed to "bring lightweight, fast gaming to the masses".
Takeda described the Nvidia chipset as being critical for delivering gamers a level of performance similar to that which they experience on personal computers, helping to achieve "high performance but low power consumption" for the Switch.
Pre-release reports, unconfirmed by either Nintendo or Nvidia, stated that the SoC would be an Nvidia Tegra X1 SoC with 4 ARM Cortex-A57 CPU cores and 4 ARM Cortex-A53 CPU cores along with 256 Maxwell based CUDA GPU cores.
This was later corroborated by an analysis on the console done by Tech Insights in March 2017.
The CPU cores are clocked at 1.020 GHz, as revealed by DigitalFoundry.
The GPU cores vary between 768 MHz and 307.2 MHz depending upon whether the device is docked; however, they can be boosted to 921 MHz and 420 MHz, respectively.
A later iFixIt teardown of the final product confirmed 4GB of LPDDR4.
The Switch offers dual-band 802.11ac wireless connectivity and is compliant with 802.11 a g ac modes.
In the case of at least one game, Splatoon 2, ten Switch consoles can connect in the ad hoc network, though only eight can play directly while the other two can watch as spectators.
The Switch uses Bluetooth 4.1 for wireless communication between the console and its controllers.
The Switch is primarily powered in portable mode by a non-removable 4310 mAh, 3.7 V Lithium-ion rechargeable battery.
The battery life is estimated to be between 2.5 and 6.5 hours, depending on the software being used.
Nintendo gives the example of The Legend of Zelda: Breath of the Wild supporting approximately three hours of battery life.
While the basic Joy-Con Grip that ships with the Switch does not offer charging capabilities, a separate premium Joy-Con Grip includes a USB-C connector port that can be used to charge the Joy-Con batteries while they are connected to this Grip.
The Switch includes 32 GB of internal storage, If the microSD card is used, the Switch will only store game save data on the internal memory, leaving data that can be re-acquired on the microSD card.
though save game and profile transfers between Switch consoles were added in the 4.0.0 system update in October 2017.
MicroSD
and microSDHC were supported initially, and microSDXC card support was later added to the Switch's software via a system update.
The Switch did not support external storage units at launch, but Nintendo stated that they were looking into adding this feature in the future.
A system update in October 2017 enabled support for wireless USB headphones when the receiver is connected to the USB port on the console when docked.
Production
The Nintendo Switch is produced between Taiwan-based Foxconn and Japan-based Hosiden, with Foxconn accounting for the largest volume.
as they had done for both the 3DS and Wii U at their respective launches; Nintendo affirmed that the Switch would be profitable from launch during its 2016 fiscal year earnings report, as the company saw the console as a key earnings driver for 2017 and beyond.
Fomalhaut Techno Solutions, a Japanese product teardown firm, estimated that the Switch cost $257 to make compared to its $299 MSRP, with the Console and Dock at $167 while each Joy-Con cost $45.
Kimishima said that they may be able to see further profitability on the Switch when they can achieve volume discounts on components once they reach a level of about 10 million Switch units.
Prior to launch, Nintendo anticipated shipping two million Nintendo Switch units by the end of the console's first month, and assured that its supply chain would be able to meet demand following the launch period to avoid the shortage situation with the NES Classic Edition in late 2016.
Kimishima anticipated that the Switch will have lifetime sales numbers similar to the Wii, which sold 101 million units by 2016.
Following the initial sales report numbers in April 2017, the Financial Times reported that the company was seeking to produce 18 million Switch units in its 2017 financial year as to avoid "customer tantrums" with poor supply levels, particularly near the 2017 holiday season and the release of Super Mario Odyssey on October 27, 2017.
Fils-Aimé said in September 2017 that their 2017 production target for the Switch could be hampered by bottlenecks in individual components.
DigiTimes reported in October 2017 that Nintendo had further shifted the production rate for the Switch up to 2 million per month, with plans to ship 20 million units by the end of the year; the newspaper also stated that the production rate was limited by component availability, and not by other factors of Nintendo's production process.
On the presentation of the 2017 fiscal year results to investors, Nintendo's newly-named president Shuntaro Furukawa stated that they anticipate producing 20 million Switch consoles over the 2018 fiscal year keeping the momentum of its sales in that year.
In June 2019, The Wall Street Journal reported that Nintendo was starting to move some of its production of the Switch and two hardware revisions of the Switch outside of China and into Southeast Asia to limit the impact of new United States tariffs on electronics made in China.
Nintendo Switch Lite
On July 10, 2019, Nintendo announced a version of the Nintendo Switch dedicated to handheld play called the Nintendo Switch Lite.
The Switch Lite is a single unit, integrating the Joy-Con as part of the main unit's hardware, and uses a smaller screen.
It is considered the successor to the New Nintendo 3DS.
Additionally, a regular directional pad replaced the four directional buttons on the integrated left Joy-Con.
Overall, the unit is and has a reduced weight of .
The battery also has slightly lower capacity, at 13.6 W-h at 3570 mA-h compared to 16 W-h at 4310 mA-h. Despite the smaller battery, the unit has a longer expected play time between recharges compared to the original Switch model, estimated to last from 3 to 7 hours of gameplay compared to 2.5 to 6.5 hours for the original Switch.
This is due to the smaller screen size, the new SoC hardware being used, and the removal of certain power-consuming features such as the Joy-Con HD Rumble and IR camera that were only usable with removable Joy-Con.
Hardware revisions
In early 2019, in addition to reports of a light-weight revision of the Switch hardware, The Wall Street Journal and Nikkei reported on a rumored more powerful unit that they said was set to arrive in 2020.
Potential revisions to the Switch were also observed by a notification Nintendo had sent to the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) alerting the FCC to changes in the Switch's System-on-a-Chip and NAND memory from its original design in July 2019.
An updated version of the Nintendo Switch, featuring a longer battery life of 4.5-9 hours was announced on July 17, 2019 and was released in Japan and North America in mid-August 2019, and released in the United Kingdom in September 2019.
This revision primarily features a change in the main CPU and GPU that leads to lower power consumption while otherwise maintaining the same battery, which extends the battery life.
Prior to the 4.0 update, players discovered that the Switch's firmware included an easter egg to allow players to play the NES Golf title via a built-in emulator.
While Nintendo has not confirmed its presence, journalists and players believe this is a tribute to Nintendo's former president Satoru Iwata; Golf was programmed by Iwata, and the game can only be accessed if the system clock is set to July 11 - the day that Iwata died - and the Joy-Con are moved similarly to how Iwata would move his hands in his Nintendo Direct presentations.
Some Japanese users referred to this as a omamori (charm) left by Iwata himself.
With the 4.0 update, the executable code for this Easter egg appears to have been wiped by Nintendo.
In August 2018, a Twitter user found files on the Switch's firmware while reverse-engineering the console, which suggest that Nintendo was possibly testing VR functionality for the Switch.
The Twitter user was able to activate the hidden "VR Mode", which split the screen into two displays.
Hackers found that the code related to possible VR functionality had been hidden in the Switch for over a year.
In April 2018, two separate groups discovered a means to use an exploit chain in the Tegra chip system that can be used to boot other software on the Switch, which could have both beneficial or malicious uses.
The exploit is unpatchable as the necessary support to update the Tegra's ROM was not included on the Switch systems as shipped.
Both groups had notified Nvidia and Nintendo of the exploit before public announcement of their findings.
Users studying the hardware determined that Nintendo has the capacity to permanently ban specific Switch consoles used to obtain software via this exploit from the Nintendo Network, as the Switch console includes a unique device identification code used as part of the validation to the Network.
As games downloaded from the Nintendo Network include encrypted information that ties the Nintendo ID to the console, which is transmitted to Nintendo when users start playing games, Nintendo can track unapproved software downloads and take action.
Nintendo has reportedly fixed the vulnerability in newer Switch units as of July 2018.
In June 2018, two hackers found a way to run the Switch system's developer software Devmenu on non-developer Switch units, allowing hackers to directly load games onto SD cards or create custom avatars for their user profile, including pornographic and NSFW pictures, which violate Nintendo's terms of service.
A Nintendo spokesperson responded to Kotakus article on the topic, saying that "Modified Nintendo Switch systems have been banned".
Shortly after the release of Nintendo Switch Online in September 2018, hackers and modders were able to figure out how to run unauthorized ROMs on the Nintendo Switch NES emulator.
A Switch hacker who goes by the name DevRin, was the first to discover the hack and posted his findings on YouTube, which prompted a modder who goes by the name KapuccinoHeck to investigate the matter with two others and their findings were later posted on KapuccinoHeck's Twitter account.
Online services
Nintendo Switch user profiles can be linked to a Nintendo Account, which enables access to online features and the ability to download and purchase software from Nintendo eShop.
A Nintendo Account can be created with an account from a third-party social networking service or an existing Nintendo Network ID from a 3DS or Wii U. Nintendo does not plan to offer first-party social networking services on Switch, such as Miiverse or StreetPass, the latter owing to Nintendo's promotion of Switch as primarily being a home console.
Instead, profiles can be linked to existing social networks such as Facebook and Twitter for social and sharing features.
Players can register friends through Friend Codes as with previous Nintendo systems, searching for friends in the local network, through past multiplayer interactions, or through Nintendo Account profiles registered as friends on Nintendo mobile apps such as Miitomo and Super Mario Run.
Nintendo said in March 2017 that they have plans to provide other methods for registering friends, including through third-party social media and via Nintendo Network IDs.
Support for registering friends on the Switch via Facebook and Twitter was added on March 13, 2018 as part of the 5.0.0 system update.
The Switch has no native support for Nintendo Network IDs, but users can link their Nintendo Network ID credentials to a Nintendo Account profile, which enables the ability to add friends that they had already registered on their 3DS or Wii U, and share an eShop balance between all three platforms.
The Nintendo Switch Online subscription includes access to online play, voice chat, access to an ongoing library of Nintendo Entertainment System (NES) and Super Nintendo Entertainment System (SNES) games, cloud storage for save data on most games, as well as other special offers and promotions.
Free-to-play games such as Fortnite Battle Royale and Warframe are exempt from the subscription requirement for online play.
The Nintendo Switch Online mobile app allows access to voice chat for Switch Online subscribers, as well as access to game-specific microsites.
Unlike its competitors, voice chat is not supported via the console itself, requiring use of the app on a smartphone instead.
A separate app provides access to parental controls for the console.
Media support
The Switch did not launch with many multimedia-oriented features, such as a web browser or support for video streaming services.
Fils-Aimé said that because the Switch is geared as a gaming console that is far different from what their competitors offer, they had focused on achieving that goal first and foremost, and did not see media support as a differentiator from their competitors.
Niconico, a popular Japanese video service, launched for the Switch in Japan on July 13, 2017, and was the Switch's first third-party media app in any market.
Hulu was the first video streaming application released for the Switch in the United States on November 9, 2017.
A YouTube application was released on November 8, 2018.
Fils-Aimé said in June 2018 that conversations to bring Netflix to the Switch are "on-going".
Korg Gadget, a music production app, was released for the Nintendo Switch on April 26, 2018.
InkyPen, a comics and manga subscription app, launched exclusively on the Switch worldwide on December 17, 2018.
Izneo, another comics and manga subscription service, was released for the Switch on February 28, 2019.
FUZE4, a text-based programming language app, was released in August 2019.
Games
Distribution
Games for the Nintendo Switch can be obtained through either retail channels or digitally through the Nintendo eShop.
Games distributed at retail are stored on proprietary cartridges, similar in design to the game cards used for Nintendo 3DS games, albeit smaller and thinner.
Because of their small size, Nintendo coats each cartridge with denatonium benzoate, a non-toxic bitterant used to discourage children from ingesting them.
Nintendo offered a suggested retail price for Switch games at the console's launch of $60, equivalent to the price for new games on either the Xbox One and PlayStation 4.
Nintendo otherwise allows publishers to set the price for a game, only requiring the list price be the same for physical and digital releases, if a physical release is made.
This has caused some games also available on other consoles to be priced higher on the Switch due to the costs of manufacturing the game card for the Switch version.
Online media outlets colloquially refer to this price hike as the "Switch tax".
The "Switch tax" also applies to many games that had been previously released on other platforms ported later to the Switch, where the Switch game price reflects the original price of the game when it was first released rather than its current price.
It is estimated that the Switch Tax is an average of 10% over other formats.
Game cards at the time of the Switch's release had a 32GB capacity; Nintendo had planned to introduce 64GB game cards by the second half of 2018, but had to push this back until 2019.
Some physical games may still require content to be installed to internal storage, with some games using a significant portion of the internal memory if a microSD card is not available.
Other physical games which have a large amount of content may require a microSD card to be present in the Switch, such as NBA 2K18; such games are clearly marked on the cover to show these requirements.
The Switch supports the ability for cloud gaming to run games that require more hardware capabilities than the Switch allows, running these games over a network with the game computations performed on server hardware.
These games may be tied to specific regions due to purchasing options.
Early examples of such games on the Switch include Resident Evil 7: Biohazard, Phantasy Star Online 2 and Assassin's Creed: Odyssey.
Unlike previous Nintendo home consoles, the Switch is region-free, allowing players to use cartridges or downloaded content from any part of the world, though Nintendo recommends using the appropriate regional eShop for digital purposes for obtaining the best post-purchase support if needed.
Further, eShop purchases, while still tied to the Nintendo Account, are not tied to the specific Switch console, as was the case for previous Nintendo hardware.
Once the user re-registers their account to a Switch, they have access to download all previous purchases; however, a user can only have their account registered on one console at a time, and downloaded software tied to an account cannot be used if that account is not registered to the device.
With the console's 6.0 system update, alongside the launch of the Online service in September 2018, a user can play games that they have purchased from the eShop on a second Switch console, though requiring continuous online connection and other restrictions.
The Switch does not use optical discs, and does not have native backward compatibility with software from any previous Nintendo console.
The Switch is also not backwards compatible with other digital titles from previous consoles.
In February 2017, Kimishima said that the Switch is powerful enough to emulate titles from previous Nintendo consoles.
Nintendo was more aggressive in trying to bring on third-party developers early in the Switch's development, to ensure a stronger lineup of games.
Takahashi and Koizumi reached out to many of the third-parties directly to help gain their support early on.
Nintendo also began gaining support of independent video game developers in the middle of 2016 to provide assistance to help them bring games to the Switch, led by Nintendo's head of partner management Damon Baker.
They had tried to draw in indie developers near the end of the Wii U's lifetime, providing indie game demos that were highlighted during E3 2015, but by this point, the Wii U had already been considered a failure.
Nintendo of America reached out to many independent developers and publishers, including Chucklefish, Team17, and Devolver Digital, to gain titles for the platform and make the process of publishing easier.
Nintendo still curates which titles they allow on the system, using the company's past portfolio for evaluation, and still carefully time releases to keep a steady stream of new content.
However, once a game is greenlit, pushing out patches and updates can be done rapidly and at no further cost to the developer.
Nintendo also offers the Switch's dev kit at 50,000 yen, or about $450, far under the cost of a comparable dev kit for other consoles, making it more amenable for smaller developers to afford and build for the unit.
Nintendo offers several of these indie games as "Nindies" through the eShop.
Nintendo had anticipated that they would have at least sixty indie games released for the Switch through 2017, but ended up with over 320 titles by the end of 2017 as a result of the console's popularity.
Indie developers have found that Nintendo has also had a significant role in the promotion and marketing of their games, including using the games to help promote the Switch itself, in contrast to Microsoft or Sony.
These developers also found Nintendo tries to keep a better rapport with fans of Nintendo's products, and help these fans identify Switch indie games they feel they will like the most, including those games that build on Nintendo's classic games from the NES, SNES, and Game Boy eras that can draw in a more global audience.
Baker said that they encourage self-publishing, but do also place value on trust of established partners for their recommendations of what games would be best for the Switch.
In the past, Nintendo had previously relied more on providing its own internally developed tools and libraries that third-party developers would use to develop games for earlier systems.
With the Switch, the company went a different route.
According to Takahashi, "we have been aiming to realize an environment in which a variety of different third-party developers are able to easily develop compatible software", taking advantage of the Nvidia chipset's support for many standard libraries that allows for ease of transition from other platforms to the Switch.
Unity Technologies, Epic Games, and the Khronos Group pledged support to help developers bring games to the Switch using their game engines and middleware, Unity, Unreal Engine 4, and the Vulkan and OpenGL graphical APIs, respectively; for instance, the Unreal Engine toolkit was updated in February 2017 to provide beta testing for native support for Switch games, with full support added by May 2017.
In March 2018, Nintendo announced it has also gained support of YoYo Games' GameMaker Studio 2 engine for the Switch.
Miyamoto said that Nintendo's own developers have "mastered" engines like Unreal, so that while it would be unlikely that Nintendo would release a first-party title using such software, they can help support developers using these tools on the Switch.
The console's reveal trailer showcased footage from new titles in Nintendo franchises, including Super Mario Odyssey, Mario Kart 8 Deluxe, and Splatoon 2, as well as footage from NBA 2K18 and The Elder Scrolls V: Skyrim.
Although Nintendo and third-parties stated at that time that these were not necessarily representative of Switch titles, all five titles were confirmed as Switch releases during the January 2017 press events.
The Switch did not launch with any bundled games, nor had any pre-loaded games or game demos; Fils-Aimé stated that once they had decided on the price point and evaluated the forthcoming game lineup, they opted to allow consumers to choose which games to get rather than include one in the bundle and increase its price.
At least ten games were shipped or digitally available alongside the Switch in North America during launch day, including Nintendo's first-party titles The Legend of Zelda: Breath of the Wild and 1-2-Switch.
Fils-Aimé said that Nintendo planned a "steady cadence of content" for the Switch after launch, avoiding the perceived situation with gaps between major releases for Wii U software.
Kimishima said that Nintendo scheduled its first-party releases "to continue to provide new titles regularly without long gaps", as this "encourages consumers to continue actively playing the system, maintains buzz, and spurs continued sales momentum for Nintendo Switch."
While the Wii U was designed as a home console unit, Nintendo's lack of clarity on this point led to a general assumption that the unit, principally the Wii U GamePad, was more like a tablet, overshadowing the Wii U's other features (such as dual-screen play modes).
Nintendo also believed that some consumers had mistaken the Wii U GamePad as being an accessory for the existing Wii console, rather than being the flagship feature of an entirely new platform.
Instead, for the Switch, Fils-Aimé said the company was "very aggressive and clearly communicating the proposition that it's a home console you can take on the go wherever and whenever you want".
For example, the October 2016 trailer (considered significantly unlike Nintendo's past marketing efforts, according to Bloomberg Chavez said of the ad, "There's no bigger stage in the U.S. on which to showcase the platform.
I think it speaks to our confidence in the system."
Additional television commercials followed the Super Bowl spot, which were to demonstrate Switch's use cases among different demographics, as well as "casual" and "core" gaming audiences.
Chavez emphasized that Nintendo's overall marketing for Switch was not be "just a six to eight week launch campaign", but "really a 15 month campaign for us, to say nothing of our plans for 2018".
The North American and European press had special events on January 13, 2017, following the Tokyo presentation.
Various Switch demonstration events were run in North America, Europe, and Japan during January and February 2017.
Nintendo offered demonstrations of the Switch at gaming conferences including PAX South, South by Southwest, and RTX.
Nintendo also promoted the Switch through an "Unexpected Places" campaign in February 2017, temporarily setting up living-room style spaces in three United States locations and inviting fans and players, including John Cena, to try out the unit.
In June 2018, Nintendo announced it was partnering with Disney Channel to help produce Nintendo Switch Family Showdown, a televised competition where families competed in challenges around various Switch games in August 2018.
Reception
Pre-release
Market analysts had a mixed response to the October 2016 announcement of the Nintendo Switch.
Taylor also approved of the company's decision to introduce the console prior to the holiday season, when Microsoft and Sony would attempt to attract casual gamers to their consoles.
Following the January 2017 press conference revealing the unit's pricing and release date, journalists expressed concern at the apparently high system price, comparable to the PlayStation 4 and Xbox One consoles but lacking some of their capabilities, the cost of the paid-for Nintendo Switch Online service, and the small number of games that were confirmed for launch.
However, other analysts found that the pricing factors indicated the Switch was a more robust console, and would likely sell better than the Wii U, with The Legend of Zelda: Breath of the Wild being a key sales driver.
Most analysts agreed that the success of the Switch depends on Nintendo's support and avoiding mistakes the company had made in marketing and promoting the Wii U. Analysis firms estimated the Switch would have a slow start due to the risk of the system and high price, but could still clear up to 40 million units by 2020.
Game and hardware developers were more positive towards the Switch, seeing the system as "a more unifying experience between their handheld and console divisions", but expressed concern on unanswered hardware specifications, and how Nintendo would market the unit to draw in developers.
