Snakes are elongated, legless, carnivorous reptiles of the suborder Serpentes.
Like all other squamates, snakes are ectothermic, amniote vertebrates covered in overlapping scales.
Many species of snakes have skulls with several more joints than their lizard ancestors, enabling them to swallow prey much larger than their heads with their highly mobile jaws.
To accommodate their narrow bodies, snakes' paired organs (such as kidneys) appear one in front of the other instead of side by side, and most have only one functional lung.
Some species retain a pelvic girdle with a pair of vestigial claws on either side of the cloaca.
Lizards have evolved elongate bodies without limbs or with greatly reduced limbs about twenty-five times independently via convergent evolution, leading to many lineages of legless lizards.
Legless lizards resemble snakes, but several common groups of legless lizards have eyelids and external ears, which snakes lack, although this rule is not universal (see Amphisbaenia, Dibamidae, and Pygopodidae).
Living snakes are found on every continent except Antarctica, and on most smaller land masses; exceptions include some large islands, such as Ireland, Iceland, Greenland, the Hawaiian archipelago, and the islands of New Zealand, and many small islands of the Atlantic and central Pacific oceans.
Additionally, sea snakes are widespread throughout the Indian and Pacific Oceans.
More than 20 families are currently recognized, comprising about 520 genera and about 3,600 species.
They range in size from the tiny, -long Barbados thread snake The fossil species Titanoboa cerrejonensis was long.
The diversity of modern snakes appeared during the Paleocene epoch (c 66 to 56 Ma ago, after the Cretaceous-Paleogene extinction event).
The oldest preserved descriptions of snakes can be found in the Brooklyn Papyrus.
Most species are nonvenomous and those that have venom use it primarily to kill and subdue prey rather than for self-defense.
Some possess venom potent enough to cause painful injury or death to humans.
Nonvenomous snakes either swallow prey alive or kill by constriction.
Etymology
The English word snake comes from Old English snaca, itself from Proto-Germanic *snak-an- (cf. Germanic Schnake "ring snake", Swedish snok "grass snake"), from Proto-Indo-European root * (s)nēg-o- "to crawl", "to creep", which also gave sneak as well as Sanskrit nāgá "snake".
The word ousted hérpō (ἕρπω) "I crawl".
Evolution
The fossil record of snakes is relatively poor because snake skeletons are typically small and fragile making fossilization uncommon.
Fossils readily identifiable as snakes (though often retaining hind limbs) first appear in the fossil record during the Cretaceous period.
The earliest known true snake fossils (members of the crown group Serpentes) come from the marine simoliophiids, the oldest of which is the Late Cretaceous (Cenomanian age)
Haasiophis terrasanctus, dated to between 112 and 94 million years old.
Based on comparative anatomy, there is consensus that snakes descended from lizards.
Pythons and boas-primitive groups among modern snakes-have vestigial hind limbs: tiny, clawed digits known as anal spurs, which are used to grasp during mating.
Previously, snakes were a minor component of the North American fauna, but during the Miocene, the number of species and their prevalence increased dramatically with the first appearances of vipers and elapids in North America and the significant diversification of Colubridae (including the origin of many modern genera such as Nerodia, Lampropeltis, Pituophis, and Pantherophis).
An early fossil snake relative, Najash rionegrina, was a two-legged burrowing animal with a sacrum, and was fully terrestrial.
One extant analog of these putative ancestors is the earless monitor Lanthanotus of Borneo (though it also is semiaquatic). .
This hypothesis was strengthened in 2015 by the discovery of a 113m year-old fossil of a four-legged snake in Brazil that has been named Tetrapodophis amplectus.
It has many snake-like features, is adapted for burrowing and its stomach indicates that it was preying on other animals.
It is currently uncertain if Tetrapodophis is a snake or another species, in the squamate order, as a snake-like body has independently evolved at least 26 times.
Tetrapodophis does not have distinctive snake features in its spine and skull.
An alternative hypothesis, based on morphology, suggests the ancestors of snakes were related to mosasaurs-extinct aquatic reptiles from the Cretaceous-which in turn are thought to have derived from varanid lizards.
Distribution
There are over 2,900 species of snakes ranging as far northward as the Arctic Circle in Scandinavia and southward through Australia.
There are numerous islands from which snakes are absent, such as Ireland, Iceland, and New Zealand
Taxonomy
All modern snakes are grouped within the suborder Serpentes in Linnean taxonomy, part of the order Squamata, though their precise placement within squamates remains controversial.
While not extant today, the Madtsoiidae, a family of giant, primitive, python-like snakes, was around until 50,000 years ago in Australia, represented by genera such as Wonambi.
There are numerous debates in the systematics within the group.
For instance, many sources classify Boidae and Pythonidae as one family, while some keep the Elapidae and Hydrophiidae (sea snakes) separate for practical reasons despite their extremely close relation.
Recent molecular studies support the monophyly of the clades of modern snakes, scolecophidians, typhlopids + anomalepidids, alethinophidians, core alethinophidians, uropeltids (Cylindrophis, Anomochilus, uropeltines), macrostomatans, booids, boids, pythonids and caenophidians.
Families
Legless lizards
While snakes are limbless reptiles, which evolved from (and are grouped with) lizards, there are many other species of lizards which have lost their limbs independently and superficially look similar to snakes.
These include the slowworm and glass snake.
Biology
Size
The now extinct Titanoboa cerrejonensis snakes found were in length.
By comparison, the largest extant snakes are the reticulated python, which measures about long,
At the other end of the scale, the smallest extant snake is Leptotyphlops carlae, with a length of about .
Most snakes are fairly small animals, approximately in length.
Perception
Pit vipers, pythons, and some boas have infrared-sensitive receptors in deep grooves on the snout, which allow them to "see" the radiated heat of warm-blooded prey.
In pit vipers, the grooves are located between the nostril and the eye in a large "pit" on each side of the head.
Other infrared-sensitive snakes have multiple, smaller labial pits lining the upper lip, just below the nostrils.
The fork in the tongue gives snakes a sort of directional sense of smell and taste simultaneously.
Generally, vision is best in arboreal snakes and weakest in burrowing snakes.
Some snakes, such as the Asian vine snake (genus Ahaetulla), have binocular vision, with both eyes capable of focusing on the same point.
Most snakes focus by moving the lens back and forth in relation to the retina, while in the other amniote groups, the lens is stretched.
Many nocturnal snakes have slit pupils while diurnal snakes have round pupils.
Skin
The skin of a snake is covered in scales.
Contrary to the popular notion of snakes being slimy because of possible confusion of snakes with worms, snakeskin has a smooth, dry texture.
Most snakes use specialized belly scales to travel, gripping surfaces.
The body scales may be smooth, keeled, or granular.
The eyelids of a snake are transparent "spectacle" scales, which remain permanently closed, also known as brille.
The shedding of scales is called ecdysis (or in normal usage, molting or sloughing).
In the case of snakes, the complete outer layer of skin is shed in one layer.
Snake scales are not discrete, but extensions of the epidermis-hence they are not shed separately but as a complete outer layer during each molt, akin to a sock being turned inside out.
Snakes have a wide diversity of skin coloration patterns.
These patterns are often related to behavior, such as a tendency to have to flee from predators.
Snakes that are plain or have longitudinal stripes often have to escape from predators, with the pattern (or lack thereof) not providing reference points to predators, thus allowing the snake to escape without being notice.
Plain snakes usually adopt active hunting strategies, as their pattern allows them to send little information to prey about motion.
Blotched snakes, on the other hand, usually use ambush-based strategies, likely because it helps them blend into an environment with irregularly shaped objects, like sticks or rocks.
Spotted patterning can similarly help snakes to blend into their environment.
The shape and number of scales on the head, back, and belly are often characteristic and used for taxonomic purposes.
Scales are named mainly according to their positions on the body.
In "advanced" (Caenophidian) snakes, the broad belly scales and rows of dorsal scales correspond to the vertebrae, allowing scientists to count the vertebrae without dissection.
Molting
Molting, or ecdysis, serves a number of functions.
Firstly, the old and worn skin is replaced; secondly, it helps get rid of parasites such as mites and ticks.
Renewal of the skin by molting is supposed to allow growth in some animals such as insects; however, this has been disputed in the case of snakes.
Molting occurs periodically throughout the snake's life.
Before a molt, the snake stops eating and often hides or moves to a safe place.
Just before shedding, the skin becomes dull and dry looking and the eyes become cloudy or blue-colored.
The inner surface of the old skin liquefies.
This causes the old skin to separate from the new skin beneath it.
After a few days, the eyes clear and the snake "crawls" out of its old skin.
The old skin breaks near the mouth and the snake wriggles out, aided by rubbing against rough surfaces.
In many cases, the cast skin peels backward over the body from head to tail in one piece, like pulling a sock off inside-out.
A new, larger, brighter layer of skin has formed underneath.
An older snake may shed its skin only once or twice a year.
But a younger snake, still growing, may shed up to four times a year.
Scale counts can sometimes be used to tell the sex of a snake when the species is not distinctly sexually dimorphic.
A probe is inserted into the cloaca until it can go no further.
The probe is marked at the point where it stops, removed, and compared to the subcaudal depth by laying it alongside the scales.
The scalation count determines whether the snake is a male or female as hemipenes of a male will probe to a different depth (usually longer) than the cloaca of a female.
Because the sides of the jaw can move independently of one another, snakes resting their jaws on a surface have sensitive stereo hearing which can detect the position of prey.
The jaw-quadrate-stapes pathway is capable of detecting vibrations on the angstrom scale, despite the absence of an outer ear and the ossicle mechanism of impedance matching used in other vertebrates to receive vibrations from the air.
The hyoid is a small bone located posterior and ventral to the skull, in the 'neck' region, which serves as an attachment for muscles of the snake's tongue, as it does in all other tetrapods.
The vertebral column consists of anywhere between 200 and 400 (or more) vertebrae.
Tail vertebrae are comparatively few in number (often less than 20% of the total) and lack ribs, while body vertebrae each have two ribs articulating with them.
The vertebrae have projections that allow for strong muscle attachment enabling locomotion without limbs.
Autotomy of the tail, a feature found in some lizards is absent in most snakes.
Caudal autotomy in snakes is rare and is intervertebral, unlike that in lizards, which is intravertebral-that is, the break happens along a predefined fracture plane present on a vertebra.
In some snakes, most notably boas and pythons, there are vestiges of the hindlimbs in the form of a pair of pelvic spurs.
These small, claw-like protrusions on each side of the cloaca are the external portion of the vestigial hindlimb skeleton, which includes the remains of an ilium and femur.
Snakes are polyphyodonts with teeth that are continuously replaced.
Internal organs
Snake's and other reptiles have a three-chambered heart that controls the circulatory system via the left and right atrium, and one ventricle.
Internally, the ventricle is divided into three interconnected cavities which include the cavum arteriosum, the cavum pulmonale, and the cavum venosum.
The cavum venosum receives deoxygenated blood from the right atrium while the cavum arteriosum receives oxygenated blood directly from the left atrium.
Located beneath the cavum venosum is the cavum pulmonale, which pumps blood to the pulmonary trunk.
The snake's heart is encased in a sac, called the pericardium, located at the is located in fatty tissue above the heart and is responsible for the generation of immune cells in the blood.
The cardiovascular system of snakes is also unique for the presence of a renal portal system in which the blood from the snake's tail passes through the kidneys before returning to the heart.
In the majority of species, only one lung is functional.
This lung contains a vascularized anterior portion and a posterior portion that does not function in gas exchange.
Snake venoms are complex mixtures of proteins, and are stored in venom glands at the back of the head.
These proteins can potentially be a mix of neurotoxins (which attack the nervous system), hemotoxins (which attack the circulatory system), cytotoxins, bungarotoxins and many other toxins that affect the body in different ways.
This makes it difficult both for the snake to use its venom and for scientists to milk them.
Most snakes currently labelled "nonvenomous" would still be considered harmless according to this theory, as they either lack a venom delivery method or are incapable of delivering enough to endanger a human.
This theory postulates that snakes may have evolved from a common lizard ancestor that was venomous-and that venomous lizards like the gila monster, beaded lizard, monitor lizards, and the now-extinct mosasaurs may also have derived from it.
They share this venom clade with various other saurian species.
Venomous snakes are classified in two taxonomic families:
* Elapids - cobras including king cobras, kraits, mambas, Australian copperheads, sea snakes, and coral snakes.
The hemipenes are often grooved, hooked, or spined in order to grip the walls of the female's cloaca.
A female python will not leave the eggs, except to occasionally bask in the sun or drink water.
She will even "shiver" to generate heat to incubate the eggs.
Recently, it has been confirmed that several species of snake are fully viviparous, such as the boa constrictor and green anaconda, nourishing their young through a placenta as well as a yolk sac, which is highly unusual among reptiles, or anything else outside of requiem sharks or placental mammals.
Ritual combat between males for the females they want to mate with includes topping, a behavior exhibited by most viperids in which one male will twist around the vertically elevated fore body of its opponent and forcing it downward.
It is common for neck biting to occur while the snakes are entwined.
Facultative parthenogenesis
Parthenogenesis is a natural form of reproduction in which growth and development of embryos occur without fertilization.
Agkistrodon contortrix (copperhead) and Agkistrodon piscivorus (cotton mouth) can reproduce by facultative parthenogenesis.
That is, they are capable of switching from a sexual mode of reproduction to an asexual mode.
The type of parthenogenesis that likely occurs is automixis with terminal fusion, a process in which two terminal products from the same meiosis fuse to form a diploid zygote.
This process leads to genome wide homozygosity, expression of deleterious recessive alleles and often to developmental abnormalities.
Both captive-born and wild-born A. contortrix and A. piscivorus appear to be capable of this form of parthenogenesis.
The WW females are likely produced by terminal automixis.
Behavior
Winter dormancy
In regions where winters are colder than snakes can tolerate while remaining active, local species will brumate.
Unlike hibernation, in which mammals are actually asleep, brumating reptiles are awake but inactive.
Individual snakes may brumate in burrows, under rock piles, or inside fallen trees, or snakes may aggregate in large numbers at hibernacula.
Feeding and diet
All snakes are strictly carnivorous, eating small animals including lizards, frogs, other snakes, small mammals, birds, eggs, fish, snails, worms or insects.
Because snakes cannot bite or tear their food to pieces, they must swallow prey whole.
The body size of a snake has a major influence on its eating habits.
Smaller snakes eat smaller prey.
Juvenile pythons might start out feeding on lizards or mice and graduate to small deer or antelope as an adult, for example.
The snake's jaw is a complex structure.
Contrary to the popular belief that snakes can dislocate their jaws, snakes have a very flexible lower jaw, the two halves of which are not rigidly attached, and numerous other joints in their skull (see snake skull), allowing them to open their mouths wide enough to swallow their prey whole, even if it is larger in diameter than the snake itself.
Some snakes have a venomous bite, which they use to kill their prey before eating it.
Other snakes kill their prey by constriction.
Because of this, a snake disturbed after having eaten recently will often regurgitate its prey to be able to escape the perceived threat.
When undisturbed, the digestive process is highly efficient, with the snake's digestive enzymes dissolving and absorbing everything but the prey's hair (or feathers) and claws, which are excreted along with waste.
Locomotion
The lack of limbs does not impede the movement of snakes.
They have developed several different modes of locomotion to deal with particular environments.
Unlike the gaits of limbed animals, which form a continuum, each mode of snake locomotion is discrete and distinct from the others; transitions between modes are abrupt.
Lateral undulation
Lateral undulation is the sole mode of aquatic locomotion, and the most common mode of terrestrial locomotion.
This mode of movement has the same net cost of transport (calories burned per meter moved) as running in lizards of the same mass.
Terrestrial lateral undulation is the most common mode of terrestrial locomotion for most snake species.
When swimming, the waves become larger as they move down the snake's body, and the wave travels backwards faster than the snake moves forwards.
Thrust is generated by pushing their body against the water, resulting in the observed slip.
In spite of overall similarities, studies show that the pattern of muscle activation is different in aquatic versus terrestrial lateral undulation, which justifies calling them separate modes.
All snakes can laterally undulate forward (with backward-moving waves), but only sea snakes have been observed reversing the motion (moving backwards with forward-moving waves).
This mode of locomotion overcomes the slippery nature of sand or mud by pushing off with only static portions on the body, thereby minimizing slipping.
While on tree branches, snakes use several modes of locomotion depending on species and bark texture.
These snakes can perform a controlled glide for hundreds of feet depending upon launch altitude and can even turn in midair.
In this mode, the belly scales are lifted and pulled forward before being placed down and the body pulled over them.
Waves of movement and stasis pass posteriorly, resulting in a series of ripples in the skin.
Documented deaths resulting from snake bites are uncommon.
Nonfatal bites from venomous snakes may result in the need for amputation of a limb or part thereof.
Of the roughly 725 species of venomous snakes worldwide, only 250 are able to kill a human with one bite.
Australia averages only one fatal snake bite per year.
In India, 250,000 snakebites are recorded in a single year, with as many as 50,000 recorded initial deaths.
The WHO estimates that on the order of 100 000 people die each year as a result of snake bites, and around three times as many amputations and other permanent disabilities are caused by snakebites annually.
The treatment for a snakebite is as variable as the bite itself.
The most common and effective method is through antivenom (or antivenin), a serum made from the venom of the snake.
Some antivenom is species-specific (monovalent) while some is made for use with multiple species in mind (polyvalent).
In the United States for example, all species of venomous snakes are pit vipers, with the exception of the coral snake.
To produce antivenom, a mixture of the venoms of the different species of rattlesnakes, copperheads, and cottonmouths is injected into the body of a horse in ever-increasing dosages until the horse is immunized.
Blood is then extracted from the immunized horse.
The serum is separated and further purified and freeze-dried.
It is reconstituted with sterile water and becomes antivenom.
For this reason, people who are allergic to horses are more likely to suffer an allergic reaction to antivenom.
Antivenom for the more dangerous species (such as mambas, taipans, and cobras) is made in a similar manner in India, South Africa, and Australia, although these antivenoms are species-specific.
Snake charmers
In some parts of the world, especially in India, snake charming is a roadside show performed by a charmer.
In such a show, the snake charmer carries a basket that contains a snake that he seemingly charms by playing tunes from his flutelike musical instrument, to which the snake responds.
The Wildlife Protection Act of 1972 in India technically proscribes snake charming on grounds of reducing animal cruelty.
Other snake charmers also have a snake and mongoose show, where both the animals have a mock fight; however, this is not very common, as the snakes, as well as the mongooses, may be seriously injured or killed.
Snake charming as a profession is dying out in India because of competition from modern forms of entertainment and environment laws proscribing the practice.
The Irulas are also known to eat some of the snakes they catch and are very useful in rat extermination in the villages.
Despite the existence of snake charmers, there have also been professional snake catchers or wranglers.
Modern-day snake trapping involves a herpetologist using a long stick with a V- shaped end.
Some television show hosts, like Bill Haast, Austin Stevens, Steve Irwin, and Jeff Corwin, prefer to catch them using bare hands.
Consumption
While not commonly thought of as food in most cultures, in some cultures, the consumption of snakes is acceptable, or even considered a delicacy, prized for its alleged pharmaceutical effect of warming the heart.
Snake soup of Cantonese cuisine is consumed by local people in autumn, to warm up their body.
Western cultures document the consumption of snakes under extreme circumstances of hunger.
Cooked rattlesnake meat is an exception, which is commonly consumed in parts of the Midwestern United States.
In Asian countries such as China, Taiwan, Thailand, Indonesia, Vietnam and Cambodia, drinking the blood of snakes-particularly the cobra-is believed to increase sexual virility.
The blood is drained while the cobra is still alive when possible, and is usually mixed with some form of liquor to improve the taste.
Snake wine (蛇酒) is an alcoholic beverage produced by infusing whole snakes in rice wine or grain alcohol.
The drink was first recorded to have been consumed in China during the Western Zhou dynasty and considered an important curative and believed to reinvigorate a person according to Traditional Chinese medicine.
Pets
In the Western world, some snakes (especially docile species such as the ball python and corn snake) are kept as pets.
To meet this demand a captive breeding industry has developed.
Snakes bred in captivity tend to make better pets and are considered preferable to wild caught specimens.
Snakes can be very low maintenance pets, especially compared to more traditional species.
They require minimal space, as most common species do not exceed in length.
Pet snakes can be fed relatively infrequently, usually once every 5 to 14 days.
Certain snakes have a lifespan of more than 40 years if given proper care.
Symbolism
In ancient Mesopotamia, Nirah, the messenger god of Ištaran, was represented as a serpent on kudurrus, or boundary stones.
Representations of two intertwined serpents are common in Sumerian art and Neo-Sumerian artwork The precursor to the ouroboros was the "Many-Faced", In a Greek myth described by Pseudo-Apollodorus in his Bibliotheca, Medusa was a Gorgon with serpents for hair whose gaze turned all those who looked at her to stone and was slain by the hero Perseus.
In the Roman poet Ovid's Metamorphoses, Medusa is said to have once been a beautiful priestess of Athena, whom Athena turned into a serpent-haired monster after she was raped by the god Poseidon in Athena's temple.
In another myth referenced by the Boeotian poet Hesiod and described in detail by Pseudo-Apollodorus, the hero Heracles is said to have slain the Lernaean Hydra, a multiple-headed serpent which dwelt in the swamps of Lerna.
The cobra is seen on the neck of Shiva and Vishnu is depicted often as sleeping on a seven-headed snake or within the coils of a serpent.
There are also several temples in India solely for cobras sometimes called Nagraj (King of Snakes) and it is believed that snakes are symbols of fertility.
There is a Hindu festival called Nag Panchami each year on which day snakes are venerated and prayed to.
See also Nāga.
In India there is another mythology about snakes.
Commonly known in Hindi as "Ichchhadhari" snakes.
Such snakes can take the form of any living creature, but prefer human form.
These mythical snakes possess a valuable gem called "Mani", which is more brilliant than diamond.
There are many stories in India about greedy people trying to possess this gem and ending up getting killed.
The snake is one of the 12 celestial animals of Chinese zodiac, in the Chinese calendar.
Many ancient Peruvian cultures worshipped nature.
They emphasized animals and often depicted snakes in their art.
Religion
Snakes are a part of Hindu worship.
A festival, Nag Panchami, in which participants worship either images of or live Nāgas (cobras) is celebrated every year.
Most images of Lord Shiva depict snake around his neck.
Puranas have various stories associated with snakes.
In the Puranas, Shesha is said to hold all the planets of the Universe on his hoods and to constantly sing the glories of Vishnu from all his mouths.
He is sometimes referred to as "Ananta-Shesha", which means "Endless Shesha".
Other notable snakes in Hinduism are Ananta, Vasuki, Taxak, Karkotaka and Pingala.
The term Nāga is used to refer to entities that take the form of large snakes in Hinduism and Buddhism.
Snakes have also been widely revered, such as in ancient Greece, where the serpent was seen as a healer.
Asclepius carried a serpent wound around his wand, a symbol seen today on many ambulances.
In religious terms, the snake and jaguar are arguably the most important animals in ancient Mesoamerica.
"In states of ecstasy, lords dance a serpent dance; great descending snakes adorn and support buildings from Chichen Itza to Tenochtitlan, and the Nahuatl word coatl meaning serpent or twin, forms part of primary deities such as Mixcoatl, Quetzalcoatl, and Coatlicue."
In both Maya and Aztec calendars, the fifth day of the week was known as Snake Day.
In Judaism, the snake of brass is also a symbol of healing, of one's life being saved from imminent death.
In some parts of Christianity, Christ's redemptive work is compared to saving one's life through beholding the Nehushtan .
* The Snakes of Europe and Snakes of Europe , a wikibook
Further reading
