North America is a continent entirely within the Northern Hemisphere and almost all within the Western Hemisphere.
It is also considered by some to be a northern subcontinent of the Americas.
It is bordered to the north by the Arctic Ocean, to the east by the Atlantic Ocean, to the west and south by the Pacific Ocean, and to the southeast by South America and the Caribbean Sea.
North America covers an area of about 24,709,000 square kilometers (9,540,000 square miles), about 16.5% of the earth's land area and about 4.8% of its total surface.
North America is the third largest continent by area, following Asia and Africa, and the fourth by population after Asia, Africa, and Europe.
In 2013, its population was estimated at nearly 579 million people in 23 independent states, or about 7.5% of the world's population, if nearby islands (most notably around the Caribbean) are included.
North America was reached by its first human populations during the last glacial period, via crossing the Bering land bridge approximately 40,000 to 17,000 years ago.
The so-called Paleo-Indian period is taken to have lasted until about 10,000 years ago (the beginning of the Archaic or Meso-Indian period).
The Classic stage spans roughly the 6th to 13th centuries.
The Pre-Columbian era ended in 1492, with the beginning of the transatlantic migrations-the arrival of European settlers during the Age of Discovery and the Early Modern period.
Present-day cultural and ethnic patterns reflect interactions between European colonists, indigenous peoples, African slaves and their descendants.
Owing to Europe's colonization of the Americas, most North Americans speak European languages such as English, Spanish or French, and their states' cultures commonly reflect Western traditions.
Name
The Americas are usually accepted as having been named after the Italian explorer Amerigo Vespucci by the German cartographers Martin Waldseemüller and Matthias Ringmann.
Vespucci, who explored South America between 1497 and 1502, was the first European to suggest that the Americas were not the East Indies, but a different landmass previously unknown by Europeans.
In 1507, Waldseemüller produced a world map, in which he placed the word "America" on the continent of South America, in the middle of what is today Brazil.
He explained the rationale for the name in the accompanying book Cosmographiae Introductio:
(from Americus the discoverer ...
as if it were the land of Americus, thus America).
For Waldseemüller, no one should object to the naming of the land after its discoverer.
He used the Latinized version of Vespucci's name (Americus Vespucius), but in its feminine form "America", following the examples of "Europa", "Asia" and "Africa".
Later, other mapmakers extended the name America to the northern continent, In 1538, Gerard Mercator used America on his map of the world for all the Western Hemisphere.
Some argue that because the convention is to use the surname for naming discoveries (except in the case of royalty), the derivation from "Amerigo Vespucci" could be put in question.
In 1874, Thomas Belt proposed a derivation from the Amerrique mountains of Central America; the next year, Jules Marcou suggested that the name of the mountain range stemmed from indigenous American languages.
Marcou corresponded with Augustus Le Plongeon, who wrote: "The name AMERICA or AMERRIQUE in the Mayan language means, a country of perpetually strong wind, or the Land of the Wind, and ...
the suffixes can mean ... a spirit that breathes, life itself."
"Northern America", as a term distinct from "North America", excludes Central America, which itself may or may not include Mexico (see ).
In the limited context of the North American Free Trade Agreement, the term covers Canada, the United States, and Mexico, which are the three signatories of that treaty.
France, Italy, Portugal, Spain, Romania, Greece, and the countries of Latin America use a six-continent model, with the Americas viewed as a single continent and North America designating a subcontinent comprising Canada, the United States, and Mexico, and often Greenland, Saint Pierre et Miquelon, and Bermuda.
North America has been historically referred to by other names.
Spanish North America (New Spain) was often referred to as Northern America, and this was the first official name given to Mexico.
Regions
Geographically the North American continent has many regions and subregions.
These include cultural, economic, and geographic regions.
Economic regions included those formed by trade blocs, such as the North American Trade Agreement bloc and Central American Trade Agreement.
Linguistically and culturally, the continent could be divided into Anglo-America and Latin America.
Anglo-America includes most of Northern America, Belize, and Caribbean islands with English-speaking populations (though sub-national entities, such as Louisiana and Quebec, have large Francophone populations; in Quebec, French is the sole official language).
The southern North American continent is composed of two regions.
These are Central America and the Caribbean.
The north of the continent maintains recognized regions as well.
In contrast to the common definition of "North America", which encompasses the whole continent, the term "North America" is sometimes used to refer only to Mexico, Canada, the United States, and Greenland.
The term Northern America refers to the northern-most countries and territories of North America: the United States, Bermuda, St. Pierre and Miquelon, Canada and Greenland.
Although the term does not refer to a unified region, Middle America-not to be confused with the Midwestern United States-groups the regions of Mexico, Central America, and the Caribbean.
The largest countries of the continent, Canada and the United States, also contain well-defined and recognized regions.
In the case of Canada these are (from east to west)
Atlantic Canada, Central Canada, Canadian Prairies, the British Columbia Coast, and Northern Canada.
These regions also contain many subregions.
In the case of the United States - and in accordance with the US Census Bureau definitions - these regions are: New England, Mid-Atlantic, South Atlantic States, East North Central States, West North Central States, East South Central States, West South Central States, Mountain States, and Pacific States.
Regions shared between both nations included the Great Lakes Region.
Megalopolises have formed between both nations in the case of the Pacific Northwest and the Great Lakes Megaregion.
Countries, territories, and dependencies
Economically, Canada and the United States are the wealthiest and most developed nations in the continent, followed by Mexico, a newly industrialized country.
Additionally, despite Greenland's vast resources in oil and minerals, much of them remain untapped, and the island is economically dependent on fishing, tourism, and subsidies from Denmark.
Nevertheless, the island is highly developed.
Demographically, North America is ethnically diverse.
Its three main groups are Caucasians, Mestizos and Blacks.
There is a significant minority of Indigenous Americans and Asians among other less numerous groups.
Languages
The dominant languages in North America are English, Spanish, and French.
Danish is prevalent in Greenland alongside Greenlandic, and Dutch is spoken side by side local languages in the Dutch Caribbean.
The term Anglo-America is used to refer to the anglophone countries of the Americas: namely Canada (where English and French are co-official) and the United States, but also sometimes Belize and parts of the tropics, especially the Commonwealth Caribbean.
Latin America refers to the other areas of the Americas (generally south of the United States) where the Romance languages, derived from Latin, of Spanish and Portuguese (but French speaking countries are not usually included) predominate: the other republics of Central America (but not always Belize), part of the Caribbean (not the Dutch-, English-, or French-speaking areas), Mexico, and most of South America (except Guyana, Suriname, French Guiana (France), and the Falkland Islands (UK)).
The French language has historically played a significant role in North America and now retains a distinctive presence in some regions.
Canada is officially bilingual.
French is the official language of the Province of Quebec, where 95% of the people speak it as either their first or second language, and it is co-official with English in the Province of New Brunswick.
Other French-speaking locales include the Province of Ontario (the official language is English, but there are an estimated 600,000 Franco-Ontarians), the Province of Manitoba (co-official as de jure with English), the French West Indies and Saint-Pierre et Miquelon, as well as the US state of Louisiana, where French is also an official language.
Haiti is included with this group based on historical association but Haitians speak both Creole and French.
Similarly, French and French Antillean Creole is spoken in Saint Lucia and the Commonwealth of Dominica alongside English.
Religions
Christianity is the largest religion in the United States, Canada and Mexico.
According to a 2012 Pew Research Center survey, 77% of the population considered themselves .
A 2015 study estimates about 493,000 Christian believers from a Muslim background in North America, most of them belonging to some form of Protestantism.
According to the same study religiously unaffiliated (include agnostic and atheist) make up about 17% of the population of Canada and the United States.
No religion make up about 24% of the United States population, and 24% of Canada total population.
Canada, the United States and Mexico host communities of both Jews (6 million or about 1.8%), Buddhists (3.8 million or 1.1%) and Muslims (3.4 million or 1.0%).
The biggest number of Jewish individuals can be found in the United States (5.4 million), Canada (375,000) and Mexico (67,476).
The United States host the largest Muslim population in North America with 2.7 million or 0.9%, While Canada host about one million Muslim or 3.2% of the population.
While in Mexico there were 3,700 Muslims in the country.
In 2012, U-T San Diego estimated U.S. practitioners of Buddhism at 1.2 million people, of whom 40% are living in Southern California.
The predominant religion in Central America is Christianity (96%).
Beginning with the Spanish colonization of Central America in the 16th century, Roman Catholicism became the most popular religion in the region until the first half of the 20th century.
Since the 1960s, there has been an increase in other Christian groups, particularly Protestantism, as well as other religious organizations, and individuals identifying themselves as having no religion.
Also Christianity is the predominant religion in the Caribbean (85%).
Canada is the third most populous country with 37.0 million.
The majority of Caribbean island-nations have national populations under a million, though Cuba, Dominican Republic, Haiti, Puerto Rico (a territory of the United States), Jamaica, and Trinidad and Tobago each have populations higher than a million.
Greenland has a small population of 55,984 for its massive size (2,166,000 km² or 836,300 mi²), and therefore, it has the world's lowest population density at 0.026 pop. mi²).
While the United States, Canada, and Mexico maintain the largest populations, large city populations are not restricted to those nations.
There are also large cities in the Caribbean.
The largest cities in North America, by far, are Mexico City and New York.
These cities are the only cities on the continent to exceed eight million, and two of three in the Americas.
Next in size are Los Angeles, Toronto, Chicago, Havana, Santo Domingo, and Montreal.
Cities in the sunbelt regions of the United States, such as those in Southern California and Houston, Phoenix, Miami, Atlanta, and Las Vegas, are experiencing rapid growth.
These causes included warm temperatures, retirement of Baby Boomers, large industry, and the influx of immigrants.
Cities near the United States border, particularly in Mexico, are also experiencing large amounts of growth.
Most notable is Tijuana, a city bordering San Diego that receives immigrants from all over Latin America and parts of Europe and Asia.
Yet as cities grow in these warmer regions of North America, they are increasingly forced to deal with the major issue of water shortages.
Eight of the top ten metropolitan areas are located in the United States.
These metropolitan areas all have a population of above 5.5 million and include the New York City metropolitan area, Los Angeles metropolitan area, Chicago metropolitan area, and the Dallas-Fort Worth metroplex.
Whilst the majority of the largest metropolitan areas are within the United States, Mexico is host to the largest metropolitan area by population in North America: Greater Mexico City.
Canada also breaks into the top ten largest metropolitan areas with the Toronto metropolitan area having six million people.
The proximity of cities to each other on the Canada-United States border and Mexico-United States border has led to the rise of international metropolitan areas.
These urban agglomerations are observed at their largest and most productive in Detroit-Windsor and San Diego-Tijuana and experience large commercial, economic, and cultural activity.
The metropolitan areas are responsible for millions of dollars of trade dependent on international freight.
In Detroit-Windsor the Border Transportation Partnership study in 2004 concluded US$13 billion was dependent on the Detroit-Windsor international border crossing while in San Diego-Tijuana freight at the Otay Mesa Port of Entry was valued at US$20 billion.
North America has also been witness to the growth of megapolitan areas.
In the United States exists eleven megaregions that transcend international borders and comprise Canadian and Mexican metropolitan regions.
These are the Arizona Sun Corridor, Cascadia, Florida, Front Range, Great Lakes Megaregion, Gulf Coast Megaregion, Northeast, Northern California, Piedmont Atlantic, Southern California, and the Texas Triangle.
Canada and Mexico are also the home of megaregions.
These include the Quebec City - Windsor Corridor, Golden Horseshoe - both of which are considered part of the Great Lakes Megaregion - and megalopolis of Central Mexico.
Traditionally the largest megaregion has been considered the Boston-Washington, DC Corridor, or the Northeast, as the region is one massive contiguous area.
Yet megaregion criterion have allowed the Great Lakes Megalopolis to maintain status as the most populated region, being home to 53,768,125 people in 2000.
The top ten largest North American metropolitan areas by population as of 2013, based on national census numbers from the United States and census estimates from Canada and Mexico.
†2011 Census figures.
Economy
North America's GDP per capita was evaluated in October 2016 by the International Monetary Fund (IMF) to be $41,830, making it the richest continent in the world, In 2016, the U.S. had an estimated per capita gross domestic product (PPP) of $57,466 according to the World Bank, and is the most technologically developed economy of the three.
The United States' services sector comprises 77% of the country's GDP (estimated in 2010), industry comprises 22% and agriculture comprises 1.2%.
Canada shows significant growth in the sectors of services, mining and manufacturing.
Canada's per capita GDP (PPP) was estimated at $44,656 and it had the 11th largest GDP (nominal) in 2014.
Being a newly industrialized country, Mexico maintains both modern and outdated industrial and agricultural facilities and operations.
Its main sources of income are oil, industrial exports, manufactured goods, electronics, heavy industry, automobiles, construction, food, banking and financial services.
The North American economy is well defined and structured in three main economic areas.
These areas are the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA), Caribbean Community and Common Market (CARICOM), and the Central American Common Market (CACM).
Its implementation in 1994 was designed for economic homogenization with hopes of eliminating barriers of trade and foreign investment between Canada, the United States and Mexico.
While Canada and the United States already conducted the largest bilateral trade relationship - and to present day still do - in the world and Canada-United States trade relations already allowed trade without national taxes and tariffs, NAFTA allowed Mexico to experience a similar duty-free trade.
The free trade agreement allowed for the elimination of tariffs that had previously been in place on United States-Mexico trade.
Trade volume has steadily increased annually and in 2010, surface trade between the three NAFTA nations reached an all-time historical increase of 24.3% or US$791 billion.
The NAFTA trade bloc GDP (PPP) is the world's largest with US$17.617 trillion.
This is in part attributed to the fact that the economy of the United States is the world's largest national economy; the country had a nominal GDP of approximately $14.7 trillion in 2010.
The countries of NAFTA are also some of each other's largest trade partners.
The United States is the largest trade partner of Canada and Mexico; while Canada and Mexico are each other's third largest trade partners.
The Caribbean trade bloc - CARICOM - came into agreement in 1973 when it was signed by 15 Caribbean nations.
As of 2000, CARICOM trade volume was US$96 billion.
CARICOM also allowed for the creation of a common passport for associated nations.
In the past decade the trade bloc focused largely on Free Trade Agreements and under the CARICOM Office of Trade Negotiations (OTN) free trade agreements have been signed into effect.
Integration of Central American economies occurred under the signing of the Central American Common Market agreement in 1961; this was the first attempt to engage the nations of this area into stronger financial cooperation.
Recent implementation of the Central American Free Trade Agreement (CAFTA) has left the future of the CACM unclear.
The Central American Free Trade Agreement was signed by five Central American countries, the Dominican Republic, and the United States.
The focal point of CAFTA is to create a free trade area similar to that of NAFTA.
In addition to the United States, Canada also has relations in Central American trade blocs.
Currently under proposal, the Canada - Central American Free Trade Agreement (CA4) would operate much the same as CAFTA with the United States does.
These nations also take part in inter-continental trade blocs.
Mexico takes a part in the G3 Free Trade Agreement with Colombia and Venezuela and has a trade agreement with the EU.
The United States has proposed and maintained trade agreements under the Transatlantic Free Trade Area between itself and the European Union; the US-Middle East Free Trade Area between numerous Middle Eastern nations and itself; and the Trans-Pacific Strategic Economic Partnership between Southeast Asian nations, Australia, and New Zealand.
Transport
The Pan-American Highway route in the Americas is the portion of a network of roads nearly in length which travels through the mainland nations.
No definitive length of the Pan-American Highway exists because the US and Canadian governments have never officially defined any specific routes as being part of the Pan-American Highway, and Mexico officially has many branches connecting to the US border.
However, the total length of the portion from Mexico to the northern extremity of the highway is roughly .
The First Transcontinental Railroad in the United States was built in the 1860s, linking the railroad network of the eastern US with California on the Pacific coast.
Finished on 10 May 1869 at the famous golden spike event at Promontory Summit, Utah, it created a nationwide mechanized transportation network that revolutionized the population and economy of the American West, catalyzing the transition from the wagon trains of previous decades to a modern transportation system.
Although an accomplishment, it achieved the status of first transcontinental railroad by connecting myriad eastern US railroads to the Pacific and was not the largest single railroad system in the world.
The Canadian Grand Trunk Railway (GTR) had, by 1867, already accumulated more than of track by connecting Ontario with the Canadian Atlantic provinces west as far as Port Huron, Michigan, through Sarnia, Ontario.
Communications
A shared telephone system known as the North American Numbering Plan (NANP) is an integrated telephone numbering plan of 24 countries and territories: the United States and its territories, Canada, Bermuda, and 17 Caribbean nations.
Culture
Canada and the United States were both former British colonies.
There is frequent cultural interplay between the United States and English-speaking Canada.
Greenland shares some cultural ties with the indigenous people of Canada but is considered Nordic and has strong Danish ties due to centuries of colonization by Denmark.
Spanish-speaking North America shares a common past as former Spanish colonies.
In Mexico and the Central American countries where civilizations like the Maya developed, indigenous people preserve traditions across modern boundaries.
Central American and Spanish-speaking Caribbean nations have historically had more in common due to geographical proximity.
Northern Mexico, particularly in the cities of Monterrey, Tijuana, Ciudad Juárez, and Mexicali, is strongly influenced by the culture and way of life of the United States.
Of the aforementioned cities, Monterrey has been regarded as the most Americanized city in Mexico.
Immigration to the United States and Canada remains a significant attribute of many nations close to the southern border of the US.
The Anglophone Caribbean states have witnessed the decline of the British Empire and its influence on the region, and its replacement by the economic influence of Northern America in the Anglophone Caribbean.
This is partly due to the relatively small populations of the English-speaking Caribbean countries, and also because many of them now have more people living abroad than those remaining at home.
Northern Mexico, the Western United States and Alberta, Canada share a cowboy culture.
Sports
Canada, Mexico and the US submitted a joint bid to host the 2026 FIFA World Cup.
The following table shows the most prominent sports leagues in North America, in order of average revenue.
Citations
