{{Infobox country
The Republic of Artsakh (; , ), or simply Artsakh, also known by its second official name, the Nagorno-Karabakh Republic (), is a breakaway state in the South Caucasus that is internationally recognized as part of Azerbaijan.
The region is currently populated mostly by Armenians and the primary spoken language is Armenian.
Artsakh controls most of the territory of the former Nagorno-Karabakh Autonomous Oblast and some of the surrounding area, giving it a border with Armenia to the west and Iran to the south.
Its capital is Stepanakert.
The predominantly Armenian-populated region of Nagorno-Karabakh was claimed by both the Azerbaijan Democratic Republic and the First Republic of Armenia when both countries became independent in 1918 after the fall of the Russian Empire, and a brief war over Nagorno-Karabakh broke out in 1920.
The dispute was largely shelved after the Soviet Union established control over the area and created the Nagorno-Karabakh Autonomous Oblast (NKAO) within the Azerbaijan SSR in 1923.
During the fall of the Soviet Union, the region re-emerged as a source of dispute between Armenia and Azerbaijan.
In 1991, a referendum held in the NKAO and the neighbouring Shahumian region resulted in a declaration of independence based on its right of self-determination.
A large-scale ethnic conflict led to the 1991-1994 Nagorno-Karabakh War, which ended with a ceasefire.
Artsakh is a presidential democracy (in the middle of transforming from a semi-presidential one, after the 2017 referendum) with a unicameral legislature.
Some have said that its reliance on Armenia means that, in many ways, it functions de facto as part of Armenia.
In speaking about Armenia in his Geography, the classical historian Strabo refers to an Armenian region which he calls "Orchistene", which again is believed to be a Greek version of the old name of Artsakh.
According to another hypothesis put forth by David M. Lang, the ancient name of Artsakh possibly derives from the name of King Artaxias I of Armenia (190-159 BC), founder of the Artaxiad Dynasty and the kingdom of Greater Armenia.
Folk etymology holds that the name is derived from "Ar" (Aran) and "tsakh" (woods, garden) (i.e., the gardens of Aran Sisakean, the first nakharar of northeastern Armenia).
History
Prehistory
The earliest record of the region covered by modern-day Artsakh is from Urartian inscriptions referring to the region as Urtekhini.
It is unclear if the region was ever ruled by Urartu, but it was in close proximity to other Urartian domains.
It may have been inhabited by Caspian tribes and/or by Scythians.
Antiquity
Kingdom of Armenia
After decades of raids by the Cimmerians, Scythians, and the Medes, Urartu finally collapsed with the rise of the Median Empire, and shortly after, the geopolitical region previously ruled as Urartu re-emerged as Armenia.
By the 5th century BC, Artsakh was part of Armenia under the Orontid Dynasty.
It would continue to be part of the Kingdom of Armenia under the Artaxiad Dynasty, under which Armenia became one of the largest realms in Western Asia.
At its greatest extent, the Great King of Armenia, Tigranes II, built several cities named after himself in regions he considered particularly important, one of which was the city he built in Artsakh.
Persian Empire and the Satrapy of Arran
Following wars with the Romans and Persians, Armenia was partitioned between the two empires.
Artsakh was removed from Persian Armenia and included into the neighbouring satrapy of Arran.
At this time, the population of Artsakh consisted of Armenians and Armenicized aborigines, though many of the latter were still cited as distinct ethnic entities.
The dialect of Armenian spoken in Artsakh was among the earliest ever recorded dialects of Armenian, which was described around this time in the 7th century AD by a contemporary named Stephanos Siunetzi.
Middle Ages
Muslim Conquest
Artsakh would remain part of Arran throughout Persian rule, during the fall of Iran to the Muslims, and following the Muslim conquest of Armenia.
Under the Arabs, most of the South Caucasus and the Armenian Highlands, including Iberia and Arran, would be unified into an emirate called Arminiya, under which Artsakh would continue to remain as part of Arran.
Despite being under Persian and Arab rule, many of the Armenian territories, including Artsakh, were governed by Armenian nobility.
Arran would gradually disappear as a geopolitical entity, and its population would be assimilated by neighbouring ethnic groups with whom they shared a common culture and religion.
Many Christians from Arran would form part of the ethnic composition of the Armenians living in modern-day Artsakh.
Bagratid Kingdom of Armenia and the Kingdom of Artsakh
Fragmentation of Arab authority provided the opportunity for the resurgence of an Armenian state in the Armenian Highlands.
One particular noble dynasty, the Bagratids, began annexing territories from other Armenian nobles, which, in the later half of the 9th century gave rise to a new Armenian kingdom which included Artsakh.
The new Kingdom wouldn't stay united for long, however, due to internal conflicts, civil wars, and external pressures, Armenia would often find itself fragmented between other noble Armenian houses, most notably the Mamikonian and Siunia families, the latter of which would produce a cadet branch known as the House of Khachen, named after their stronghold in Artsakh.
The House of Khachen ruled the Kingdom of Artsakh in the 11th century as an independent kingdom under the protectorate of the Bagratid Kingdom of Armenia.
Under the House of Khachen, the region historically called Artsakh would become synonymous with the name "Khachen".
Turko-Mongol rule, the Principality of Khachen, and the Melikdoms of Karabakh
Following wars with the Byzantine Empire, and with the arrival of Seljuk Turks in the later half of the 11th century, the Kingdom of Armenia collapsed, and Artsakh became the autonomous Principality of Khachen, ruled by the House of Hasan-Jalalyan, within the Kingdom of Georgia for a short time until the Mongols would acquire the region.
Although the Armenians of Artsakh would not rule the lands as fully sovereign entities, the mountainous geography of the location would allow them to maintain a semi-independent or autonomous status within other realms, such as the Timurid, Kara Koyunlu, and Ak Koyunlu realms.
During this time, the lands to the west of the Kura river up to the eastern slopes of the Zangezur mountain range would become known as Karabakh, with the lands of the Principality of Khachen corresponding to the highlands.
During the period of Mongol domination, a great number of Armenians left the lowlands of Karabakh and sought refuge in the mountainous heights of the region.
The Principality of Khachen was eventually divided amongst five Armenian princes, known as meliks, who collectively became known as the Five Melikdoms of Karabakh (literally "five principalities of Karabakh"; also referred to as Khamsa, meaning "five" in Arabic).
Early modern era
In the 16th century, Karabakh came under Iranian rule for the first time in almost a millennium with the rise of the Safavid Empire, within which the territory of modern-day Artsakh became part of the Province of Karabakh.
The Armenian princes continued to rule autonomously over the highlands of Karabakh during this time.
In the mid-18th century, the whole of Karabakh became a semi-independent khanate called the Karabakh Khanate which lasted for about 75 years.
The Russian Empire advanced into the region in 1805, declared Artsakh a Russian protectorate and formally annexed it from Iran in 1813 according to the Gülistan/Northern Karabakh Treaty.
The Armenian princes lost their status as princes (meliks) in 1822.
Late modern era
War in Transcaucasia
Following the collapse of the Russian Empire during World War I, Transcaucasia became the stage of wars between every political entity that emerged in the region (Armenia, Azerbaijan, and Georgia) and their neighbors (Ottoman Empire).
The newly formed Republic of Armenia (declared on 28 May 1918) claimed most of the highlands of Karabakh, which was also claimed by the newly formed Azerbaijan Democratic Republic.
Assistance from the Republic of Armenia to Karabakh was limited as it found itself fighting enemies on all fronts, but the Armenian irregulars in Zangezur and the territories formerly known as Khachen managed to maintain their control over the lands, consistently fighting off offensives from Azerbaijan and quelling Muslim uprisings from within.
Azerbaijan maintained control of the lowlands of Karabakh and some regions between Zangezur and Artsakh.
Following the collapse of the Ottoman Empire, the British Empire established itself in Azerbaijan, and advocated that all of Karabakh should be part of Azerbaijan until the boundaries can be decided upon peacefully at the upcoming Paris Peace Conference of 1919, but the battles did not cease until the Red Army from Russia began reclaiming the former territories of the Russian Empire and created Soviet Azerbaijan out of the Azerbaijan Democratic Republic in 1920.
The Armenians of Zangezur and Artsakh had consistently maintained control of the region and intended to unite with Armenia during the entirety of the two years of chaos, with Azerbaijan only temporarily occupying parts of the regions at certain times.
The fall of Azerbaijan gave Armenia the opportunity to properly unite with the Armenian irregulars in Zangezur and Artsakh, but they were taken by the Red Army on 26 May 1920.
The rest of Armenia fell to the Red Army shortly after.
Soviet Union
The Bolsheviks tried to end the centuries-long rivalry between Russia and Turkey, and in 1921, Joseph Stalin formally transferred the Armenian-populated highlands of Karabakh to Soviet Azerbaijan to try to placate Turkey, though the majority of Zangezur remained within Soviet Armenia.
In December 1920 under Soviet pressure central authorities issued a statement that Karabakh, Zangezur and Nakhjivan were all transferred to Armenian control.
Stalin (then commissar for nationalities) made the decision public on December 2, but the Azerbaijani leader Narimanov later denied the transfer.
Under these circumstances, Soviet Armenia and Soviet Azerbaijan were admitted to the Soviet Union on 20 December 1922.
The inclusion of Artsakh within Soviet Azerbaijan caused an uproar amongst Armenians, which led to the creation of the Nagorno-Karabakh Autonomous Oblast within Soviet Azerbaijan on 7 July 1923 (implemented in November 1924).
Although the Armenians in Nagorno-Karabakh continued to desire reunification with Armenia, the conflict was largely dormant during the Soviet era.
Nagorno-Karabakh War
During the dissolution of the Soviet Union, the Nagorno-Karabakh conflict was revitalized.
The Armenians of Nagorno-Karabakh declared their independence as the Republic of Mountainous Karabakh with the intention of reunifying with the newly independent Armenia.
The declaration was rejected by the newly independent Azerbaijan, leading to the Nagorno-Karabakh War from 20 February 1988 to 12 May 1994, resulting in ceasefire in May 1994 and the de facto independence of the Republic of Artsakh, whose territory remains internationally recognized as part of the Republic of Azerbaijan.
Government and politics
Artsakh is a presidential democracy (in the middle of transforming from a semi-presidential one, after the 2017 referendum).
The Prime Minister's post was abolished and the executive power is now residing with the President who is both the head of state and head of government.
The president is directly elected for a maximum of two-consecutive five-year terms.
On 19 July 2012, Sahakyan was re-elected for a second term.
He was again re-elected to a third term on 19 July 2017.
The National Assembly is a unicameral legislature.
It has 33 members who are elected for 5-year terms.
Elections take place within a multi-party system; in 2009, the American NGO Freedom House ranked the Republic of Artsakh above the republics of Armenia and Azerbaijan with respect to civil and political rights.
Five parties have members in the parliament: the Free Motherland party has 15 members, ARF has 8 members, Democratic Party of Artsakh has 7 members, Movement 88 has 2 members and the National Revival party has one member.
A number of non-partisan candidates have also taken part in the elections, with some success; in 2015, two of the 33 members to the National Assembly took their seats without running under the banner of any of the established political parties in the republic.
Elections in Artsakh are not recognised by international bodies such as the European Union and the Organisation of Islamic Cooperation, as well as numerous individual countries, who called them a source of increased tensions.
Artsakh is heavily dependent on Armenia, and in many ways de facto functions and is administered as part of Armenia.
However, Armenia is hesitant to officially recognise Artsakh.
Constitution
On 3 November 2006, the then-President of the Nagorno-Karabakh Republic, Arkadi Ghukasyan, signed a decree to hold a referendum on a draft Nagorno-Karabakh constitution.
It was held on 10 December of the same year and voters overwhelmingly approved the new constitution.
According to official preliminary results, with a turnout of 87.2%, as many as 98.6 percent of voters approved the constitution.
However, the vote was criticised harshly by inter-governmental organisations such as the European Union, OSCE and GUAM, which rejected the referendum, deeming it illegitimate.
The EU announced it was "aware that a 'constitutional referendum' has taken place," but emphasised its stance that only a negotiated settlement between Azerbaijan and ethnic Armenians could bring a lasting solution.
Secretary General of the Council of Europe Terry Davis asserted that the poll "will not be recognized... and is therefore of no consequence".
Another referendum was held on 20 February 2017, with an 87.6% vote in favour on a 76% turnout for instituting a new constitution.
This constitution among other changes turned the government from a semi-presidential to a fully presidential model, and changed the official name from the "Republic of Nagorno-Karabakh" to the "Republic of Artsakh"/"Artsakh Republic".
Foreign relations
The Ministry of Foreign Affairs is based in Stepanakert.
Since no UN member or observer currently recognizes Artsakh, none of its foreign relations are of an official diplomatic nature.
However, the Republic of Artsakh operates five permanent Missions and one Bureau of Social-Politic Information in France.
Artsakh's Permanent Missions exist in Armenia, Australia, France, Germany, Russia, the United States, and one for Middle East countries based in Beirut.
The goals of the offices are to present the Republic's positions on various issues, to provide information and to facilitate the peace process.
In his 2015 speech, the President of Armenia Serzh Sargsyan stated that he considered Nagorno-Karabakh "an inseparable part of Armenia".
The Republic of Artsakh is neither a member or observer of the UN or any of its specialized agencies.
However, it is a member of the Community for Democracy and Rights of Nations, commonly known as the "Commonwealth of Unrecognized States", and is recognized by Transnistria, Abkhazia and South Ossetia.
Military
According to the Constitution of Artsakh the army is under the civilian command of the government.
The Artsakh Defense Army was officially established on 9 May 1992 as a defense against Azerbaijan.
It fought the Azerbaijani army to a ceasefire on 12 May 1994.
Currently the Artsakh Defense Army consists of around 18,000-20,000 officers and soldiers.
However, only 8,500 citizens from Artsakh serve in the Artsakh army; some 10,000 come from Armenia.
There are also 177-316 tanks, 256-324 additional fighting vehicles, and 291-322 guns and mortars.
Armenia supplies arms and other military necessities to Artsakh.
Several battalions of Armenia's army are deployed directly in the Artsakh zone on occupied Azerbaijani territory.
The Artsakh Defense Army fought in Shusha in 1992, opening the Lachin corridor between Armenia and Nagorno-Karabakh (1992), and staged the defense of the Martakert front from 1992-1994.
Land mines
The region of Nagorno-Karabakh is considered to be one of the most heavily mined regions of the former Soviet Union.
Mines were laid from 1991 to 1994 by both conflicting parties in the Nagorno-Karabakh War.
The United Nations and the U.S. have estimated the number of mines in Nagorno-Karabakh at 100,000.
There have been many civilian casualties resulting from the land mines.
The United Nations Development Program (UNDP) claims that 123 people have been killed and over 300 injured by landmines near the disputed enclave of Nagorno-Karabakh since a 1994 truce ended a six-year conflict between ethnic Armenian and Azerbaijani forces.
The HALO Trust - UK based demining NGO, is the only other organisation conducting demining in Nagorno Karabakh.
Current situation
Artsakh status process
Today, Artsakh is a de facto independent state, calling itself the Republic of Artsakh.
It has close relations with the Republic of Armenia and uses the same currency, the dram.
According to Human Rights Watch, "from the beginning of the Karabakh conflict, Armenia provided aid, weapons, and volunteers.
Armenian involvement in Artsakh escalated after a December 1993 Azerbaijani offensive.
The Republic of Armenia began sending conscripts and regular Army and Interior Ministry troops to fight in Artsakh."
The politics of Armenia and the de facto Artsakh are so intertwined that Robert Kocharyan served as the first President of the Nagorno-Karabakh Republic, from 1994-1997, then as prime minister of Armenia from 1997 to 1998, and then as the second President of Armenia, from 1998 to 2008.
However, Armenian governments have repeatedly resisted internal pressure to unite the two, due to ongoing negotiations under the auspices of the OSCE Minsk Group.
In his case study of Eurasia, Dov Lynch of the Institute for Security Studies of WEU believes that "Karabakh's independence allows the new Armenian state to avoid the international stigma of aggression, despite the fact that Armenian troops fought in the war between 1991-94 and continue to man the Line of Contact between Karabakh and Azerbaijan."
Lynch also cites that the "strength of the Armenian armed forces, and Armenia's strategic alliance with Russia, are seen as key shields protecting the Karabakh state by the authorities in , Internationale Politik, Volume 8, 2007 "...and Nagorno-Karabakh, the disputed territory that is now de facto part of Armenia..."
At present, the mediation process is at a standstill, with the most recent discussions in Rambouillet, France, yielding no agreement.
Azerbaijan has officially requested Armenian troops to withdraw from all disputed areas of Azerbaijan outside Nagorno-Karabakh, and that all displaced persons be allowed to return to their homes before the status of Karabakh can be discussed.
Armenia does not recognise Azerbaijani claims to Nagorno-Karabakh, and believes the territory should have self-determination.
Both the Armenian and Artsakhi governments note that the independence of Artsakh was declared around the time the Soviet Union dissolved and its members became independent.
The Armenian government insists that the government of Artsakh be part of any discussions on the region's future, and rejects ceding occupied territory or allowing refugees to return before talks on the region's status.
Representatives of Armenia, Azerbaijan, France, Russia and the United States met in Paris and in Key West, Florida, in early 2001.
Despite rumours that the parties were close to a solution, the Azerbaijani authorities - both during Heydar Aliyev's period of office, and after the accession of his son Ilham Aliyev in the October 2003 elections - have firmly denied that any agreement was reached in Paris or Key West.
Further talks between the Azerbaijani and Armenian presidents, Ilham Aliyev and Robert Kocharyan, were held in September 2004 in Astana, Kazakhstan, on the sidelines of the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) summit.
Reportedly, one of the suggestions put forward was the withdrawal of the occupying forces from the Azeri territories adjacent to Artsakh and then holding referendums (plebiscites) in Artsakh and Azerbaijan proper regarding the future status of the region.
On 10 and 11 February 2006, Kocharyan and Aliyev met in Rambouillet, France, to discuss the fundamental principles of a settlement to the conflict.
Contrary to the initial optimism, the Rambouillet talks did not produce any agreement, with key issues such as the status of Artsakh and whether Armenian troops would withdraw from Kalbajar still being contentious.
Talks were held at the Polish embassy in Bucharest in June 2006.
Again, American, Russian, and French diplomats attended the talks that lasted over 40 minutes.
Earlier, Armenian President Kocharyan announced that he was ready to "continue dialogue with Azerbaijan for the settlement of the Nagorno-Karabakh conflict and with Turkey on establishing relations without any preconditions".
According to Armenian foreign minister, Vardan Oskanyan, no progress was made at this latest meeting.
Both presidents failed to reach a consensus on the issues from the earlier Rambouillet conference.
He noted that the Kocharyan-Aliyev meeting was held in a normal atmosphere.
"Nevertheless," he added, "the foreign ministers of the two countries are commissioned to continue talks over settlement of the Nagorno-Karabakh conflict and try to find common points before the next meeting of the presidents."
The major disagreement between both sides at the Bucharest conference was the status of Artsakh.
Azerbaijan's preferred solution would be to give Artsakh the "highest status of autonomy adopted in the world".
Armenia, on the other hand, endorsed a popular vote by the inhabitants of Artsakh to decide their future, a position that was also taken by the international mediators.
On 27 June, the Armenian foreign minister said both parties agreed to allow the residents of Artsakh to vote regarding the future status of the region.
The Azerbaijani Ministry of Foreign Affairs officially refuted that statement.
According to Azeri opposition leader Isa Gambar, however, Azerbaijan did indeed agree to the referendum.
Still, nothing official has confirmed this yet.
The ongoing "Prague Process" overseen by the OSCE Minsk Group was brought into sharp relief in the summer of 2006 with a series of rare public revelations seemingly designed to jump-start the stalled negotiations.
After the release in June of a paper outlining its position, which had until then been carefully guarded, U.S. State Department official Matthew Bryza told Radio Free Europe that the Minsk Group favored a referendum in Karabakh that would determine its final status.
The referendum, in the view of the OSCE, should take place not in Azerbaijan as a whole, but in Artsakh only.
This was a blow to Azerbaijan, and despite talk that their government might eventually seek a more sympathetic forum for future negotiations, this has not yet happened.
On 10 December 2007 Azerbaijan's deputy foreign minister said Azerbaijan would be prepared to conduct anti-terrorist operations in Nagorno-Karabakh against alleged bases of the Kurdistan Workers' Party (PKK).
Armenian Foreign Ministry Spokesperson Vladimir Karapetian previously rejected the allegations as "fabricated" and suggested the accusations of the PKK presence were a form of provocation.
In 2008, Azerbaijani president Ilham Aliyev stated that "Nagorno-Karabakh will never be independent; the position is backed by international mediators as well; Armenia has to accept the reality" and that "in 1918, Yerevan was granted to the Armenians.
It was a great mistake.
The khanate of Iravan was the Azeri territory, the Armenians were guests here".
On the other hand, in 2009, the president of the Nagorno-Karabakh Republic Bako Sahakyan declared that "Artsakh will never be a part of Azerbaijan.
Artsakh security should never be an article of commerce either.
As to other issues, we are ready to discuss them with Azerbaijan.".
On 14 March 2008, the United Nations General Assembly passed a non-binding resolution by a vote of 39 to 7, with 100 abstentions, reaffirming Azerbaijan's territorial integrity, expressing support for that country's internationally recognised borders and demanding the immediate withdrawal of all Armenian forces from all occupied territories there.
The resolution was supported mainly by members of the Organisation of Islamic Cooperation (OIC) and GUAM, Azerbaijan is a member in both groups, as well as other nations facing breakaway regions.
The resolution was opposed by all three members of the OSCE Minsk Group.
On 20 May 2010, the European Parliament adopted a resolution "on the need for an EU strategy for the South Caucasus", which states that EU must pursue a strategy to promote stability, prosperity and conflict resolution in the South Caucasus.
The resolution "calls on the parties to intensify their peace talk efforts for the purpose of a settlement in the coming months, to show a more constructive attitude and to abandon preferences to perpetuate the status quo created by force and with no international legitimacy, creating in this way instability and prolonging the suffering of the war-affected populations; condemns the idea of a military solution and the heavy consequences of military force already used, and calls on both parties to avoid any further breaches of the 1994 ceasefire".
The resolution also calls for withdrawal of Armenian forces from all occupied territories of Azerbaijan, accompanied by deployment of international forces to be organised with respect of the UN Charter in order to provide the necessary security guarantees in a period of transition, which will ensure the security of the population of Artsakh and allow the displaced persons to return to their homes and further conflicts caused by homelessness to be prevented; and states that the EU believes that the position according to which Artsakh includes all occupied Azerbaijani lands surrounding Artsakh should rapidly be abandoned.
It also notes "that an interim status for Nagorno-Karabakh could offer a solution until the final status is determined and that it could create a transitional framework for peaceful coexistence and cooperation of Armenian and Azerbaijani populations in the region."
On 26 June 2010, the presidents of the OSCE Minsk Group's Co-Chair countries, France, Russia, and United States made a joint statement, reaffirming their "commitment to support the leaders of Armenia and Azerbaijan as they finalize the Basic Principles for the peaceful settlement of the Nagorno-Karabakh conflict".
After Armenia established diplomatic relations with Tuvalu in March 2012, it was speculated in the press that Armenia was attempting to persuade the small island nation to be the first state to recognise Artsakh's independence.
Tuvalu recognised two other disputed states in the Caucasus, Abkhazia and South Ossetia, the previous year.
During his August 2019 visit to Stepanakert, the Prime Minister of Armenia Nikol Pashinyan presented the strategic development goals set for Armenia for the next three decades.
He added that he made no special provision for Nagorno-Karabakh because "Artsakh is Armenia and there is no alternative".
Soon afterwards, Armenia's Foreign Minister Zohrab Mnatsakanyan commented on Pashinyan's statement by saying he had "nothing to add" to Pashinyan's formulation of Armenia's position in the conflict.
Recognition process
No UN member states have recognised Artsakh, although some other unrecognised states have done so.
Various sub-national administrations in the United States of America have issued calls for recognition of Artsakh by their national government.
* In May 2012, the Rhode Island House of Representatives in the United States passed a resolution calling on President Barack Obama and the U.S. Congress to recognise the Republic of Artsakh.
The resolution, adopted by the state's House of Representatives, encourages Artsakh's "efforts to develop as a free and independent nation".
* In August 2012, the Massachusetts House of Representatives passed a resolution calling on President Barack Obama and the U.S. Congress to recognise the Republic of Artsakh.
* On 24 October 2012, the New South Wales Legislative Council in Australia adopted a resolution recognising the Republic of Artsakh and the right to self-determination of its Armenian people.
The motion acknowledges the 20th anniversary of independence for the Republic of Artsakh, it supports the right to self-determination of its people, and it "calls on the Commonwealth Government of Australia to officially recognise the independence of the Republic of Artsakh and strengthen Australia's relationship with the Artsakh and its citizens".
* In April 2013, the Maine House of Representatives in the United States passed a resolution accepting Artsakh's independence and urging President Barack Obama to also accept Artsakh's independence.
* In April 2013, Fresno County in California recognised Nagorno-Karabakh.
* In May 2013, the Louisiana State Senate in the United States passed a resolution accepting Artsakh's independence and expressed support for the Artsakh Republic's efforts to develop as a free and independent nation.
* In November 2013, Highland, California, recognised Artsakh and was twinned with Berdzor.
* In May 2014, the California State Assembly passed a measure recognizing Artsakh's independence with a 70-1 vote.
The measure also calls for President Barack Obama and the U.S. Congress to recognise Artsakh Republic.
* In May 2014, the Louisiana State Senate adopted a resolution saluting the Artsakh Republic's independence and urging the U.S. President and Congress to "Support Self-Determination and Democratic Independence of the Artsakh Republic".
* On 27 August 2014, the California State Senate voted unanimously (23-0) to pass Assembly Joint Resolution 32, recognising the Republic of Nagorno Karabakh as a sovereign state.
The resolution encourages Artsakh's efforts to develop as a free and independent nation and formally calls upon the President and Congress of the United States to support the self-determination and democratic independence of the Artsakh Republic.
* On 3 March 2016, Georgia became the sixth state of the U.S. to recognize the independence of Artsakh.
* On 30 March 2016, Hawaii unanimously became the seventh state recognize Artsakh.
The Hawaii House of Representatives placed bill H.R. 167 into effect despite pressure from Azerbaijani diplomats and Washington D.C.
* On 30 March 2016, the US Embassy in Azerbaijan issued a declaration that US foreign state policy is determined at a federal government level, and that the United States does not recognize the Artsakh Republic.
This statement was delivered shortly after Azerbaijan's president, president Ilham Aliyev, arrived in Washington D.C. for bilateral discussions.
* On 5 May 2016 the Government of Armenia approved the bill on recognition of the independence of the Republic of Artsakh.
It was announced, that the recognition of the independence of the Artsakh Republic is "due to the results of discussions between Armenia and Artsakh, and considering further developments, including external factors".
* On 28 September 2017 Michigan became the 8th U.S. state to recognize the independent Republic of Artsakh (Nagorno-Karabagh).
The bipartisan measure calls upon the U.S. to establish economic and cultural ties with the Artsakh Republic and support peace and stability across the South Caucasus.
Displaced people
The Nagorno-Karabakh conflict has resulted in the displacement of 597,000 Azerbaijanis (this figure includes 230,000 children born to internally displaced persons (IDPs) and 54,000 who have returned
The government required IDPs to register their place of residence in an attempt to better target the limited and largely inadequate national and international assistance due to the Armenian advocated and US imposed restrictions on humanitarian aid to Azerbaijan.
Many IDPs were from rural areas and found it difficult to integrate into the urban labor market.
Many international humanitarian agencies reduced or ceased assistance for IDPs citing increasing oil revenues of the country.
The infant mortality among displaced Azerbaijani children is 3-4 times higher than in the rest of the population.
The rate of stillbirth was 88.2 per 1,000 births among the internally displaced people.
The majority of the displaced have lived in difficult conditions for more than 13 years.
280,000 persons-virtually all ethnic Armenians who fled Azerbaijan during the 1988-1993 war over the disputed region of Artsakh-were living in refugee-like circumstances in Armenia.
Geography
The Artsakh Republic is mountainous, a feature which has given it its former name (from the Russian for "Mountainous/Highland Karabakh").
It is in area, bordering Armenia, Azerbaijan, and Iran.
The highest peaks in the country are Mount Mrav at , and Mount Kirs at .
The largest water body is the Sarsang reservoir, and the major rivers are the Terter and Khachen rivers.
The country is on a plateau which slopes downwards towards the east and southeast, with the average altitude being above sea level.
Most rivers in the country flow towards the Artsakh Valley.
The climate is mild and temperate.
The average temperature is , which fluctuates annually between in July and in January.
The average precipitation can reach in some regions, and it is foggy for over 100 days a year.
The Republic of Artsakh claims Shahumian, which was not part of the Nagorno-Karabakh Autonomous Oblast.
Representatives from Shahumian declared independence along with Artsakh, and the proclamation of Artsakh includes the Shahumian region within its borders.
Unlike the rest of Artsakh, Shahumian remains under Azerbaijani control.
Demographics
In 2002, the country's population was 145,000, made up of 95% Armenians and 5% others.
Until 2000, the country's net migration was at a negative.
For the first half of 2007, 1,010 births and 659 deaths were reported, with a net emigration of 27.
According to age group: 15,700 (0-6), 25,200 (7-17) 75,800 (18-59) and 21,000 (60+)
Population by province (2006):
Population of the Republic of Artsakh (2000-2008)
Ethnic composition
Ethnic Groups of the Nagorno-Karabach AO (1926-1989) and the Republic of Artsakh (2015) according to census data
Religion
Most of the Armenian population in Artsakh is Christian and belongs to the Armenian Apostolic Church which is an Oriental Orthodox Church.
Certain Eastern Orthodox and Evangelical denominations also exist.
The Gandzasar monastery ("Գանձասար" in Armenian) is a historical monastery in Artsakh.
Another is Dadivank Monastery () also Khutavank ( - Monastery on the Hill) that was built between the 9th and 13th century.
Artsakhi government's aim is to include the Gandzasar Monastery into the directory of the UNESCO's World Heritage Sites.
Ghazanchetsots Cathedral (built 1868-1888)
(Սուրբ Ամենափրկիչ Ղազանչեցոց Եկեղեցի (Surb Amenap'rkich Ghazanchets'ots' Yekeghets'i) in Armenian), also known as the Cathedral of Christ the Savior and the Shushi Cathedral, is an Armenian church located in Shusha.
It is the main cathedral and headquarters of the Armenian Apostolic Church's "Diocese of Artsakh".
Just uphill from the cathedral in Shushi is the Kanach Zham (Green Church in Armenian) built in 1847.
Amaras Monastery (4th century) was a monastery was established by the foremost Armenian saint, St. Gregory the Enlightener, who baptized Armenia into the world's first Christian state in 301 AD.
Amaras also hosted the first school where St. Mesrop Mashtots, the inventor of the Armenian alphabet, taught the new script to pupils, in the 5th century.
The Amaras Monastery's location is in the Martuni District.
Tzitzernavank Monastery (4th century) is the best preserved example of an Armenian basilica with three naves.
The monastery is in the Qashatagh District.
Saint Yeghishe Arakyal Monastery (5th-13th centuries) commemorating St. Yeghishe, the famous evangelizer of Armenia's eastern lands.
The church serves as a burial ground for the 5th century's King Vachagan II the Pious, the most well-known representative of the Arranshahik line of east Armenian monarchs.
The monastery is located in the Martakert District.
Dadivank Monastery (13th century) is one of the most architecturally and culturally significant Monasteries in Artsakh.
The western façade of Dadivank's Memorial Cathedral bears one of the most extensive Armenian lapidary (inscribed-in-stone) texts, and has one of the largest collection of Medieval Armenian frescoes.
Dadivank is named after St. Dadi, a disciple of Apostle Thaddeus who preached the Holy Gospel in Artsakh in the 1st century.
St. Dadi's tomb was later discovered by archeologists in 2007.
The monastery is in the Shahumian District.
Gtichavank Monastery (13th century) has design features shared with the architectural style of medieval Armenia's capital city of Ani.
The monastery is located in the Hadrut District.
Bri Yeghtze Monastery (13th century) that centers on embedded khachkars, unique-to-Armenia stone memorials with engraved crosses.
The monastery is located in the Martuni District.
Yerits Mankants Monastery (17th century) (meaning "three infants" in Armenian) is known for hosting the seat of Artsakh's rival clergy to that of the Holy See of Gandzasar.
The monastery is located in the Martakert District.
Church of St. Nerses the Great, is located in the city of Martuni.
It is dedicated to the famous Armenian Catholicos, St. Nerses the Great.
Post-war resettlement attempts
Following the ceasefire, the Stepanakert-based administration launched various programs aimed at bringing in permanent Armenian settlers to the depopulated lands, including into regions previously populated by Azeris, with those that bordered Armenia - Lachin and Kalbajar - being the priority.
Incentives in the form of free housing, access to
property, social infrastructure, inexpensive or sometimes free electricity, running water, low taxes or limited tax exemptions were offered to new settlers.
Azerbaijan regards this as a violation of the Fourth Geneva Convention, to which Armenia became party in 1993, whereby "the Occupying Power shall not deport or transfer parts of its own civilian population into the territory it occupies".
The ruling party of Azerbaijan accuses the Armenian side of artificially changing the demographic situation and the ethnic composition of the occupied region so that it can lay future claims to them, comparing this to the 1950s campaign of resettling diaspora Armenians in previously Azeri-populated locales in Soviet Armenia where Azeris were forcibly deported from in 1948-1950.
In 1979, the total Armenian population of the districts of Kalbajar, Lachin, Qubadli, Zangilan, Jabrayil, Fuzuli and Agdam was around 1,400 people.
An OSCE fact-finding mission established at Azerbaijan's request visited these regions in February 2005 with the intention to assess the scale of the settlement attempts.
The mission's findings showed that these districts had as of 2005 an overall population of 14,000 persons, mostly living in precarious social conditions.
It consisted primarily of ethnic Armenians displaced from the non-conflict zones of Azerbaijan during the war.
It was noted, however, that most of them had settled in the conflict zone after having lived in Armenia for several years and some held Armenian passports and even voted in Armenian elections.
A smaller segment of the settlers were originally from the towns of Gyumri and Spitak in Armenia who had lived in temporary shelters following the devastating 1988 earthquake before moving to Karabakh, as well as a small number of natives of Yerevan who moved there for financial reasons.
A field assessment mission revisited the region in October 2010, confirming that there had not been much growth in population or change in the living conditions of the settlers.
The Co-Chairs of the Minsk Group who visited Nagorno-Karabakh, Kalbajar and Lachin in 2014 reported seeing signs of improvements in the infrastructure but could not observe any indications that the size of the population had changed in recent years.
By June 2015, an estimated 17,000 of Syria's once 80,000-strong Armenian population had fled the civil war and sought refuge in Armenia.
David Babayan, spokesperson of the Artsakh leader Bako Sahakyan, confirmed that some of those refugees had been resettled in Artsakh.
The Economist put the number of the resettled families at 30 as of June 2017.
In December 2014, Armenian media cited local municipal authorities in stating that dozens of Syrian Armenian families had been resettled in the disputed zone, in particular in the city of Lachin and the village of Xanlıq in Qubadli.
Azerbaijan's Minister of Foreign Affairs Elmar Mammadyarov expressed his concern over Armenia's attempts to change the demographic situation in the region and informed of his intention to raise this issue with the Minsk Group.
In February 2019, Armenia National Security Service director 's government alleged readiness to cede some of the Armenian-controlled territories as part of a peace settlement.
Vanetsyan pointed out that settling Armenians and investing into infrastructural projects along the Iranian border, in the previously Azeri-populated regions outside of the former autonomous province, was "a clear message" to the international community that there would be no territorial concessions.
He referred to the ongoing settlement efforts as a method of "guaranteeing security".
Azerbaijan's Foreign Ministry reacted by qualifying Vanetsyan's statement as an "attempt to undermine the peace talks and defy the work of the mediators" and vowed to address the issue to the UN and the OSCE.
Economy
The socio-economic situation of the Republic of Artsakh was greatly affected by the conflict.
Yet, foreign investments are beginning to come.
The origin of most venture capital comes from Armenians in Armenia, Russia, United States, France, Australia, Iran, and the Middle East.
Notably the telecommunications sector was developed with Karabakh Telecom investing millions of dollars in mobile telephony, spearheaded by a Lebanese company.
Copper and gold mining has been advancing since 2002 with development and launch of operations at Drmbon deposit.
Approximately 27-28 thousand tons (wet weight) of concentrates are produced with average copper content of 19-21% and gold content of 32-34 g/t. Azerbaijan considers any mining operations in Nagorno-Karabakh illegal and has vowed to engage an international audit company to determine the damages suffered by Azerbaijan's state-run ore management company as a result.
In 2018, the government of Azerbaijan announced that it was planning to appeal to an international court and the law enforcement agencies of the countries where the mining companies involved are registered.
The banking system is administered by Artsakhbank (a Yerevan-based Armenian bank fulfilling the functions of the state bank of Nagorno-Karabakh) and a number of other Armenian banks.
The republic uses the Armenian dram.
Wine growing and processing of agricultural products, particularly wine (i.e., storage of wine, wine stuffs, cognac alcohol) is one of the prioritized directions of the economic development.
Tourism
The republic is developing a tourist industry geared to Armenia and the Armenian diaspora.
The republic has been showing a major increase in tourists over the last several years, which keeps growing because of Artsakh's many cultural sights.
There are currently nine hotels in Stepanakert.
The Artsakh development agency says 4,000 tourists visited Artsakh in 2005.
The figures rose to 8,000 in 2010 (excluding visitors from Armenia).
The agency cooperates with the Armenia Tourism Development Agency (ATDA) as Armenia is the only way tourists (mainly Armenians) can access Artsakh.
The Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Artsakh informs of continuous expansion visitors' geography.
The Tourism Development Agency of Artsakh was established in Yerevan as a non-governmental organisation in the Republic of Armenia to promote tourism further in Artsakh.
It makes preparations for tour operators, travel agencies and journalists covering the region, and arranges for hotel services, shopping, catering, recreation centers.
Tourist attractions include:
Other tourist attractions include:
* The ancient city of Tigranakert, one of four cities that were founded in the 1st century BC in opposite corners of Armenia and named after King Tigran II the Great, ruler of the short-lived Armenian Empire.
Tigranakert, which has been undergoing archaeological excavations since 2005, is located in Mardakert District.
* Fort Mayraberd (10th-18th centuries) served as the primary bulwark against Turko-nomadic incursions from the eastern steppe.
The fort is found to the east of the region's capital city of Stepanakert.
* Govharagha Mosque (18th century), a mosque located in the city of Shushi.
Janapar Trail is a marked trail through mountains, valleys and villages of Artsakh, with monasteries and fortresses along the way.
The trail is broken into day hikes, which will bring tourists to a different village each night.
The paths have existed for centuries, but now are marked specifically for hikers.
The Himnakan Janapar (backbone trail), marked in 2007, leads from the northwest region of Shahumian to the southern town of Hadrut.
Side trails and mini trails take one to additional parts of Artsakh.
The important sites passed along this hike include Dadivank Monastery, Gandzasar monastery, Shushi, the Karkar Canyon with its high cliffs, Zontik Waterfall and the ruins of Hunot and Gtichavank monastery.
One of the noteworthy side trails is the Gtichavank Loop Trail.
This loop starts from Togh Village.
The cost of staying in Artsakh is relatively cheap in comparison with the rest of the region and varies approximately between 25 - US$70 for a single person as of May, 2017.
Azerbaijani government also keeps and publishes online a list of foreign nationals who visited these occupied areas without prior approval.
In late 2017, the list contained 699 names with additional details (date, country, profession, purpose of visit).
The earliest entry recorded a visit to Artsakh that occurred on an unspecified date sometime between 1993-1996.
The list includes many journalists and members of parliaments of foreign countries.
Artsakh Wine Fest
Artsakh Wine Fest is a festival which takes place annually since October 18 of 2014 in Togh village of Hadrout region of the Republic of Artsakh.
The festival is of repetitive nature and is held on the third Saturdays of each September.
History
The festival was initiated by the Department of Tourism and Protection of Historical Places of the Ministry of Culture, Tourism and Youth Affairs of the Republic of Artsakh and is aimed to develop tourism in Artsakh.
It is meant to restore Artsakh winemaking traditions.
The festival provides a platform to the winemakers of Artsakh and Armenia giving them an opportunity to sell their products, exchange experience, promote their wine etc.
The annual festival's program includes grape stomping (a unique and ancient wine ritual), tasting of traditional Artsakh cuisine, exhibition of artworks, exhibition of ancient artefacts that belonged to the Melik Egan's Palace, as well as an exhibition and sale of local wine, where one can find products from 5 different regions of Artsakh and Armenia.
Traditionally, the festival is accompanied by Armenian national singing and dancing.
The festival has evolved into a national holiday, year by year.
Transportation
The transportation system had been damaged by the conflict, but has been noticeably improved during the last several years: the North&ndash;South Artsakh motorway alone has largely facilitated in the development of the transportation system.
The Hadrut-Stepanakert-Askeran-Martakert motorway, the locals say, is the lifeline of Artsakh, and $25 million donated during the Hayastan All-Armenian Foundation telethons was allotted for the construction of the road.
The route from the Armenian capital Yerevan to Stepanakert is estimated to be reduced from the current 8-9 hours drive once major infrastructures are realized.
Stepanakert Airport, the sole civilian airport of the Republic of Artsakh, located about east of the capital, has been closed since the onset of the war in 1990.
However, the government was pressing ahead with plans to reopen the airport , and raised about 1 billion drams ($2.8 million) for its reconstruction from unspecified "charitable sources".
It began building a new airport terminal and repairing the runway in late 2009.
In any case, its unresolved status makes direct air communication with other countries all but impossible according to IATA conventions.
Though originally scheduled to launch the first commercial flights on 9 May 2011, Artsakh officials postponed a new reopening date throughout the whole of 2011.
In May 2012, the director of the Artsakh Civil Aviation Administration, Tigran Gabrielyan, announced that the airport would begin operations in mid-2012.
However the airport still remains closed due to political reasons.
Education
Education in Artsakh is compulsory, and is free up to the age of 18.
The education system is inherited from the old system of the Soviet Union.
Artsakh's school system was severely damaged because of the conflict.
But the government of the Republic of Artsakh with considerable aid from the Republic of Armenia and with donations from the Armenian diaspora, has rebuilt many of the schools.
The republic has around 250 schools of various sizes, with more than 200 lying in the regions.
The student population estimated at more than 20,000 study, with almost half in the capital city of Stepanakert.
Artsakh State University was founded by Artsakh and Armenian governments' joint efforts, with main campus in Stepanakert.
The university opening ceremony took place on 10 May 1992.
Yerevan University of Management also opened a branch in Stepanakert.
Culture
"We Are Our Mountains" () by Sargis Baghdasaryan is a monument located in .
Artsakh State Museum is the historical museum of the Republic of Artsakh.
Located at 4 Sasunstsi David Street, in Stepanakert, the museum offers an assortment of ancient artifacts and Christian manuscripts.
There are also more recent items, ranging in date from the 19th century to World War II and from events of the Karabakh Independence War.
Artsakh has its own brand of popular music.
As Artsakh question became a pan-Armenian question, Artsakh music was further promoted worldwide.
Many nationalist songs, performed by Artsakhi artists, as well as artists from Republic of Armenia and the Armenian diaspora, show support for the Artsakh independence movement; videos for the songs incorporate footage of Artsakhi military campaigns.
These videos are posted to sites such as YouTube, where they often generate conflicting nationalist Armenian and Azerbaijani comments.
Publications
Azat Artsakh is the official newspaper of the Republic of Artsakh.
Sports
Sports in the Republic of Artsakh are organised by the Artsakh Ministry of Culture and Youth.
Due to the non-recognition of Artsakh, sports teams from the country cannot compete in most international tournaments.
Football is the most popular sport in Artsakh.
Stepanakert has a well-built football stadium.
Since the mid-1990s, football teams from Artsakh started taking part in some domestic competitions in the Republic of Armenia.
Lernayin Artsakh FC represents the city of Stepanakert.
In Artsakh, domestic football clubs play in the Artsakh Football League.
The Artsakh football league was launched in 2009.
The Artsakh national football team was formed in 2012 and played their first competitive match against the Abkhazia national football team in Sokhumi, a match that ended with a result of 1-1 draw.
The return match between the unrecognized teams took place at the Stepanakert Stadium, on 21 October 2012, when the team from Artsakh defeated the Abkhazian team 3-0.
There is also interest in other sports, including basketball and volleyball.
Sailing is practiced in the town of Martakert.
Artsakh sports teams and athletes also participate in the Pan-Armenian Games organised in the Republic of Armenia.
Holidays
* Armenian-controlled territories surrounding Nagorno-Karabakh
* Janapar - Multi-section hiking trail going through much of Karabakh
