Katsushika Hokusai (, also ; , ; 31 October 1760 - 10 May 1849) was a Japanese artist, ukiyo-e painter and printmaker of the Edo period.
Born in Edo (now Tokyo), Hokusai is best known as author of the woodblock print series which includes the internationally iconic print, The Great Wave off Kanagawa.
Hokusai created the Thirty-Six Views both as a response to a domestic travel boom and as part of a personal obsession with Mount Fuji.
Early life and artistic training
Hokusai's date of birth is unclear, but is often stated as the 23rd day of the 9th month of the 10th year of the Hōreki era (in the old calendar, or 31 October 1760) to an artisan family, in the Katsushika district of Edo, Japan.
Upon the death of Shunshō in 1793, Hokusai began exploring other styles of art, including European styles he was exposed to through French and Dutch copper engravings he was able to acquire.
In 1811, at the age of 51, Hokusai changed his name to Taito and entered the period in which he created the Hokusai Manga and various etehon, or art manuals.
The first book of Hokusai's manga, sketches or caricatures that influenced the modern form of comics known by the same name, was published in 1814.
Together, his 12 volumes of manga published before 1820 and
three more published posthumously include thousands of drawings of animals, religious figures, and everyday people.
They often have humorous overtones and were very popular at the time.
Although the original was destroyed in 1945, promotional handbills from that time survived and are preserved at the Nagoya City Museum.
Based on studies, a reproduction of the large painting was done at a large public event on 23 November 2017 to commemorate the 200-year anniversary of the painting, using the same size and techniques and material as the original.
In 1820, Hokusai changed his name yet again, this time to "Iitsu," a change which marked the start of a period in which he secured fame as an artist throughout Japan.
His most famous work, Thirty-six Views of Mount Fuji, including the famous Great Wave off Kanagawa, was produced in the early 1830s.
The results of Hokusai's perspectival studies in Manga can be seen here in The Great Wave off Kanagawa where he uses what would have been seen as a western perspective to represent depth and volume.
In the postscript to this work, Hokusai writes:
QTEMPLATE |From the age of six, I had a passion for copying the form of things and since the age of fifty I have published many drawings, yet of all I drew by my seventieth year there is nothing worth taking into account.
At seventy-three years I partly understood the structure of animals, birds, insects and fishes, and the life of grasses and plants.
And so, at eighty-six I shall progress further; at ninety I shall even further penetrate their secret meaning, and by one hundred I shall perhaps truly have reached the level of the marvellous and divine.
When I am one hundred and ten, each dot, each line will possess a life of its own.
In 1839, a fire destroyed Hokusai's studio and much of his work.
By this time, his career was beginning to fade as younger artists such as Andō Hiroshige became increasingly popular.
At the age of 83, Hokusai traveled to Obuse in Shinano Province (now Nagano Prefecture) at the invitation of a wealthy farmer, Takai Kozan where he stayed for several years.
During his time in Obuse, he created several masterpieces, included the Masculine Wave and the Feminine Wave.
Translated literally, the Japanese word shunga means picture of spring or "spring".
Works and influences
Hokusai had a long career, but he produced most of his important work after age 60.
His most popular work is the ukiyo-e series Thirty-six Views of Mount Fuji, which was created between 1826 and 1833.
It actually consists of 46 prints (10 of them added after initial publication).
File:View of lake Suwa.jpg|Lake Suwa in Shinano Province,
from Rare Views of Famous Landscapes
File:Carp leaping up a cascade.jpg|Carp Leaping up a Cascade
File:The Strong Oi Pouring Sake.jpg|The Strong Oi Pouring Sake
File:Katsushika Hokusai - Yoshitsune Falls, from the series Famous Waterfalls in Various Provinces - Google Art Project.jpg|Yoshino Waterfalls, where Yoshitsune Washed his Horse,
from A Tour of Japanese Waterfalls
Influences on art and culture
Hokusai himself was influenced by Sesshū Tōyō and other styles of Chinese painting.
In the 1985 Encyclopaedia Britannica, Richard Lane speculates Hokusai as "since the later 19th century having impressed Western artists, critics and art lovers alike, more, possibly, than any other single Asian artist."
Notes
* Nagata, Seiji (1995).
Hokusai: Genius of the Japanese Ukiyo-e. Tokyo: Kodansha International.
* Ray, Deborah Kogan (2001).
Hokusai: The Man Who Painted a Mountain.
New York: Frances Foster Books. .
* Smith, Henry D. II (1988).
Hokusai: One Hundred Views of Mt. Fuji.
New York: George Braziller, Inc., Publishers. .
* Weston, Mark (1999).
Giants of Japan: The Lives of Japan's Most Influential Men and Women.
New York: Kodansha International. .
Further reading
General biography
* Bowie, Theodore (1964).
The Drawings of Hokusai.
Indiana University Press, Bloomington.
* Forrer, Matthi (1988).
Hokusai Rizzoli, New York. .
* Forrer, Matthi; van Gulik, Willem R., and Kaempfer, Heinz M. (1982).
Hokusai and His School: Paintings, Drawings and Illustrated Books.
Frans Halsmuseum, Haarlem.
* Hillier, Jack (1955).
Hokusai: Paintings, Drawings and Woodcuts.
Phaidon, London.
* Hillier, Jack (1980).
Art of Hokusai in Book Illustration.
Sotheby Publications, London. .
* Lane, Richard (1989).
Hokusai: Life and Work.
E.P. Dutton. .
* van Rappard-Boon, Charlotte (1982).
Hokusai and his School: Japanese Prints c. 1800-1840 .
Rijksmuseum, Amsterdam.
Specific works of art
For readers who want more information on specific works of art by Hokusai, these particular works are recommended.
* Hillier, Jack, and Dickens, F.W. (1960).
Fugaku Hiyaku-kei (One Hundred Views of Fuji by Hokusai).
Frederick, New York.
* Kondo, Ichitaro (1966).
Trans.
Terry, Charles S. The Thirty-six Views of Mount Fuji by Hokusai.
East-West Center, Honolulu.
* Michener, James A. (1958).
The Hokusai Sketch-Books: Selections from the 'Manga.
Charles E. Tuttle, Rutland.
* Morse, Peter (1989).
Hokusai: One Hundred Poets.
George Braziller, New York. .
* Narazaki, Muneshige (1968).
Trans.
Bester, John.
Masterworks of Ukiyo-E: Hokusai - The Thirty-Six Views of Mt. Fuji.
Kodansha, Tokyo.
Art monographs
Monographs dedicated to Hokusai art works:
* Goncourt, Edmond de (2014).
Essential Hokusai.
Bournemouth, Parkstone International. .
* Goncourt, Edmond de (2014).
Hokusai Mega Square.
Bournemouth, Parkstone International. .
