{{Infobox settlement
| name = Manchester
| image_skyline = Manchester_Montage_2017.jpg
| government_footnotes =
| area_magnitude =
Manchester () is a major city and metropolitan borough in Greater Manchester, England, with a population of 545,500 as of 2017 (5th most populous English district).
It lies within the United Kingdom's second-most populous urban area, with a population of 2.7 million, and third-most populous metropolitan area, with a population of 3.3 million.
It is fringed by the Cheshire Plain to the south, the Pennines to the north and east, and an arc of towns with which it forms a continuous conurbation.
The local authority for the city is Manchester City Council.
The recorded history of Manchester began with the civilian settlement associated with the Roman fort of Mamucium or Mancunium, which was established in about AD 79 on a sandstone bluff near the confluence of the rivers Medlock and Irwell.
It is historically a part of Lancashire, although areas of Cheshire south of the River Mersey were incorporated in the 20th century.
The first to be included, Wythenshawe, was added to the city in 1931.
Throughout the Middle Ages Manchester remained a manorial township, but began to expand "at an astonishing rate" around the turn of the 19th century.
Manchester's unplanned urbanisation was brought on by a boom in textile manufacture during the Industrial Revolution, and resulted in it becoming the world's first industrialised city.
Manchester achieved city status in 1853.
The Manchester Ship Canal opened in 1894, creating the Port of Manchester and directly linking the city to the Irish Sea, to the west.
Its fortune declined after the Second World War, owing to deindustrialisation, but the IRA bombing in 1996 led to extensive investment and regeneration.
Following successful redevelopment after the IRA bombing, Manchester was the host city for the 2002 Commonwealth Games.
Manchester is the third most visited city in the UK, after London and Edinburgh.
It is notable for its architecture, culture, musical exports, media links, scientific and engineering output, social impact, sports clubs and transport connections.
A city of notable firsts, Manchester Liverpool Road railway station was the world's first inter-city passenger railway station.
The city has also excelled in scientific advancement, as it was at The University of Manchester in 1917 that scientist Ernest Rutherford first split the atom, in 1948 Frederic C. Williams, Tom Kilburn, and Geoff Tootill developed and built the world's first stored-program computer, and in 2004 Andre Geim and Konstantin Novoselov successfully isolated and characterised the first graphene.
Name
The name Manchester originates from the Latin name Mamucium or its variant Mancunio and the citizens are still referred to as Mancunians ().
These names are generally thought to represent a Latinisation of an original Brittonic name.
The generally accepted etymology of this name is that it comes from Brittonic *mamm- ("breast", in reference to a "breast-like hill").
The suffix -chester is from Old English ceaster ("Roman fortification", itself a loanword from Latin castra, "fort; fortified town").
Their territory extended across the fertile lowland of what is now Salford and Stretford.
Following the Roman conquest of Britain in the 1st century, General Agricola ordered the construction of a fort named Mamucium in the year 79 to ensure that Roman interests in Deva Victrix (Chester) and Eboracum (York) were protected from the Brigantes.
A stabilised fragment of foundations of the final version of the Roman fort is visible in Castlefield.
The Roman habitation of Manchester probably ended around the 3rd century; its civilian settlement appears to have been abandoned by the mid-3rd century, although the fort may have supported a small garrison until the late 3rd or early 4th century.
After the Roman withdrawal and Saxon conquest, the focus of settlement shifted to the confluence of the Irwell and Irk sometime before the arrival of the Normans after 1066.
Much of the wider area was laid waste in the subsequent Harrying of the North.
Thomas de la Warre, lord of the manor, founded and constructed a collegiate church for the parish in 1421.
The church is now Manchester Cathedral; the domestic premises of the college house Chetham's School of Music and Chetham's Library.
The library, which opened in 1653 and is still open to the public today, is the oldest free public reference library in the United Kingdom.
Manchester is mentioned as having a market in 1282.
Around the 14th century, Manchester received an influx of Flemish weavers, sometimes credited as the foundation of the region's textile industry.
Manchester became an important centre for the manufacture and trade of woollens and linen, and by about 1540, had expanded to become, in John Leland's words, "The fairest, best builded, quickest, and most populous town of all Lancashire."
Significant quantities of cotton began to be used after about 1600, firstly in linen/cotton fustians, but by around 1750 pure cotton fabrics were being produced and cotton had overtaken wool in importance.
and later the world's largest marketplace for cotton goods.
Manchester was dubbed "Cottonopolis" and "Warehouse City" during the Victorian era.
The industrial revolution brought about huge change in Manchester and was key to the increase in Manchester's population.
Manchester began expanding "at an astonishing rate" around the turn of the 19th century as people flocked to the city for work from Scotland, Wales, Ireland and other areas of England as part of a process of unplanned urbanisation brought on by the Industrial Revolution.
It developed a wide range of industries, so that by 1835 "Manchester was without challenge the first and greatest industrial city in the world."
The Manchester Ship Canal was built between 1888 and 1894, in some sections by canalisation of the Rivers Irwell and Mersey, running from Salford to Eastham Locks on the tidal Mersey.
This enabled oceangoing ships to sail right into the Port of Manchester.
On the canal's banks, just outside the borough, the world's first industrial estate was created at Trafford Park.
and when Karl Marx visited Manchester, they met at Chetham's Library.
The economics books Marx was reading at the time can be seen in the library, as can the window seat where Marx and Engels would meet.
At that time, it seemed a place in which anything could happen-new industrial processes, new ways of thinking (the Manchester School, promoting free trade and laissez-faire), new classes or groups in society, new religious sects, and new forms of labour organisation.
It attracted educated visitors from all parts of Britain and Europe.
A saying capturing this sense of innovation survives today: "What Manchester does today, the rest of the world does tomorrow."
Manchester's golden age was perhaps the last quarter of the 19th century.
Many of the great public buildings (including Manchester Town Hall) date from then.
The city's cosmopolitan atmosphere contributed to a vibrant culture, which included the Hallé Orchestra.
In 1889, when county councils were created in England, the municipal borough became a county borough with even greater autonomy.
Although the Industrial Revolution brought wealth to the city, it also brought poverty and squalor to a large part of the population.
Historian Simon Schama noted that "Manchester was the very best and the very worst taken to terrifying extremes, a new kind of city in the world; the chimneys of industrial suburbs greeting you with columns of smoke".
An American visitor taken to Manchester's blackspots saw "wretched, defrauded, oppressed, crushed human nature, lying and bleeding fragments".
The number of cotton mills in Manchester itself reached a peak of 108 in 1853.
Manchester Cathedral was among the buildings seriously damaged; its restoration took 20 years.
Post-Second World War
Cotton processing and trading continued to fall in peacetime, and the exchange closed in 1968.
and employed over 3,000 men, but the canal was unable to handle the increasingly large container ships.
Traffic declined, and the port closed in 1982.
Heavy industry suffered a downturn from the 1960s and was greatly reduced under the economic policies followed by Margaret Thatcher's government after 1979.
Manchester lost 150,000 jobs in manufacturing between 1961 and 1983.
The final insurance payout was over £400 million; many affected businesses never recovered from the loss of trade.
Since 2000
Spurred by the investment after the 1996 bomb and aided by the XVII Commonwealth Games, the city centre has undergone extensive regeneration.
New and renovated complexes such as The Printworks and Corn Exchange have become popular shopping, eating and entertainment areas.
Manchester Arndale is the UK's largest city-centre shopping centre.
Large city sections from the 1960s have been demolished, re-developed or modernised with the use of glass and steel.
Old mills have been converted into apartments.
Hulme has undergone extensive regeneration, with million-pound loft-house apartments being developed.
The 47-storey, Beetham Tower was the tallest UK building outside London and the highest residential accommodation in Europe when completed in 2006.
It was surpassed in 2018 by the South Tower of the Deansgate Square project, also in Manchester.
In January 2007, the independent Casino Advisory Panel licensed Manchester to build the UK's only supercasino, but plans were abandoned in February 2008.
On 22 May 2017, an Islamic terrorist carried out a bombing at an Ariana Grande concert in the Manchester Arena.
The bomb killed 23, including the attacker, and injured over 800.
It was the deadliest terrorist attack and first suicide bombing in Britain since the 7 July 2005 London bombings.
It caused worldwide condemnation and changed the UK's threat level to "critical" for the first time since 2007.
Since around the turn of the 21st century, Manchester has been regarded as the second city of the United Kingdom by sections of the international press, British public, and government ministers.
The BBC reports that redevelopment of recent years has heightened claims that Manchester is the second city of the UK.
Manchester and Birmingham traditionally compete as front runners for this unofficial title.
The town of Manchester was granted a charter by Thomas Grelley in 1301, but lost its borough status in a court case of 1359.
Until the 19th century local government was largely in the hands of manorial courts, the last of which was dissolved in 1846.
From a very early time, the township of Manchester lay within the historic or ceremonial county boundaries of Lancashire.
It was this separation that resulted in Salford becoming the judicial seat of Salfordshire, which included the ancient parish of Manchester.
Manchester later formed its own Poor Law Union using the name "Manchester".
Andy Burnham was elected as the first Mayor of Greater Manchester in 2017.
Geography
At , northwest of London, Manchester lies in a bowl-shaped land area bordered to the north and east by the Pennines, an upland chain that runs the length of northern England, and to the south by the Cheshire Plain.
Manchester is north-east of Liverpool and north-west of Sheffield, making the city the halfway point between the two.
The city centre is on the east bank of the River Irwell, near its confluences with the Rivers Medlock and Irk, and is relatively low-lying, being between above sea level.
The River Mersey flows through the south of Manchester.
Much of the inner city, especially in the south, is flat, offering extensive views from many highrise buildings in the city of the foothills and moors of the Pennines, which can often be capped with snow in the winter months.
Manchester's geographic features were highly influential in its early development as the world's first industrial city.
These features are its climate, its proximity to a seaport at Liverpool, the availability of water power from its rivers, and its nearby coal reserves.
The name Manchester, though officially applied only to the metropolitan district within Greater Manchester, has been applied to other, wider divisions of land, particularly across much of the Greater Manchester county and urban area.
The "Manchester City Zone", "Manchester post town" and the "Manchester Congestion Charge" are all examples of this.
For purposes of the Office for National Statistics, Manchester forms the most populous settlement within the Greater Manchester Urban Area, the United Kingdom's third-largest conurbation.
There is a mix of high-density urban and suburban locations.
The largest open space in the city, at around , is Heaton Park.
Manchester is contiguous on all sides with several large settlements, except for a small section along its southern boundary with Cheshire.
The M60 and M56 motorways pass through Northenden and Wythenshawe respectively in the south of Manchester.
Heavy rail lines enter the city from all directions, the principal destination being Manchester Piccadilly station.
Climate
Manchester experiences a temperate Oceanic climate (Köppen: Cfb), like much of the British Isles, with mild summers and cool winters.
Summer daytime temperatures regularly top 20 Celsius, typically reaching 25 Celsius on sunny days throughout July and August in particular.
In more recent years, temperatures have reached over 30 Celsius on occasions.
There is regular but generally light precipitation throughout the year.
The city's average annual rainfall is compared to a UK average of , and its mean rain days are 140.4 per annum, Snowfalls are not common in the city because of the urban warming effect but the West Pennine Moors to the north-west, South Pennines to the north-east and Peak District to the east receive more snow, which can close roads leading out of the city.
They include the A62 via Oldham and Standedge, the A57, Snake Pass, towards Sheffield, and the Pennine section of the M62.
The lowest temperature ever recorded in Manchester was on 7 January 2010.
Green belt
Manchester lies at the centre of a green belt region extending into the wider surrounding counties.
This reduces urban sprawl, prevents towns in the conurbation from further convergence, protects the identity of outlying communities, and preserves nearby countryside.
It is achieved by restricting inappropriate development within the designated areas and imposing stricter conditions on permitted building.
at Clayton Vale, Heaton Park, Chorlton Water Park along with the Chorlton Ees & Ivy Green nature reserve and the floodplain surrounding the River Mersey, as well as the southern area around Manchester Airport.
The green belt was first drawn up in 1961.
Demography
Below are the 10 largest immigrant groups of Manchester in 2011.
Historically the population of Manchester began to increase rapidly during the Victorian era, estimated at 354,930 for Manchester and 110,833 for Salford in 1865, and peaking at 766,311 in 1931.
From then the population began to decrease rapidly, due to slum clearance and the increased building of social housing overspill estates by Manchester City Council after the Second World War such as Hattersley and Langley.
The 2012 mid-year estimate for the population of Manchester was 510,700.
This was an increase of 7,900, or 1.6 per cent, since the 2011 estimate.
Since 2001, the population has grown by 87,900, or 20.8 per cent, making Manchester the third fastest-growing area in the 2011 census.
The city experienced the greatest percentage population growth outside London, with an increase of 19 per cent to over 500,000.
Manchester's population is projected to reach 532,200 by 2021, an increase of 5.8 per cent from 2011.
This represents a slower rate of growth than the previous decade.
Of all households in Manchester, 0.23 per cent were Same-Sex Civil Partnership households, compared with an English national average of 0.16 per cent in 2011.
In terms of ethnic composition, the City of Manchester has the highest non-white proportion of any district in Greater Manchester.
Statistics from the 2011 census showed that 66.7 per cent of the population was White .
4.7 per cent were mixed race (1.8 per cent White and Black Caribbean, 0.9 per cent White and Black African, 1.0 per cent White and Asian, 1.0 per cent other mixed), 17.1 per cent Asian (2.3 per cent Indian, 8.5 per cent Pakistani, 1.3 per cent Bangladeshi, 2.7 per cent Chinese, 2.3 per cent other Asian), 8.6 per cent Black (5.1 per cent African, 1.6 per cent other Black), 1.9 per cent Arab and 1.2 per cent of other ethnic heritage.
Kidd identifies Moss Side, Longsight, Cheetham Hill, Rusholme, as centres of population for ethnic minorities.
There is also a well-established Chinatown in the city with a substantial number of oriental restaurants and Chinese supermarkets.
The area also attracts large numbers of Chinese students to the city who, in attending the local universities, contribute to Manchester having the third-largest Chinese population in Europe.
The Manchester Larger Urban Zone, a Eurostat measure of the functional city-region approximated to local government districts, had a population of 2,539,100 in 2004.
In addition to Manchester itself, the LUZ includes the remainder of the county of Greater Manchester.
The Manchester LUZ is the second largest within the United Kingdom, behind that of London.
Economy
The Office for National Statistics does not produce economic data for the City of Manchester alone, but includes four other metropolitan boroughs, Salford, Stockport, Tameside, Trafford, in an area named Greater Manchester South, which had a GVA of £34.8 billion.
The economy grew relatively strongly between 2002 and 2012, when growth was 2.3 per cent above the national average.
With a GDP of $102.3bn (2015 estimate, PPP) the wider metropolitan economy is the third largest in the United Kingdom.
It is ranked as a beta world city by the Globalization and World Cities Research Network.
As the UK economy continues to recover from its 2008-2010 downturn, Manchester compares favourably according to recent figures.
In 2012 it showed the strongest annual growth in business stock (5 per cent) of all core cities.
The city had a relatively sharp increase in the number of business deaths, the largest increase in all the core cities, but this was offset by strong growth in new businesses, resulting in strong net growth.
Manchester's civic leadership has a reputation for business acumen.
It owns two of the country's four busiest airports and uses its earnings to fund local projects.
Meanwhile, KPMG's competitive alternative report found that in 2012 Manchester had the 9th lowest tax cost of any industrialised city in the world, and fiscal devolution has come earlier to Manchester than to any other British city: it can keep half the extra taxes it gets from transport investment.
According to 2010 Indices of Multiple Deprivation, Manchester is the 4th most deprived local council in England.
Unemployment throughout 2012-2013 averaged 11.9 per cent, which was above national average, but lower than some of the country's comparable large cities.
On the other hand, Greater Manchester is home to more multi-millionaires than anywhere outside London, with the City of Manchester taking up most of the tally.
In 2013 Manchester was ranked 6th in the UK for quality of life, according to a rating of the UK's 12 largest cities.
Women fare better in Manchester than the rest of the country in comparative pay with men.
The per hours-worked gender pay gap is 3.3 per cent compared with 11.1 per cent for Britain.
37 per cent of the working-age population in Manchester have degree-level qualifications, as opposed to an average of 33 per cent across other core cities,
Manchester has the largest UK office market outside London, according to GVA Grimley, with a quarterly office uptake (averaged over 2010-2014) of some 250,000 square ft - equivalent to the quarterly office uptake of Leeds, Liverpool and Newcastle combined and 90,000 square feet more than the nearest rival, Birmingham.
The strong office market in Manchester has been partly attributed to "northshoring", (from offshoring) which entails the relocation or alternative creation of jobs away from the overheated South to areas where office space is possibly cheaper and the workforce market less saturated.
According to 2019 property investment research, Manchester is rated as No. 2 location for "Best Places To Invest in Property in the UK".
This was attributed to a 5.6 per cent increase in house prices and local investment in infrastructure and in Manchester Airport.
Landmarks
Manchester's buildings display a variety of architectural styles, ranging from Victorian to contemporary architecture.
The widespread use of red brick characterises the city, much of the architecture of which harks back to its days as a global centre for the cotton trade.
Manchester also has a number of skyscrapers built in the 1960s and 1970s, the tallest being the CIS Tower near Manchester Victoria station until the Beetham Tower was completed in 2006.
The latter exemplifies a new surge in high-rise building.
It includes a Hilton hotel, a restaurant and apartments.
The Green Building, opposite Oxford Road station, is a pioneering eco-friendly housing project, while the recently completed One Angel Square, is one of the most sustainable large buildings in the world.
The award-winning Heaton Park in the north of the city borough is one of the largest municipal parks in Europe, covering of parkland.
The city has 135 parks, gardens, and open spaces.
Two large squares hold many of Manchester's public monuments.
Albert Square has monuments to Prince Albert, Bishop James Fraser, Oliver Heywood, William Ewart Gladstone and John Bright.
Piccadilly Gardens has monuments dedicated to Queen Victoria, Robert Peel, James Watt and the Duke of Wellington.
The cenotaph in St Peter's Square is Manchester's main memorial to its war dead.
Designed by Edwin Lutyens, it echoes the original on Whitehall in London.
The Alan Turing Memorial in Sackville Park commemorates his role as the father of modern computing.
A larger-than-life statue of Abraham Lincoln by George Gray Barnard in the eponymous Lincoln Square (having stood for many years in Platt Fields) was presented to the city by Mr and Mrs Charles Phelps Taft of Cincinnati, Ohio, to mark the part Lancashire played in the cotton famine and American Civil War of 1861-1865.
A Concorde is on display near Manchester Airport.
Manchester has six designated local nature reserves: Chorlton Water Park, Blackley Forest, Clayton Vale and Chorlton Ees, Ivy Green, Boggart Hole Clough and Highfield Country Park.
Transport
Rail
Manchester Liverpool Road was the world's first purpose-built passenger and goods railway station, and served as the Manchester terminus on the Liverpool and Manchester Railway - the world's first inter-city passenger railway.
Today the city is well served by its rail network, and is at the centre of an extensive county-wide railway network, including the West Coast Main Line, with two mainline stations: Manchester Piccadilly and Manchester Victoria.
The Manchester station group - comprising Manchester Piccadilly, Manchester Victoria, Manchester Oxford Road and Deansgate - is the third busiest in the United Kingdom, with 44.9 million passengers recorded in 2017/2018.
The High Speed 2 link to Birmingham and London is also planned, which if built will include a tunnel under Manchester on the final approach into an upgraded Piccadilly station.
Recent improvements in Manchester as part of the Northern Hub in the 2010s have been numerous electrification schemes into and through Manchester, redevelopment of Victoria station and construction of the Ordsall Chord directly linking Victoria and Piccadilly.
Work on two new through platforms at Piccadilly and an extensive upgrade at Oxford Road had not commenced as of 2019.
Manchester city centre suffers from constrained rail capacity that frequently leads to delays and cancellations - a 2018 report found that all three major Manchester stations are among the top ten worst stations in the United Kingdom for punctuality, with Oxford Road deemed the worst in the country.
Metrolink (tram)
Manchester became the first city in the UK to acquire a modern light rail tram system when the Manchester Metrolink opened in 1992.
In 2016-2017, 37.8 million passenger journeys were made on the system.
The present system mostly runs on former commuter rail lines converted for light rail use, and crosses the city centre via on-street tram lines.
The network consists of seven lines with 93 stops.
A new line to the Trafford Centre is due to open by 2020.
Manchester city centre is also serviced by over a dozen heavy and light rail-based park and ride sites.
Bus
The city has one of the most extensive bus networks outside London, with over 50 bus companies operating in the Greater Manchester region radiating from the city.
In 2011, 80 per cent of public transport journeys in Greater Manchester were made by bus, amounting to 220 million passenger journeys each year.
Go North West operate a two-route zero-fare bus service, called "free bus around the city", which carries 2.8 million commuters a year around Manchester's business districts.
Stagecoach Manchester is the Stagecoach Group's largest subsidiary and operates around 690 buses.
Air
to operate the Airbus A380.
A smaller City Airport Manchester exists to the west of Manchester city centre.
It was Manchester's first municipal airport and became the site of the first air traffic control tower in the UK, and the first municipal airfield in the UK to be licensed by the Air Ministry.
Today, private charter flights and general aviation use City.
It also has a flight school, and both the Greater Manchester Police Air Support Unit and the North West Air Ambulance have helicopters based there.
Canal
An extensive canal network, including the Manchester Ship Canal, was built to carry freight from the Industrial Revolution onward; the canals are still maintained, though now largely repurposed for leisure use.
In 2012, plans were approved to introduce a water taxi service between Manchester city centre and MediaCityUK at Salford Quays.
This ceased to operate in June 2018, citing poor infrastructure.
Culture
Music
Bands that have emerged from the Manchester music scene include Van der Graaf Generator, Oasis, The Smiths, Joy Division and its successor group New Order, Buzzcocks, The Stone Roses, The Fall, The Durutti Column, 10cc, Godley & Creme, The Verve, Elbow, Doves, The Charlatans, M People, The 1975, Simply Red, Take That, Dutch Uncles, Everything Everything, Pale Waves and The Outfield.
Manchester was credited as the main driving force behind British indie music of the 1980s led by The Smiths, later including The Stone Roses, Happy Mondays, Inspiral Carpets, and James.
The later groups came from what became known as the "Madchester" scene that also centred on The Haçienda nightclub developed by the founder of Factory Records, Tony Wilson.
Although from southern England, The Chemical Brothers subsequently formed in Manchester.
Former Smiths frontman Morrissey, whose lyrics often refer to Manchester locations and culture, later found international success as a solo artist.
Previously, notable Manchester acts of the 1960s include The Hollies, Herman's Hermits, and Davy Jones of the Monkees (famed in the mid-1960s for their albums and their American TV show), and the earlier Bee Gees, who grew up in Chorlton.
Another notable contemporary band from Manchester is The Courteeners consisting of Liam Fray and four close friends.
Singer-songwriter Ren Harvieu is also from Greater Manchester.
music events outside London.
Manchester has two symphony orchestras, the Hallé and the BBC Philharmonic, and a chamber orchestra, the Manchester Camerata.
In the 1950s, the city was home to a so-called "Manchester School" of classical composers, which was composed of Harrison Birtwistle, Peter Maxwell Davies, David Ellis and Alexander Goehr.
Manchester is a centre for musical education: the Royal Northern College of Music and Chetham's School of Music.
Forerunners of the RNCM were the Northern School of Music (founded 1920) and the Royal Manchester College of Music (founded 1893), which merged in 1973.
One of the earliest instructors and classical music pianists/conductors at the RMCM, shortly after its founding, was the Russian-born Arthur Friedheim, (1859-1932), who later had the music library at the famed Peabody Institute conservatory of music in Baltimore, Maryland, named after him.
The main classical music venue was the Free Trade Hall on Peter Street until the opening in 1996 of the 2,500 seat Bridgewater Hall.
Brass band music, a tradition in the north of England, is important to Manchester's musical heritage; some of the UK's leading bands, such as the CWS Manchester Band and the Fairey Band, are from Manchester and surrounding areas, and the Whit Friday brass-band contest takes place annually in the neighbouring areas of Saddleworth and Tameside.
Performing arts
Manchester has a thriving theatre, opera and dance scene, with a number of large performance venues, including Manchester Opera House, which feature large-scale touring shows and West End productions; the Palace Theatre; and the Royal Exchange Theatre in Manchester's former cotton exchange, which is the largest theatre in the round in the UK.
Smaller venues include the Contact Theatre and Z-arts in Hulme.
The Dancehouse on Oxford Road is dedicated to dance productions.
In 2014, HOME, a new custom-built arts complex opened.
Housing two theatre spaces, five cinemas and an art exhibition space, it replaced the Cornerhouse and The Library Theatre.
Since 2007 the city has hosted the Manchester International Festival, a biennial international arts festival with a focus on original work, which has included major new commissions by artists, including Bjork.
A government statement in 2014 announced a £78 million grant for a new "large-scale, ultra-flexible arts space" for the city.
Later the council stated it had secured a further £32 million.
The £110 million venue was confirmed in July 2016.
The theatre, to be called The Factory, after Manchester's Factory Records, will provide a permanent home for the Manchester International Festival.
The Museum of Transport displays a collection of historic buses and trams.
Trafford Park in the neighbouring borough of Trafford is home to Imperial War Museum North.
The Manchester Museum opened to the public in the 1880s, has notable Egyptology and natural history collections.
The municipally owned Manchester Art Gallery in Mosley Street houses a permanent collection of European painting and one of Britain's main collections of Pre-Raphaelite paintings.
In the south of the city, the Whitworth Art Gallery displays modern art, sculpture and textiles and was voted Museum of the Year in 2015.
Other exhibition spaces and museums in Manchester include Islington Mill in Salford, the National Football Museum at Urbis, Castlefield Gallery, the Manchester Costume Gallery at Platt Fields Park, the People's History Museum and the Manchester Jewish Museum.
The work of Stretford-born painter , known for "matchstick" paintings of industrial Manchester and Salford, can be seen in the City and Whitworth Manchester galleries, and at the Lowry art centre in Salford Quays (in the neighbouring borough of Salford), which devotes a large permanent exhibition to his works.
Literature
Manchester is a UNESCO City of Literature known for a "radical literary history".
Manchester in the 19th century featured in works highlighting the changes that industrialisation had brought.
They include Elizabeth Gaskell's novel Mary Barton: A Tale of Manchester Life (1848), and studies such as The Condition of the Working Class in England in 1844 by Friedrich Engels, while living and working here.
Manchester was the meeting place of Engels and Karl Marx.
The two began writing The Communist Manifesto in Chetham's Library - founded in 1653 and claiming to be the oldest public library in the English-speaking world.
Elsewhere in the city, the John Rylands Library holds an extensive collection of early printing.
The Rylands Library Papyrus P52, believed to be the earliest extant New Testament text, is on permanent display there.
Letitia Landon's poem Manchester in Fisher's Drawing Room Scrap Book, 1835, records the rapid growth of the city and its cultural importance.
Charles Dickens is reputed to have set his novel Hard Times in the city, and though partly modelled on Preston, it shows the influence of his friend Mrs Gaskell.
Gaskell penned all her novels but Mary Barton at her home in 84 Plymouth Grove.
Often her house played host to influential authors: Dickens, Charlotte Brontë, Harriet Beecher Stowe and Charles Eliot Norton.
fpr example.
It is now open as a literary museum.
Charlotte Brontë began writing her novel Jane Eyre in 1846, while staying at lodgings in Hulme.
She was accompanying her father Patrick, who was convalescing in the city after cataract surgery.
She probably envisioned Manchester Cathedral churchyard as the burial place for Jane's parents and the birthplace of Jane herself.
Also associated with the city is the Victorian poet and novelist Isabella Banks, famed for her 1876 novel The Manchester Man.
Anglo-American author Frances Hodgson Burnett was born in the city's Cheetham Hill district in 1849, and wrote much of her classic children's novel The Secret Garden while visiting nearby Salford's Buile Hill Park.
Anthony Burgess is among the 20th-century writers who made Manchester their home.
He wrote here the dystopian satire A Clockwork Orange in 1962.
Dame Carol Ann Duffy, Poet Laureate from 2009 to 2019, moved to the city in 1996 and lives in West Didsbury.
Nightlife
The night-time economy of Manchester has expanded significantly since about 1993, with investment from breweries in bars, public houses and clubs, along with active support from the local authorities.
with 110,000-130,000 people visiting on a typical weekend night, The night-time economy has a value of about £100 million.
and supports 12,000 jobs.
The Madchester scene of the 1980s, from which groups including New Order, The Smiths, The Stone Roses, the Happy Mondays, Inspiral Carpets, 808 State, James and The Charlatans emerged, was based on clubs such as The Haçienda.
The period was the subject of the film 24 Hour Party People.
Many of the big clubs suffered problems with organised crime at that time; Haslam describes one where staff were so completely intimidated that free admission and drinks were demanded (and given) and drugs were openly dealt.
Education
There are three universities in the City of Manchester.
The University of Manchester, Manchester Metropolitan University and Royal Northern College of Music.
The University of Manchester is the largest full-time non-collegiate university in the United Kingdom, created in 2004 by the merger of Victoria University of Manchester, founded in 1904, and UMIST, founded in 1956, though the university's logo appears to claim it was established in 1824.
It includes the Manchester Business School, which offered the first MBA course in the UK in 1965.
Manchester Metropolitan University was formed as Manchester Polytechnic on the merger of three colleges in 1970.
It gained university status in 1992, and in the same year absorbed Crewe and Alsager College of Higher Education in South Cheshire.
The University of Law, the largest provider of vocation legal training in Europe, has a campus in the city.
The three universities are grouped around Oxford Road on the southern side of the city centre, which forms Europe's largest urban higher-education precinct.
Together they have a combined population of 76,025 students in higher education as of 2015, although almost 6,000 of them were based at Manchester Metropolitan University's campuses at Crewe and Alsager in Cheshire.
One of Manchester's notable secondary schools is Manchester Grammar School.
Established in 1515, as a free grammar school next to what is now the Cathedral, it moved in 1931 to Old Hall Lane in Fallowfield, south Manchester, to accommodate the growing student body.
In the post-war period, it was a direct grant grammar school , but it reverted to independent status in 1976 after abolition of the direct-grant system.
Its previous premises are now used by Chetham's School of Music.
There are three schools nearby: William Hulme's Grammar School, Withington Girls' School and Manchester High School for Girls.
In 2010, the Manchester Local Education Authority was ranked last out of Greater Manchester's ten LEAs and 147th out of 150 in the country LEAs based on the percentage of pupils attaining at least five A*-C grades at General Certificate of Secondary Education (GCSE) including maths and English (38.6 per cent compared with the national average of 50.7 per cent).
The LEA also had the highest occurrence of absences: 11.11 per cent of "half-day sessions missed by pupils", well above the national average of 5.8 per cent.
Of the schools in the LEA with 30 or more pupils, four had 90 per cent or more pupils achieving at least five A*-C grades at GCSE including maths and English: Manchester High School for Girls, St Bede's College, Manchester Islamic High School for Girls, and The King David High School.
Three managed 25 per cent or less: Plant Hill Arts College, North Manchester High School for Boys, Brookway High School and Sports College.
Sport
Manchester is well known as a city of sport.
Two decorated Premier League football clubs bear the city name - Manchester United and Manchester City.
Manchester United play its home games at Old Trafford, in the Manchester suburb of Trafford, the largest club football ground in the United Kingdom.
Manchester City's home ground is the City of Manchester Stadium (also known as the Etihad Stadium for sponsorship purposes); its former ground, Maine Road was demolished in 2003.
The City of Manchester Stadium was initially built as the main athletics stadium for the 2002 Commonwealth Games and was then reconfigured into a football stadium before Manchester City's arrival.
Manchester has hosted domestic, continental and international football competitions at Fallowfield Stadium, Maine Road, Old Trafford and the City of Manchester Stadium.
Competitions hosted in city include the FIFA World Cup (1966), UEFA European Football Championship (1996), Olympic Football (2012), UEFA Champions League Final (2003), UEFA Cup Final (2008), four FA Cup Finals (1893, 1911, 1915, 1970) and three League Cup Finals (1977, 1978, 1984).
First-class sporting facilities were built for the 2002 Commonwealth Games, including the City of Manchester Stadium, the National Squash Centre and the Manchester Aquatics Centre.
Manchester has competed twice to host the Olympic Games, beaten by Atlanta for 1996 and Sydney for 2000.
The National Cycling Centre includes a velodrome, BMX Arena and Mountainbike trials, and is the home of British Cycling, UCI ProTeam Team Sky and Sky Track Cycling.
The Manchester Velodrome was built as a part of the bid for the 2000 games and has become a catalyst for British success in cycling.
The velodrome hosted the UCI Track Cycling World Championships for a record third time in 2008.
The National Indoor BMX Arena (2,000 capacity) adjacent to the velodrome opened in 2011.
The Manchester Arena hosted the FINA World Swimming Championships in 2008.
Manchester Cricket Club evolved into Lancashire County Cricket Club and play at Old Trafford Cricket Ground, as do Manchester Originals, a new city-based cricket team founded in 2019 which will play in the new cricket competition The Hundred, representing Lancashire and Manchester.
Manchester also hosted the World Squash Championships in 2008, and also hosted the 2010 World Lacrosse Championship in July 2010.
Recent sporting events hosted by Manchester include the 2013 Ashes series, 2013 Rugby League World Cup and the 2015 Rugby World Cup.
Media
The ITV franchise Granada Television is partly headquartered on the old Granada Studios site in Quay Street and partly at a new location at MediaCityUK as part of the initial phase of its migration to Salford Quays.
It produces Coronation Street, local news and programmes for North West England.
Although its influence has waned, Granada had been described as "the best commercial television company in the world".
Manchester was one of the BBC's three main centres in England.
and Real Story, were made at New Broadcasting House.
The Cutting It series set in the city's Northern Quarter and The Street were set in Manchester as was Life on Mars.
The first edition of Top of the Pops was broadcast from a studio in Rusholme on New Year's Day 1964.
Manchester was the regional base for BBC One North West Region programmes before it relocated to MediaCityUK in nearby Salford Quays.
The Manchester television channel, Channel M, owned by the Guardian Media Group operated from 2000, but closed in 2012.
Manchester is also covered by two internet television channels: Quays News and Manchester.tv.
The city had a new terrestrial channel from January 2014 when YourTV Manchester, which won the OFCOM licence bid in February 2013.
It began its first broadcast, but in 2015, That's Manchester took over to air on 31 May and launched the freeview channel 8 service slot, before moving to channel 7 in April 2016.
The city has the highest number of local radio stations outside London, including BBC Radio Manchester, Hits Radio Manchester, Capital Manchester, Piccadilly Magic 1152, Real Radio North West, 100.4 Smooth FM, Capital Gold 1458, 96.2 The Revolution, NMFM (North Manchester FM) and Xfm.
A community radio network is coordinated by Radio Regen, with stations covering Ardwick, Longsight and Levenshulme (All FM 96.9) and Wythenshawe (Wythenshawe FM 97.2).
Defunct radio stations include Sunset 102, which became Kiss 102, then Galaxy Manchester), and KFM which became Signal Cheshire (now Imagine FM).
These stations and pirate radio played a significant role in the city's house music culture, the Madchester scene.
The Guardian newspaper was founded in 1821 as The Manchester Guardian.
Its head office is still in the city, though many of its management functions were moved to London in 1964.
The Metro North West is available free at Metrolink stops, rail stations and other busy locations.
The MEN group distributes several local weekly free papers.
For many years most national newspapers had offices in Manchester: The Daily Telegraph, Daily Express, Daily Mail, Daily Mirror, The Sun.
At its height, 1,500 journalists were employed, though in the 1980s office closures began and today the "second Fleet Street" is no more.
An attempt to launch a Northern daily newspaper, the North West Times, employing journalists made redundant by other titles, closed in 1988.
Twin cities and consulates
Manchester has formal twinning arrangements (or "friendship agreements") with several places.
In addition, the British Council maintains a metropolitan centre in Manchester.
Manchester is home to the largest group of consuls in the UK outside London.
The expansion of international trade links during the Industrial Revolution led to the introduction of the first consuls in the 1820s and since then over 800, from all parts of the world, have been based in Manchester.
Manchester hosts consular services for most of the north of England.
Further reading
;Architecture
; General
; Culture
; Sport
