Big Ben is the nickname for the Great Bell of the clock at the north end of the Palace of Westminster in London and is usually extended to refer to both the clock and the clock tower.
The official name of the tower in which Big Ben is located was originally the Clock Tower, but it was renamed Elizabeth Tower in 2012 to mark the Diamond Jubilee of Elizabeth II.
The tower was designed by Augustus Pugin in a neo-Gothic style.
When completed in 1859, its clock was the largest and most accurate four-faced striking and chiming clock in the world.
The tower stands tall, and the climb from ground level to the belfry is 334 steps.
Its base is square, measuring on each side.
Dials of the clock are in diameter.
On 31 May 2009, celebrations were held to mark the tower's 150th anniversary.
Big Ben is the largest of the tower's five bells and weighs .
and it is often used in the establishing shot of films set in London.
The clock tower has been part of a Grade I listed building since 1970 and a UNESCO World Heritage Site since 1987.
On 21 August 2017, a four-year schedule of renovation works began on the tower, which are to include the addition of a lift.
There are also plans to re-glaze and repaint the clock dials.
With a few exceptions, such as New Year's Eve and Remembrance Sunday, the bells are to be silent until the work has been completed in the 2020s.
Tower
Origin
Elizabeth Tower, previously called the Clock Tower
The main bell, officially known as the Great Bell but better known as Big Ben, is the largest bell in the tower and part of the Great Clock of Westminster.
It sounds an E-natural.
The original bell was a 16 ton (16.3-tonne) hour bell, cast on 6 August 1856 in Stockton-on-Tees by John Warner & Sons.
Since the tower was not yet finished, the bell was mounted in New Palace Yard but, during testing it cracked beyond repair and a replacement had to be made.
The bell was recast on 10 April 1858 at the Whitechapel Bell Foundry as a 13 ton (13.76-tonne) bell.
The second bell was transported from the foundry to the tower on a trolley drawn by sixteen horses, with crowds cheering its progress; it was then pulled up to the Clock Tower's belfry, a feat that took 18 hours.
It is tall and diameter.
This new bell first chimed in July 1859; in September it too cracked under the hammer.
According to the foundry's manager, George Mears, the horologist Denison had used a hammer more than twice the maximum weight specified.
Chimes
Along with the Great Bell, the belfry houses four quarter bells which play the Westminster Quarters on the quarter hours.
The four quarter bells sound G, F, E, and B.
They were cast by John Warner & Sons at their Crescent Foundry in 1857 (G, F and B) and 1858 (E).
The Foundry was in Jewin Crescent, in what is now known as The Barbican, in the City of London.
The bells are sounded by hammers pulled by cables coming from the link room-a low-ceiling space between the clock room and the belfry-where mechanisms translate the movement of the quarter train into the sounding of the individual bells.
The quarter bells play a once-repeating, 20-note sequence of rounds and four changes in the key of E major: 1-4 at quarter past, 5-12 at half past, 13-20 and 1-4 at quarter to, and 5-20 on the hour (which sounds 25 seconds before the main bell tolls the hour).
Because the low bell (B) is struck twice in quick succession, there is not enough time to pull a hammer back, and it is supplied with two wrench hammers on opposite sides of the bell.
The tune is that of the Cambridge Chimes, first used for the chimes of Great St Mary's church, Cambridge, and supposedly a variation, attributed to William Crotch, based on violin phrases from the air "I know that my Redeemer liveth" in Handel's Messiah.
The notional words of the chime, again derived from Great St Mary's and in turn an allusion to Psalm 37:23-24, are: "All through this hour And by Thy power/No foot shall slide".
They are written on a plaque on the wall of the clock room.
One of the requirements for the clock was that the first stroke of the hour bell should be correct to within one second per day.
The tolerance is with reference to Greenwich Mean Time (BST in summer).
So, at twelve o'clock, for example, it is the first of the twelve hour-bell strikes that signifies the hour (the New Year on New Year's Eve at midnight).
The time signalled by the last of the "six pips" (UTC) may be fractionally different.
Nickname
The origin of the nickname Big Ben is the subject of some debate.
The nickname was applied first to the Great Bell; it may have been named after Sir Benjamin Hall, who oversaw the installation of the Great Bell, or after English heavyweight boxing champion Benjamin Caunt.
Now Big Ben is often used, by extension, to refer to the clock, the tower and the bell collectively, although the nickname is not universally accepted as referring to the clock and tower.
Some authors of works about the tower, clock and bell sidestep the issue by using the words Big Ben first in the title, then going on to clarify that the subject of the book is the clock and tower as well as the bell.
In August 2017, satirical news site The Rochdale Herald published a spoof article stating that the bell was to be renamed "Massive Mohammed".
Many people mistook this for a genuine news story and were widely ridiculed on social media.
This even inspired the creation of two online petitions.
Cultural significance
The clock has become a cultural symbol of the United Kingdom, particularly in the visual media.
When a television or film-maker wishes to indicate a generic location in the country, a popular way to do so is to show an image of the tower, often with a red double-decker bus or black cab in the foreground.
In 2008, a survey of 2,000 people found that the tower was the most popular landmark in the United Kingdom.
It has also been named as the most iconic film location in London.
The sound of the clock chiming has also been used this way in audio media, but as the Westminster Quarters are heard from other clocks and other devices, the sound is by no means unique.
Big Ben is a focal point of New Year celebrations in the United Kingdom, with radio and television stations airing its chimes to welcome the start of the New Year.
To welcome in 2012, the clock tower was lit with fireworks that exploded at every toll of Big Ben.
Similarly, on Remembrance Day, the chimes of Big Ben are broadcast to mark the 11th hour of the 11th day of the 11th month and the start of the two minutes' silence.
The chimes of Big Ben have also been used at the state funerals of monarchs on three occasions: firstly, at the funeral of King Edward VII in 1910, when Big Ben chimed 68 times, one stroke for each year of the monarch's life; secondly, at the funeral of King George V in 1936 (70 strokes); and finally, at the funeral of King George VI in 1952 (56 strokes).
Londoners who live an appropriate distance from the tower and Big Ben can, by means of listening to the chimes both live and on analogue radio, hear the bell strike thirteen times.
This is possible because the electronically transmitted chimes arrive virtually instantaneously, while the "live" sound is delayed travelling through the air since the speed of sound is relatively slow.
ITN's News at Ten opening sequence formerly featured an image of the tower with the sound of Big Ben's chimes punctuating the announcement of the news headlines of the day.
The Big Ben chimes (known within ITN as "The Bongs") continue to be used during the headlines and all ITV News bulletins use a graphic based on the Westminster clock dial.
Big Ben can also be heard striking the hour before some news bulletins on BBC Radio 4 (6 p.m. and midnight, plus 10 p.m. on Sundays) and the BBC World Service, a practice that began on 31 December 1923.
The sound of the chimes is sent live from a microphone permanently installed in the tower and connected by line to Broadcasting House.
At the close of the polls for the 2010 general election the results of the national exit poll were projected onto the south side of the tower.
On 27 July 2012, starting at 8:12 a.m, Big Ben chimed 30 times, to welcome the Games of the 30th Olympiad, which officially began that day, to London.
2017 renovation
On 21 August 2017, Big Ben's chimes were silenced for four years to allow essential restoration work to be carried out on the tower.
The decision to silence the bells was made to protect the hearing of the workers on the tower, and drew much criticism from senior MPs and Prime Minister Theresa May.
The striking and tolling of the bells for important occasions, such as New Year's Eve and Remembrance Sunday, will be handled via an electric motor; and at least one of the four clock faces will remain visible during the restoration.
Scaffolding was put up around the tower immediately after the bells were silenced.
The original cost of the project to the taxpayers and creditors was estimated to be roughly £29 million, but this was then more than doubled, to £69 million.
Big Ben will resume its usual striking and tolling in 2021.
The aim of the renovation is to repair and conserve the tower, upgrading facilities as necessary, and ensuring the tower's integrity for future generations.
The last significant renovation work to the tower was carried out in 1983-85.
The high structure is exposed to the elements, resulting in cracks and other damage to the masonry and rust damage to the ironwork.
The 2,567 cast-iron roof tiles will be removed and replaced, and a lift will be installed to make access easier, along with a basic washroom with running water.
The Ayrton Light at the top of the tower, which is lit when Parliament is sitting, will also be fully dismantled and restored with the other lights in the Belfry, the lights being replaced with low energy LEDs.
One of the most visible changes to the tower will be the restoration of the clock-face framework to its original colour of Prussian blue, used when the tower was first built in 1859, with the black paint used to cover up the soot-stained dial frames being stripped away.
The clock faces are also to be regilded, and the shields of St George are to be repainted in their original red and white colours.
The 1,296 pieces of glass that make up the clock faces are also to be removed and replaced.
