The Empire State Building is a 102-story Art Deco skyscraper in Midtown Manhattan, New York City.
It was designed by Shreve, Lamb & Harmon and completed in 1931.
The building has a roof height of and stands a total of tall, including its antenna.
Its name is derived from "Empire State", the nickname of New York, which is of unknown origin.
The Empire State Building stood as the world's tallest building for nearly 40 years until the completion of the World Trade Center's North Tower in Lower Manhattan in late-1970.
Following the September 11 attacks in 2001, it was again the tallest building in New York City until the new One World Trade Center surpassed it while under construction in April 2012.
, the building is the seventh-tallest building in New York City, the sixth-tallest completed skyscraper in the United States, and the 45th-tallest in the world.
It is also the sixth-tallest freestanding structure in the Americas.
The site of the Empire State Building, located in Midtown South on the west side of Fifth Avenue between West 33rd and 34th Streets, was originally part of an early 18th-century farm, then became the site of the Waldorf-Astoria Hotel in 1893.
a mixed residential and commercial area, the building is so large that it was assigned its own ZIP Code, 10118; , it is one of 43 buildings in New York City that has its own ZIP code.
The areas surrounding the Empire State Building are home to other major Manhattan landmarks as well, including Macy's at Herald Square on Sixth Avenue and 34th Street, Koreatown on 32nd Street between Fifth and Sixth Avenues, Penn Station and Madison Square Garden on Seventh Avenue between 32nd and 34th Streets, a neighborhood with a mix of residential, commercial, and entertainment activity.
One block east of the Empire State Building, on Madison Avenue at 34th Street, is the New York Public Library's Science, Industry and Business Library, which is located on the same block as the City University of New York's Graduate Center.
Bryant Park and the New York Public Library Main Branch are located six blocks north of the Empire State Building, on the block bounded by Fifth Avenue, Sixth Avenue, 40th Street, and 42nd Street.
Grand Central Terminal is located two blocks east of the library's Main Branch, at Park Avenue and 42nd Street.
The earliest recorded major action on the site was during the American Revolutionary War, when General George Washington's troops retreated from the British following the Battle of Kip's Bay.
The Astors also purchased a parcel from the Murrays.
John Jacob's son William Backhouse Astor Sr. bought a half interest in the properties for $20,500 on July 28, 1827, securing a tract of land on Fifth Avenue from 32nd to 35th streets.
On March 13, 1893, John Jacob Astor Sr's grandson William Waldorf Astor opened the Waldorf Hotel on the site with the help of hotelier George Boldt.
On November 1, 1897, Waldorf's cousin, John Jacob Astor IV, opened the 16-story Astoria Hotel on an adjacent site.
After Boldt died, in early 1918, the hotel lease was purchased by Thomas Coleman du Pont.
By the 1920s, the hotel was becoming dated and the elegant social life of New York had moved much farther north than 34th Street.
The Astor family decided to build a replacement hotel further uptown, and sold the hotel to Bethlehem Engineering Corporation in 1928 for $14-16 million.
Planning process
Bethlehem Engineering Corporation originally intended to build a 25-story office building on the Waldorf-Astoria site.
The company's president, Floyd De L. Brown, paid $100,000 of the $1 million down payment required to start construction on the tower, with the promise that the difference would be paid later.
Brown borrowed $900,000 from a bank, but then defaulted on the loan.
The land was then resold to Empire State Inc., a group of wealthy investors that included Louis G. Kaufman, Ellis P. Earle, John J. Raskob, Coleman du Pont, and Pierre S. du Pont.
The name came from the state nickname for New York.
Alfred E. Smith, a former Governor of New York and U.S. presidential candidate whose 1928 campaign had been managed by Raskob, was appointed head of the company.
Empire State Inc. contracted William F. Lamb, of architectural firm Shreve, Lamb and Harmon, to create the building design.
Lamb produced the building drawings in just two weeks using the firm's earlier designs for the Reynolds Building in Winston-Salem, North Carolina as the basis.
Concurrently, Lamb's partner Richmond Shreve created "bug diagrams" of the project requirements.
The 1916 Zoning Act forced Lamb to design a structure that incorporated setbacks resulting in the lower floors being larger than the upper floors.
Consequently, the tower was designed from the top down, giving it a "pencil"-like shape.
The original plan of the building was 50 stories, but was later increased to 60 and then 80 stories.
Two days later, Smith announced the updated plans for the skyscraper that included an observation deck on the 86th-floor roof at a height of , higher than the Chrysler's 71st-floor observation deck.
The 1,050-foot Empire State Building would only be taller than the Chrysler Building, and Raskob was afraid that Chrysler might try to "pull a trick like hiding a rod in the spire and then sticking it up at the last minute."
The plans were revised one last time in December 1929, to include a 16-story, metal "crown" and an additional mooring mast intended for dirigibles.
The roof height was now , making it the tallest building in the world by far, even without the antenna.
The addition of the dirigible station meant that another floor, the now-enclosed 86th floor, would have to be built below the crown; however, unlike the Chrysler's spire, the Empire State's mast would serve a practical purpose.
The final plan was announced to the public on January 8, 1930, just before the start of construction.
The New York Times reported that the spire was facing some "technical problems", but they were "no greater than might be expected under such a novel plan."
By this time the blueprints for the building had gone through up to fifteen versions before they were approved.
The tight completion schedule necessitated the commencement of construction even though the design had yet to be finalized.
Construction
Demolition of the old Waldorf-Astoria began on October 1, 1929.
Stripping the building down was an arduous process, as the hotel had been constructed using more rigid material than earlier buildings had been.
Furthermore, the old hotel's granite, wood chips, and "'precious' metals such as lead, brass, and zinc" were not in high demand resulting in issues with disposal.
Most of the wood was deposited into a woodpile on nearby 30th Street or was burned in a swamp elsewhere.
Much of the other materials that made up the old hotel, including the granite and bronze, were dumped into the Atlantic Ocean near Sandy Hook, New Jersey.
By the time the hotel's demolition started, Raskob had secured the required funding for the construction of the building.
The plan was to start construction later that year but, on October 24, the New York Stock Exchange suffered a sudden crash marking the beginning of the decade-long Great Depression.
Despite the economic downturn, Raskob refused to cancel the project because of the progress that had been made up to that point.
Neither Raskob, who had ceased speculation in the stock market the previous year, nor Smith, who had no stock investments, suffered financially in the crash.
However, most of the investors were affected and as a result, in December 1929, Empire State Inc. obtained a $27.5 million loan from Metropolitan Life Insurance Company so construction could begin.
The stock market crash resulted in no demand in new office space, Raskob and Smith nonetheless started construction, as canceling the project would have resulted in greater losses for the investors.
A structural steel contract was awarded on January 12, 1930, with excavation of the site beginning ten days later on January 22, before the old hotel had been completely demolished.
Two twelve-hour shifts, consisting of 300 men each, worked continuously to dig the foundation.
Small pier holes were sunk into the ground to house the concrete footings that would support the steelwork.
Excavation was nearly complete by early March, and construction on the building itself started on March 17, with the builders placing the first steel columns on the completed footings before the rest of the footings had been finished.
Around this time, Lamb held a press conference on the building plans.
He described the reflective steel panels parallel to the windows, the large-block Indiana Limestone facade that was slightly more expensive than smaller bricks, and the tower's lines and rise.
Four colossal columns, intended for installation in the center of the building site, were delivered; they would support a combined when the building was finished.
The structural steel was pre-ordered and pre-fabricated in anticipation of a revision to the city's building code that would have allowed the Empire State Building's structural steel to carry , up from , thus reducing the amount of steel needed for the building.
Although the 18,000-psi regulation had been safely enacted in other cities, Mayor Jimmy Walker did not sign the new codes into law until March 26, 1930, just before construction was due to commence.
The first steel framework was installed on April 1, 1930.
From there, construction proceeded at a rapid pace; during one stretch of 10 working days, the builders erected fourteen floors.
This was made possible through precise coordination of the building's planning, as well as the mass production of common materials such as windows and spandrels.
On one occasion, when a supplier could not provide timely delivery of dark Hauteville marble, Starrett switched to using Rose Famosa marble from a German quarry that was purchased specifically to provide the project with sufficient marble.
The scale of the project was massive, with trucks carrying "16,000 partition tiles, 5,000 bags of cement, of sand and 300 bags of lime" arriving at the construction site every day.
The of steel ordered for the project was the largest-ever single order of steel at the time, comprising more steel than was ordered for the Chrysler Building and 40 Wall Street combined.
According to historian John Tauranac, building materials were sourced from numerous, and distant, sources with "limestone from Indiana, steel girders from Pittsburgh, cement and mortar from upper New York State, marble from Italy, France, and England, wood from northern and Pacific Coast forests, and hardware from New England."
The facade, too, used a variety of material, most prominently Indiana limestone but also Swedish black granite, terracotta, and brick.
By June 20, the skyscraper's supporting steel structure had risen to the 26th floor, and by July 27, half of the steel structure had been completed.
prior to this, the fastest pace of construction for a building of similar height had been stories per week.
While construction progressed, the final designs for the floors were being designed from the ground up (as opposed to the general design, which had been from the roof down).
Some of the levels were still undergoing final approval, with several orders placed within an hour of a plan being finalized.
On September 10, as steelwork was nearing completion, Smith laid the building's cornerstone during a ceremony attended by thousands.
The stone contained a box with contemporary artifacts including the previous day's New York Times, a U.S. currency set containing all denominations of notes and coins minted in 1930, a history of the site and building, and photographs of the people involved in construction.
The steel structure was topped out at on September 19, twelve days ahead of schedule and 23 weeks after the start of construction.
Workers raised a flag atop the 86th floor to signify this milestone.
Afterward, work on the building's interior and crowning mast commenced.
Meanwhile, work on the walls and interior was progressing at a quick pace, with exterior walls built up to the 75th floor by the time steelwork had been built to the 95th floor.
The majority of the facade was already finished by the middle of November.
Because of the building's height, it was deemed infeasible to have many elevators or large elevator cabins, so the builders contracted with the Otis Elevator Company to make 66 cars that could speed at , which represented the largest-ever elevator order at the time.
In addition to the time constraint builders had, there were also space limitations because construction materials had to be delivered quickly, and trucks needed to drop off these materials without congesting traffic.
This was solved by creating a temporary driveway for the trucks between 33rd and 34th Streets, and then storing the materials in the building's first floor and basements.
Concrete mixers, brick hoppers, and stone hoists inside the building ensured that materials would be able to ascend quickly and without endangering or inconveniencing the public.
At one point, over 200 trucks made material deliveries at the building site every day.
A series of relay and erection derricks, placed on platforms erected near the building, lifted the steel from the trucks below and installed the beams at the appropriate locations.
The Empire State Building was structurally completed on April 11, 1931, twelve days ahead of schedule and 410 days after construction commenced.
Al Smith shot the final rivet, which was made of solid gold.
The project involved more than 3,500 workers at its peak, including 3,439 on a single day, August 14, 1930.
Many of the workers were Irish and Italian immigrants, with a sizable minority of Mohawk ironworkers from the Kahnawake reserve near Montreal.
According to official accounts, five workers died during the construction, although the New York Daily News gave reports of 14 deaths and a headline in the socialist magazine The New Masses spread unfounded rumors of up to 42 deaths.
The Empire State Building cost $40,948,900 to build, including demolition of the Waldorf-Astoria (equivalent to $ in ).
This was lower than the $60 million budgeted for construction.
Lewis Hine captured many photographs of the construction, documenting not only the work itself but also providing insight into the daily life of workers in that era.
Hine's images were used extensively by the media to publish daily press releases.
According to the writer Jim Rasenberger, Hine "climbed out onto the steel with the ironworkers and dangled from a derrick cable hundreds of feet above the city to capture, as no one ever had before (or has since), the dizzy work of building skyscrapers".
In Rasenberger's words, Hine turned what might have been an assignment of "corporate flak" into "exhilarating art".
These images were later organized into their own collection.
An account from that day stated that the view from the luncheon was obscured by a fog, with other landmarks such as the Statue of Liberty being "lost in the mist" enveloping New York City.
The building officially opened the next day.
Technically, it was believed possible to build a tower of up to , but it was deemed uneconomical to do so, especially during the Great Depression.
As the tallest building in the world, at that time, and the first one to exceed 100 floors, the Empire State Building became an icon of the city and, ultimately, of the nation.
The Empire State Building's opening coincided with the Great Depression in the United States, and as a result much of its office space was vacant from its opening.
Jack Brod, one of the building's longest resident tenants, co-established the Empire Diamond Corporation with his father in the building in mid-1931 Brod recalled that there were only about 20 tenants at the time of opening, including him, In 1931, NBC took up tenancy, leasing space on the 85th floor for radio broadcasts.
after which passengers would have climbed steep ladders to board the airship.
The idea, however, was impractical and dangerous due to powerful updrafts caused by the building itself, the wind currents across Manhattan, and the spires of nearby skyscrapers.
On September 15, 1931, in the first and only instance of an airship using the building's mast, a small commercial United States Navy airship circled 25 times in winds.
The airship then attempted to dock at the mast, but its ballast spilled and the craft was rocked by unpredictable eddies.
The near-disaster scuttled plans to turn the building's spire into an airship terminal, although one blimp did manage to make a single newspaper delivery afterward.
In 1932, the Fifth Avenue Association gave the tower its 1931 "gold medal" for architectural excellence, signifying that the Empire State had been the best-designed building on Fifth Avenue to open in 1931.
A year later, on March 2, 1933, the movie King Kong was released.
The movie, which depicted a large stop motion ape named Kong climbing the Empire State Building, made the still-new building into a cinematic icon.
On July 28, 1945, a B-25 Mitchell bomber crashed into the north side of the Empire State Building, between the 79th and 80th floors.
One engine completely penetrated the building and landed in a neighboring block, while the other engine and part of the landing gear plummeted down an elevator shaft.
Fourteen people were killed in the incident,
Profitability
The Empire State Building only started becoming profitable in the 1950s, when it was finally able to break even for the first time.
However, despite the turnaround in the building's fortunes, Raskob put the tower up for sale in 1951, with a minimum asking price of $50 million.
The sale was brokered by the Charles F. Noyes Company, a prominent real estate firm in upper Manhattan, for $51 million, the highest price paid for a single structure at the time.
By this time, the Empire State had been fully leased for several years with a waiting list of parties looking to lease space in the building, according to the Cortland Standard.
That year, six news companies formed a partnership to pay a combined annual fee of $600,000 to use the tower's antenna, The following year, the American Society of Civil Engineers named the building one of the "Seven Modern Civil Engineering Wonders".
In 1961, Lawrence A. Wien signed a contract to purchase the Empire State Building for $65 million, with Harry B. Helmsley acting as partners in the building's operating lease.
This became the new highest price for a single structure.
Helmsley, Wien, and Peter Malkin quickly started a program of minor improvement projects, including the first-ever full-building facade refurbishment and window-washing in 1962, the installation of new flood lights on the 72nd floor in 1964,
Loss of "tallest building" title
In 1961, the same year that Helmsley, Wien, and Malkin had purchased the Empire State Building, the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey formally backed plans for a new World Trade Center in Lower Manhattan.
The plan originally included 66-story twin towers with column-free open spaces.
The Empire State's owners and real estate speculators were worried that the twin towers' of office space would create a glut of rentable space in Manhattan as well as take away the Empire State Building's profits from lessees.
A revision in the World Trade Center's plan brought the twin towers to each or 110 stories, taller than the Empire State.
Opponents of the new project included prominent real-estate developer Robert Tishman, as well as Wien's Committee for a Reasonable World Trade Center.
In response to Wien's opposition, Port Authority executive director Austin J. Tobin said that Wien was only opposing the project because it would overshadow his Empire State Building as the world's tallest building.
The World Trade Center's twin towers started construction in 1966.
The following year, the Ostankino Tower succeeded the Empire State Building as the tallest freestanding structure in the world.
the North Tower was topped out, on December 23, 1970.
In December 1975, the observation deck was opened on the 110th floor of the Twin Towers, significantly higher than the 86th floor observatory on the Empire state.
The Empire State Building was also losing revenue during this period, particularly as a number of broadcast stations had moved to the World Trade Center in 1971; although the Port Authority continued to pay the broadcasting leases for the Empire State until 1984.
By 1980, there were nearly two million annual visitors, although a building official had previously estimated between 1.5 million and 1.75 million annual visitors.
The building received its own ZIP code in May 1980 in a roll out of 63 new postal codes in Manhattan.
At the time, the tenants of the tower collectively received 35,000 pieces of mail daily.
The Empire State Building celebrated its 50th anniversary on May 1, 1981, with a much-publicized, but poorly received, laser light show, as well as an "Empire State Building Week" that ran through to May 8.
The New York City Landmarks Preservation Commission voted to make the lobby a city landmark on May 19, 1981, citing the historic nature of the first and second floors, as well as "the fixtures and interior components" of the upper floors.
The building became a National Historic Landmark in 1986 The Empire State Building was added to the National Register of Historic Places the following year due to its architectural significance.
From the early to mid 1990s, the building underwent a $55 million In 1994, Donald Trump entered into a joint-venture agreement with Yokoi, with a shared goal of breaking the Empire State Building's lease on the land in an effort to gain total ownership of the building so that, if successful, the two could reap the potential profits of merging the ownership of the building with the land beneath it.
Having secured a half-ownership of the land, Trump devised plans to take ownership of the building itself so he could renovate it, even though Helmsley and Malkin had already started their refurbishment project.
He sued Empire State Building Associates in February 1995, claiming that the latter had caused the building to become a "high-rise slum" Trump had intended to have Empire State Building Associates evicted for violating the terms of their lease, this led to Helmsley's companies countersuing Trump in May.
This sparked a series of lawsuits and countersuits that lasted several years, Upon Harry Helmsley's death in 1997, the Malkins sued Helmsley's widow, Leona Helmsley, for control of the building.
After 9/11
Following the destruction of the World Trade Center in the September 11 attacks in 2001, the Empire State Building again became the tallest building in New York City, but was only the second-tallest building in the Americas after the Willis Tower in Chicago.
In 2002, Trump and Yokoi sold their land claim to the Empire State Building Associates, now headed by Malkin, in a $57.5 million sale.
This action merged the building's title and lease for the first time in half a century.
Although she maintained her ownership stake in the building until the post-consolidation IPO in October 2013, Leona Helmsley handed over day-to-day operations of the building in 2006 to Peter Malkin's company.
In 2008, the building was temporarily "stolen" by the New York Daily News to show how easy it was to transfer the deed on a property, since city clerks were not required to validate the submitted information, as well as to help demonstrate how fraudulent deeds could be used to obtain large mortgages and then have individuals disappear with the money.
The paperwork submitted to the city included the names of Fay Wray, the famous star of King Kong, and Willie Sutton, a notorious New York bank robber.
The newspaper then transferred the deed back over to the legitimate owners, who at that time were Empire State Land Associates.
In 2009, an improvement campaign encompassing the building's public areas was commenced, including improvements to the air conditioning systems, the building's waterproofing, and extensive renovations to the observation decks and the main lobby (see ).
The new One World Trade Center surpassed the Empire State Building as the tallest LEED-certified building when it opened in 2014.
, the building is owned by the Empire State Realty Trust with Anthony Malkin as chairman, CEO, and president.
Due to its status as a publicly traded company, details regarding the trust's profits are publicly available and accessible on its website.
In August 2016, the Qatar Investment Authority (QIA) was issued new fully diluted shares equivalent to 9.9% of the trust; this investment gave them partial ownership of the entirety of the Empire State Realty Trust's portfolio, and as a result, partial ownership of the Empire State Building.
The trust's president John Kessler called it an "endorsement of the company's irreplaceable assets".
The investment has been described by the real-estate magazine The Real Deal as "an unusual move for a sovereign wealth fund", as these funds typically buy direct stakes in buildings rather than real estate companies.
Other foreign entities that have a stake in the Empire State Realty Trust include investors from Norway, Japan, and Australia.
and the interior required of elevator cable and of electrical wires.
The building has a capacity for 20,000 tenants and 15,000 visitors.
The building has been named as one of the Seven Wonders of the Modern World by the American Society of Civil Engineers.
The building and its street floor interior are designated landmarks of the New York City Landmarks Preservation Commission, and confirmed by the New York City Board of Estimate.
It was designated as a National Historic Landmark in 1986.
In 2007, it was ranked number one on the AIA's List of America's Favorite Architecture.
Exterior
The Empire State Building's art deco design is typical of pre-World War II architecture in New York.
The modernistic, stainless steel canopies of the entrances on 33rd and 34th Streets lead to two-story-high corridors around the elevator core, crossed by stainless steel and glass-enclosed bridges at the second-floor level.
which give the building its signature blonde color.
The amount of material used in the building's construction resulted in a very stiff structure when compared to other skyscrapers, with a structural stiffness of versus the Willis Tower's and the John Hancock Center's .
A December 1930 feature in Popular Mechanics estimated that a building with the Empire State's dimensions would still stand even if hit with an impact of .
The Empire State Building design featured one major setback and several smaller ones that reduce the level dimensions as the height increases, thus making upper 81 floors much smaller than the lower five floors.
However, this design allows sunlight to illuminate the interiors of the top floors and, in addition, positions these floors away from the noisy streets below.
This design was mandated as per the 1916 Zoning Resolution, which was intended to allow sunlight to reach the streets as well.
Normally, a building of the Empire State's dimensions would be permitted to build up to 12 stories on the Fifth Avenue side, and up to 17 stories on the 33rd/34th Streets side, before it would have to utilize setbacks.
so the rest of the building above the sixth floor would have a facade of uniform shape.
Interior
The Empire State Building was the first building to have more than 100 floors.
It has 6,514 windows; 73 elevators; As originally built, there were four "express" elevators that connected the lobby, 80th floor, and several landings in between; the other 60 "local" elevators connected the landings with the floors above these intermediate landings.
Of the 64 total elevators, 58 were for passenger use (comprising the four express elevators and 54 local elevators), and eight were for freight deliveries.
The elevators were designed to move at .
At the time of the skyscraper's construction, their practical speed was limited to as per city law, but this limit was removed shortly after the building opened.
Additional elevators connect the 80th floor to the six floors above it, as the six extra floors were built after the original 80 stories were approved.
The elevators were mechanically operated until 2011, when they were replaced with digital elevators during the $550 million renovation of the building.
The Empire State Building has 73 elevators in all, including service elevators.
Utilities are grouped in a central shaft.
The relief, which was intended to provide a welcoming effect, contains an embossing of the building's outline, accompanied by what the Landmarks Preservation Commission describes as "the rays of an aluminum sun shining out behind the tower and mingling with aluminum rays emanating from the spire of the Empire State Building".
In the background is a state map of New York with the building's location marked by a "medallion" in the very southeast portion of the outline.
A compass is located in the bottom right and a plaque to the tower's major developers is on the bottom left.
The plaque at the western end of the lobby is located on the eastern interior wall of a one-story tall rectangular-shaped corridor that surrounds the banks of escalators, with a similar design to the lobby.
The rectangular shaped corridor actually consists of two long hallways on the northern and southern sides of the rectangle, as well as a shorter hallway on the eastern side and another long hallway on the western side.
At both ends of the northern and southern corridors, there is a bank of four low-rise elevators in between the corridors.
The western side of the rectangular elevator-bank corridor extends north to the 34th Street entrance and south to the 33rd Street entrance.
It borders three large storefronts and leads to escalators that go both to the second floor and to the basement.
Going from west to east, there are secondary entrances to 34th and 33rd Streets from both the northern and southern corridors, respectively, at approximately the two-thirds point of each corridor.
Until the 1960s, an art deco mural, inspired by both the sky and the Machine Age, was installed in the lobby ceilings.
The north corridor contained eight illuminated panels created in 1963 by Roy Sparkia and Renée Nemorov, in time for the 1964 World's Fair, depicting the building as the Eighth Wonder of the World alongside the traditional seven.
The building's owners installed a series of paintings by the New York artist Kysa Johnson in the concourse level.
Johnson later filed a federal lawsuit, in January 2014, under the Visual Artists Rights Act alleging the negligent destruction of the paintings and damage to her reputation as an artist.
As part of the building's 2010 renovation, Denise Amses commissioned a work consisting of 15,000 stars and 5,000 circles, superimposed on a etched-glass installation, in the lobby.
Major renovations
Capital improvements were made to the Empire State Building during the early to mid-1990s at a cost of $55 million.
A settlement was reached in 1994, in which the Empire State Building Associates agreed to add ADA-compliant elements, such as new elevators, ramps, and automatic doors, during its ongoing renovation.
The building's public areas received a $550 million renovation in 2009 with improvements to the air conditioning and waterproofing, renovations to the observation deck and main lobby, $120 million of the budget was spent on improving the energy efficiency of the building with the goal of reducing energy emissions by 38% within five years.
For example, all of the windows were refurbished onsite into film-coated "superwindows" which block heat but pass light.
The Empire State Building won a gold Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design (LEED) rating in September 2011, The new lobby includes several technological features, including large LED panels, digital ticket kiosks in nine languages, and a two-story architectural model of the building surrounded by two metal staircases.
A exhibit with nine galleries, opened in July 2019.
Features
Above the 102nd floor
The final stage of the building was the installation of a hollow mast, a steel shaft fitted with elevators and utilities, above the 86th floor.
At the top would be a conical roof and the 102nd-floor docking station.
The elevators would ascend from the 86th floor ticket offices to a 101st-floor waiting room.
It is now an access point to reach the spire for maintenance.
The room now contains electrical equipment, but celebrities and dignitaries may also be given permission to take pictures there.
Above the 103rd floor, there is a set of stairs and a ladder to reach the spire for maintenance work.
The mast's 480 windows were all replaced in 2015.
Broadcast stations
Broadcasting began at the Empire State Building on December 22, 1931, when NBC and RCA began transmitting experimental television broadcasts from a small antenna erected atop the spire, with two separate transmitters for the visual and audio data.
They leased the 85th floor and built a laboratory there.
This setup, which entailed the installation of the world's first FM transmitter, Specifically, NBC wanted to install more TV equipment in the room where Armstrong's transmitter was located.
NBC retained exclusive use of the top of the building until 1950 when the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) ordered the exclusive deal be terminated.
The FCC directive was based on consumer complaints that a common location was necessary for the seven extant New York-area television stations to transmit from so that receiving antennas would not have to be constantly adjusted.
Other television broadcasters would later join RCA at the building on the 81st through 83rd floors, often along with sister FM stations.
with TV, and FM, transmissions starting in 1951.
The broadcast tower was completed by 1953.
The placement of the stations in the Empire State Building became a major issue with the construction of the World Trade Center Twin Towers in the late 1960s, and early 1970s.
The greater height of the Twin Towers would reflect radio waves broadcast from the Empire State Building, eventually resulting in some broadcasters relocating to the newer towers instead of suing the developer, the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey.
Even though the nine stations who were broadcasting from the Empire State Building were leasing their broadcast space until 1984, most of these stations moved to the World Trade Center as soon as it was completed in 1971.
The broadcasters obtained a court order stipulating that the Port Authority had to build a mast and transmission equipment in the North Tower, as well as pay the broadcasters' leases in the Empire State Building until 1984.
Only a few broadcasters renewed their leases in the Empire State Building.
The September 11 attacks in 2001 destroyed the World Trade Center and the broadcast centers atop it, leaving most of the city's stations without a station for ten days until a temporary tower was built in Alpine, New Jersey.
By October 2001, nearly all of the city's commercial broadcast stations (both television and FM radio) were again transmitting from the top of the Empire State Building.
In a report that Congress commissioned about the transition from analog television to digital television, it was stated that the placement of broadcast stations in the Empire State Building was considered "problematic" due to interference from other nearby towers.
In comparison, the Congressional report stated that the former Twin Towers had very few buildings of comparable height nearby thus signals suffered little interference.
In 2003, a few FM stations were relocated to the nearby Condé Nast Building to reduce the number of broadcast stations using the Empire State Building.
Eleven television stations and twenty-two FM stations had signed 15-year leases in the building by May 2003.
It was expected that a taller broadcast tower in Bayonne, New Jersey, or Governors Island, would be built in the meantime with the Empire State Building being used as a "backup" since signal transmissions from the building were generally of poorer quality.
With the completion of 1 World Trade Center, some TV Stations began moving their transmitting facilities to 1 World Trade Center, while others, including WABC-TV remained at the Empire State Building, with no plans to consider a move to the new tower.
, the Empire State Building is home to the following stations:
* Television:
WABC-7, WPIX-11, WXTV-41 Paterson, and WFUT-68 Newark
* FM: WNYL-92.3, WPAT-93.1 Paterson, WNYC-93.9, WPLJ-95.5, WXNY-96.3, WQHT-97.1, WSKQ-97.9, WEPN-98.7, WHTZ-100.3 Newark, WCBS-101.1, WFAN-101.9, WNEW-FM-102.7, WKTU-103.5 Lake Success, WAXQ-104.3, WWPR-105.1, WQXR-105.9 Newark, WLTW-106.7 and WBLS-107.5
Observation decks
The 86th and 102nd floors contain observatories, Since opening, the observatories have been more popular than similar observatories at 30 Rockefeller Plaza, the Chrysler Building, the first One World Trade Center, or the Woolworth Building, despite being more expensive.
The 86th floor observatory contains both an enclosed section and a wide-open section.
The 102nd floor observatory is completely enclosed and much smaller.
The 102nd floor observatory was closed to the public from the late 1990s to 2005.
The observation decks were redesigned in mid-1979.
However, in 2016, New York City's official tourism website, , made note of only three lines: the security check line, the ticket purchase line, and the second elevator line.
For an extra fee tourists can skip to the front of the line.
New York Skyride
In early 1994, a motion simulator attraction was built on the 2nd floor, as a complement to the observation deck.
The original cinematic presentation lasted approximately 25 minutes, while the simulation was about eight minutes.
The ride had two incarnations.
The original version, which ran from 1994 until around 2002, featured James Doohan, Star Trek's Scotty, as the airplane's pilot who humorously tried to keep the flight under control during a storm.
After the World Trade Center terrorist attacks on September 11, 2001, the ride was closed.
This new version served a more informative goal, as opposed to the old version's main purpose of entertainment, and contained details about the 9/11 attacks.
The simulator received mixed reviews, with assessments of the ride ranging from "great" to "satisfactory" to "corny".
The Skyride attraction permanently closed on December 31, 2015.
Lights
The building was originally equipped with white searchlights atop the tower.
They saw their first use in November 1932 when they lit up to signal Roosevelt's victory over Hoover in the presidential election of that year.
These were later swapped for four "Freedom Lights" in 1956.
The lights were shut off from November 1973 to July 1974 because of the energy crisis at the time.
New red, white, and blue metal-halide lights were installed in time for the country's bicentennial that July.
The building is also lit in the colors of New York-based sports teams on nights when they host games: for example, orange, blue, and white for the New York Knicks; red, white, and blue for the New York Rangers.
It was twice lit in scarlet to support New Jersey's Rutgers University, once for a football game against the University of Louisville on November 9, 2006, and again on April 3, 2007, when the women's basketball team played in the national championship game.
There have also been special occasions where the lights are modified from the usual schedule.
After the eightieth birthday, and subsequent death, of Frank Sinatra in 1998, for example, the building was bathed in blue light to represent the singer's nickname "Ol' Blue Eyes".
After actress Fay Wray, who starred in King Kong, died in September 2004, the building lights were extinguished for 15 minutes.
The floodlights bathed the building in red, white, and blue for several months after the destruction of the World Trade Center in September 2001, then reverted to the standard schedule.
On June 4, 2002, the Empire State Building donned purple and gold (the royal colors of Elizabeth II), in thanks for the United Kingdom playing the Star Spangled Banner during the Changing of the Guard at Buckingham Palace on September 12, 2001 (a show of support after the September 11 attacks).
On January 13, 2012, the building was lit in red, orange, and yellow to honor the 60th anniversary of NBC program The Today Show.
From June 1 to 3, 2012, the building was lit in blue and white, the colors of the Israeli flag, in honor of the 49th annual Celebrate Israel Parade.
During 2012, the building's four hundred metal halide lamps and floodlights were replaced with 1,200 LED fixtures, increasing the available colors from nine to over 16 million.
The computer-controlled system allows the building to be illuminated in ways that were unable to be done previously with plastic gels.
For instance, on November 6, 2012, CNN used the top of the Empire State Building as a scoreboard for the 2012 United States presidential election.
When incumbent president Barack Obama had reached the 270 electoral votes necessary to win re-election, the lights turned blue, representing the color of Obama's Democratic Party.
Had Republican challenger Mitt Romney won, the building would have been lit red, the color of the Republican Party.
Also, on November 26, 2012, the building had its first ever synchronized light show, using music from recording artist Alicia Keys.
Artists such as Eminem and OneRepublic have been featured in later shows, such as the building's annual Holiday Music-to-Lights Show.
The building's owners adhere to strict standards in using the lights; for instance, they do not use the lights to play advertisements.
The Empire State Building was also the tallest man-made structure in the world before it was surpassed by the Griffin Television Tower Oklahoma (KWTV Mast) in 1954, and the tallest freestanding structure in the world until the completion of the Ostankino Tower in 1967.
With the destruction of the World Trade Center in the September 11 attacks, the Empire State Building again became the tallest building in New York City, and the second-tallest building in the Americas, surpassed only by the Willis Tower in Chicago.
The Empire State Building remained the tallest building in New York until the new One World Trade Center reached a greater height in April 2012.
, it is the fourth-tallest building in New York City after One World Trade Center, 432 Park Avenue, and 30 Hudson Yards.
It is the fifth-tallest completed skyscraper in the United States behind the two other tallest buildings in New York City, as well as the Willis Tower and Trump International Hotel and Tower in Chicago.
The Empire State Building is the 28th-tallest in the world , the tallest being Burj Khalifa in Dubai.
It is also the sixth-tallest freestanding structure in the Americas behind the five tallest buildings and the CN Tower.
Notable tenants
, the building houses around 1,000 businesses.
Current tenants include:
Former tenants include:
The National Catholic Welfare Council (now Catholic Relief Services, located in Baltimore)
Incidents
1945 plane crash
At 9:40 am on July 28, 1945, a B-25 Mitchell bomber, piloted in thick fog by Lieutenant Colonel William Franklin Smith Jr., crashed into the north side of the Empire State Building between the 79th and 80th floors where the offices of the National Catholic Welfare Council were located.
One engine completely penetrated the building, landing on the roof of a nearby building where it started a fire that destroyed a penthouse.
The other engine and part of the landing gear plummeted down an elevator shaft causing a fire, which was extinguished in 40 minutes.
Fourteen people were killed in the incident.
Despite the damage and loss of life, the building was open for business on many floors two days later.
Also as a result of the crash, the Civil Aeronautics Administration enacted strict regulations regarding flying over New York City, setting a minimum flying altitude of above sea level regardless of the weather conditions.
A year later, on July 24, 1946, another aircraft narrowly missed striking the building.
The unidentified twin-engine plane scraped past the observation deck, scaring the tourists there.
2000 elevator plunge
On January 24, 2000, an elevator in the building suddenly descended 40 stories after a cable that controlled the cabin's maximum speed was severed.
The elevator fell from the 44th floor to the fourth floor, where a narrowed elevator shaft provided a second safety system.
Despite the 40-floor fall, both of the passengers in the cabin at the time were only slightly injured.
Since that elevator had no fourth-floor doors, the passengers were rescued by an adjacent elevator.
After the fall, building inspectors reviewed all of the building's elevators.
More than 30 people have attempted suicide over the years by jumping from the upper parts of the building, with most attempts being successful.
The first suicide from the building occurred on April 7, 1931, before the tower was even completed, when a carpenter who had been laid-off went to the 58th floor and jumped.
The first suicide after the building's opening occurred from the 86th floor observatory in February 1935, when Irma P. Eberhardt fell onto a marquee sign.
On December 16, 1943, William Lloyd Rambo jumped to his death from the 86th floor, landing amidst Christmas shoppers on the street below.
In the early morning of September 27, 1946, shell-shocked Marine Douglas W. Brashear Jr. jumped from the 76th-floor window of the Grant Advertising Agency; police found his shoes from his body.
On May 1, 1947, Evelyn McHale leapt to her death from the 86th floor observation deck and landed on a limousine parked at the curb.
Photography student Robert Wiles took a photo of McHale's oddly intact corpse a few minutes after her death.
The police found a suicide note among possessions that she left on the observation deck: "He is much better off without me....
I wouldn't make a good wife for anybody".
The photo ran in the May 12, 1947 edition of Life magazine and is often referred to as "The Most Beautiful Suicide".
It was later used by visual artist Andy Warhol in one of his prints entitled Suicide (Fallen Body).
A mesh fence was put up around the 86th floor terrace in December 1947 after five people tried to jump during a three-week span in October and November of that year.
By then, sixteen people had died from suicide jumps.
Two people have survived falls by not falling more than a floor.
On December 2, 1979, Elvita Adams jumped from the 86th floor, only to be blown back onto a ledge on the 85th floor by a gust of wind and left with a broken hip.
On April 25, 2013, a man fell from the 86th floor observation deck, but he landed alive with minor injuries on an 85th-floor ledge where security guards brought him inside and paramedics transferred him to a hospital for a psychiatric evaluation.
Shootings
Two fatal shootings have occurred in the direct vicinity of the Empire State Building.
Abu Kamal, a 69-year-old Palestinian teacher, shot seven people on the 86th floor observation deck during the afternoon of February 23, 1997.
He killed one person and wounded six others before committing suicide.
Kamal reportedly committed the shooting in response to events happening in Palestine and Israel.
On the morning of August 24, 2012, 58-year-old Jeffrey T. Johnson shot and killed a former co-worker on the building's Fifth Avenue sidewalk.
He had been laid off from his job in 2011.
Two police officers confronted the gunman, and he aimed his firearm at them.
They responded by firing 16 shots, killing him but also wounding nine bystanders.
Most of the injured were hit by bullet fragments, although three took direct hits from bullets.
Importance
Iconic status
As the tallest building in the world and the first one to exceed 100 floors, the Empire State Building immediately became an icon of the city and of the nation.
The historian John Tauranac calls the tower "'the' twentieth-century New York building", despite the existence of taller and more modernist buildings.
Early in the building's history, travel companies such as Short Line Motor Coach Service and New York Central Railroad used the building as an icon to symbolize the city.
After the construction of the first World Trade Center, architect Paul Goldberger noted that the Empire State Building "is famous for being tall, but it is good enough to be famous for being good."
The building was originally a symbol of hope in a country devastated by the Depression, as well as a work of accomplishment by newer immigrants.
The writer Benjamin Flowers states that the Empire State was "a building intended to celebrate a new America, built by men (both clients and construction workers) who were themselves new Americans."
The architectural critic Jonathan Glancey refers to the building as an "icon of American design".
It has often been called the Eighth Wonder of the World as well, an appellation that it has held since shortly after opening.
The panels installed in the lobby in 1963 reflected this, showing the seven original wonders alongside the Empire State Building.
The building has also been featured in other works, such as "Daleks in Manhattan", a 2007 episode of the TV series Doctor Who; and Empire, an eight-hour black-and-white silent film by Andy Warhol, which was later added to the Library of Congress's National Film Registry.
Empire State Building Run-Up
The Empire State Building Run-Up, a foot race from ground level to the 86th-floor observation deck, has been held annually since 1978.
Its participants are referred to both as runners and as climbers, and are often tower running enthusiasts.
The race covers a vertical distance of 1,050 feet (320 m) and takes in 1,576 steps.
The record time is 9 minutes and 33 seconds, achieved by Australian professional cyclist Paul Crake in 2003, at a climbing rate of per hour.
Stock trading
ESRT began trading publicly on the New York Stock Exchange on October 2, 2013.
Citations
Bibliography
Further reading
