The bald eagle (Haliaeetus leucocephalus) is a bird of prey found in North America.
A sea eagle, it has two known subspecies and forms a species pair with the white-tailed eagle (Haliaeetus albicilla).
Its range includes most of Canada and Alaska, all of the contiguous United States, and northern Mexico.
It is found near large bodies of open water with an abundant food supply and old-growth trees for nesting.
The bald eagle is an opportunistic feeder which subsists mainly on fish, which it swoops down and snatches from the water with its talons.
It builds the largest nest of any North American bird and the largest tree nests ever recorded for any animal species, up to deep, wide, and in weight.
Sexual maturity is attained at the age of four to five years.
Bald eagles are not actually bald; the name derives from an older meaning of the word, "white headed".
The adult is mainly brown with a white head and tail.
The sexes are identical in plumage, but females are about 25 percent larger than males.
The beak is large and hooked.
The plumage of the immature is brown.
The bald eagle is the national bird of the United States of America.
The bald eagle appears on its seal.
In the late 20th century it was on the brink of extirpation in the contiguous United States.
Populations have since recovered and the species was removed from the U.S. government's list of endangered species on July 12, 1995 and transferred to the list of threatened species.
It was removed from the List of Endangered and Threatened Wildlife in the Lower 48 States on June 28, 2007.
Description
The plumage of an adult bald eagle is evenly dark brown with a white head and tail.
The tail is moderately long and slightly wedge-shaped.
Males and females are identical in plumage coloration, but sexual dimorphism is evident in the species, in that females are 25% larger than males.
Of intermediate size, 117 migrant bald eagles in Glacier National Park were found to average but this was mostly (possibly post-dispersal) juvenile eagles, with 6 adults here averaging .
Wintering eagles in Arizona (winter weights are usually the highest through the year since like many raptors they spend the highest percentage of time foraging during winter) were found to average .
The largest eagles are from Alaska, where large females may weigh more than and span across the wings.
An Alaskan adult female eagle that was considered outsized weighed some .
R.S. Palmer listed a record from 1876 in Wyoming County, New York of an enormous adult bald eagle that was shot and reportedly scaled .
The culmen reportedly ranges from , while the measurement from the gape to the tip of the bill is .
The call consists of weak staccato, chirping whistles, kleek kik ik ik ik, somewhat similar in cadence to a gull's call.
The calls of young birds tend to be more harsh and shrill than those of adults.
and the specific name, leucocephalus, is Latinized () and ().
and as of 2018 the species nests in every continental state and province in the United States and Canada.
Bald eagles also congregate in certain locations in winter.
From November until February, one to two thousand birds winter in Squamish, British Columbia, about halfway between Vancouver and Whistler.
The birds primarily gather along the Squamish and Cheakamus Rivers, attracted by the salmon spawning in the area.
Similar congregations of wintering bald eagles at open lakes and rivers, wherein fish are readily available for hunting or scavenging, are observed in the northern United States.
It has occurred as a vagrant twice in Ireland; a juvenile was shot illegally in Fermanagh on January 11, 1973 (misidentified at first as a white-tailed eagle), and an exhausted juvenile was captured in Kerry on November 15, 1987.
Habitat
The bald eagle occurs during its breeding season in virtually any kind of American wetland habitat such as seacoasts, rivers, large lakes or marshes or other large bodies of open water with an abundance of fish.
Studies have shown a preference for bodies of water with a circumference greater than , and lakes with an area greater than are optimal for breeding bald eagles.
In Florida, nesting habitats often consist of mangrove swamps, the shorelines of lakes and rivers, pinelands, seasonally flooded flatwoods, hardwood swamps, and open prairies and pastureland with scattered tall trees.
Favored nesting trees in Florida are slash pines (Pinus elliottii), longleaf pines (P. palustris), loblolly pines (P. taeda) and cypress trees, but for the southern coastal areas where mangroves are usually used.
In 20 food habit studies across the species' range, fish comprised 56% of the diet of nesting eagles, birds 28%, mammals 14% and other prey 2%.
More than 400 species are known to be included in the bald eagle's prey spectrum, far more than its ecological equivalent in the Old World, the white-tailed eagle, is known to take.
Despite its considerably lower population, the bald eagle may come in second amongst all North American accipitrids, slightly behind only the red-tailed hawk, in number of prey species recorded.
In Southeast Alaska, fish comprise approximately 66% of the year-around diet of bald eagles and 78% of the prey brought to the nest by the parents.
Benthic fishes such as catfish are usually consumed after they die and float to the surface, though while temporarily swimming in the open may be more vulnerable to predation than most fish since their eyes focus downwards.
Predators who leave behind scraps of dead fish that they kill, such as brown bears (Ursus arctos), gray wolves (Canis lupus) and red foxes (Vulpes vulpes), may be habitually followed in order to scavenge the kills secondarily.
While adults often actively prey on waterbirds, congregated wintering waterfowl are frequently exploited for carcasses to scavenge by immature eagles in harsh winter weather.
Bald eagles have been recorded as killing other raptors on occasion.
In some cases, these may be attacks of competition or kleptoparasitism on rival species but ended with the consumption of the victim.
Nine species each of other accipitrids and owls are known to have been preyed upon by bald eagles.
Owl prey species have ranged in size from western screech-owls (Megascops kennicotti) to snowy owls (Bubo scandiacus).
Larger diurnal raptors known to have fallen victim to bald eagles have included red-tailed hawks (Buteo jamaicensis), northern goshawks (Accipiter gentilis), ospreys (Pandion haliaetus)
Even an adult bobcat (Lynx rufus) has been recorded amongst their prey, although this may have been scavenged.
Where available, seal colonies can provide much food.
On Protection Island, Washington, they commonly feed on harbor seal (Phoca vitulina) afterbirths, still-borns and sickly seal pups.
Snakes are also taken occasionally, especially partially aquatic ones, as are amphibians and crustaceans (largely crayfish and crabs).
This feat is the record for the heaviest load carrying ever verified for a flying bird.
It has been estimated that the gripping power (pounds by square inch) of the bald eagle is ten times greater than that of a human.
Bald eagles can fly with fish at least equal to their own weight, but if the fish is too heavy to lift, the eagle may be dragged into the water.
It may swim to safety, in some cases pulling the catch along to the shore as it swims, but some eagles drown or succumb to hypothermia.
Many sources claim that bald eagles, like all large eagles, cannot normally take flight carrying prey more than half of their own weight unless aided by favorable wind conditions.
They are not very selective about the condition or origin, whether provided by humans, other animals, auto accidents or natural causes, of a carcass's presence, but will avoid eating carrion where disturbances from humans are a regular occurrence.
They will scavenge carcasses up to the size of whales, though carcasses of ungulates and large fish are seemingly preferred.
The bald eagle is thought to be much more numerous in North America than the golden eagle, with the bald species estimated to number at least 150,000 individuals, about twice as many golden eagles there are estimated to live in North America.
This nest is on record as the largest tree nest ever recorded for any animal.
Usually nests are used for under five years or so, as they either collapse in storms or break the branches supporting them by their sheer weight.
However, one nest in the Midwest was occupied continuously for at least 34 years.
Six weeks after however, it was discovered that the hawk, nicknamed "Spunky" by biologists monitoring the nest, had grown to fledgeling size and was learning how to hunt, indicating that it successfully survived.
Longevity and mortality
The average lifespan of bald eagles in the wild is around 20 years, with the oldest confirmed one having been 38 years of age.
In captivity, they often live somewhat longer.
In one instance, a captive individual in New York lived for nearly 50 years.
As with size, the average lifespan of an eagle population appears to be influenced by its location and access to prey.
As they are no longer heavily persecuted, adult mortality is quite low.
In one study of Florida eagles, adult bald eagles reportedly had 100% annual survival rate.
An early natural history video depicting a cougar (Puma concolor) ambushing and killing an immature bald eagle feeding at a rabbit carcass is viewable online although this film may have been staged.
Most non-human-related mortality involves nestlings or eggs.
Around 50% of eagles survive their first year.
If food access is low, parental attendance at the nest may be lower because both parents may have to forage thus resulting in less protection.
Relationship with humans
Population decline and recovery
Once a common sight in much of the continent, the bald eagle was severely affected in the mid-20th century by a variety of factors, among them the thinning of egg shells attributed to use of the pesticide DDT.
Other factors in bald eagle population reductions were a widespread loss of suitable habitat, as well as both legal and illegal shooting.
In 1930 a New York City ornithologist wrote that in the state of Alaska in the previous 12 years approximately 70,000 bald eagles had been shot.
Many of the hunters killed the bald eagles under the long-held beliefs that bald eagles grabbed young lambs and even children with their talons, yet the birds were innocent of most of these alleged acts of predation (lamb predation is rare, human predation is thought to be non-existent).
Later illegal shooting was described as "the leading cause of direct mortality in both adult and immature bald eagles," according to a 1978 report in the Endangered Species Technical Bulletin.
In 1984, the National Wildlife Federation listed hunting, power-line electrocution, and collisions in flight as the leading causes of eagle deaths.
Bald eagles have also been killed by oil, lead, and mercury pollution, and by human and predator intrusion at nests.
For some time, the stronghold breeding population of bald eagles in the lower 48 states was in Florida, where over a thousand pairs have held on while populations in other states were significantly reduced by DDT use.
Today, the contiguous state with the largest number of breeding pairs of eagles is Minnesota with an estimated 1,312 pairs, surpassing Florida's most recent count of 1,166 pairs.
23, or nearly half, of the 48 contiguous states now have at least 100 breeding pairs of bald eagles.
The bald eagle was officially removed from the U.S. federal government's list of endangered species on July 12, 1995, by the U.S. Fish & Wildlife Service, when it was reclassified from "Endangered" to "Threatened."
On July 6, 1999, a proposal was initiated "To Remove the Bald Eagle in the Lower 48 States From the List of Endangered and Threatened Wildlife."
It was de-listed on June 28, 2007.
It has also been assigned a risk level of Least Concern category on the IUCN Red List.
Killing permits
In December 2016, the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service proposed quadrupling to 4,200 per year the amount of bald eagles that can be killed by the wind electric generation industry without paying a penalty.
If issued, the permits would last 30 years, six times the current 5-year permits.
In captivity
Permits are required to keep bald eagles in captivity in the United States.
Permits are primarily issued to public educational institutions, and the eagles which they show are permanently injured individuals which cannot be released to the wild.
The facilities where eagles are kept must be equipped with adequate caging and facilities, as well as workers experienced in the handling and care of eagles.
In Canada and in England a license is required to keep bald eagles for falconry.
As a rule, the bald eagle is not the ideal choice for public shows, being timid, prone to becoming highly stressed, and unpredictable in nature.
Native American tribes can obtain a "Native American Religious Use" permit to keep non-releasable eagles as well.
They use their naturally molted feathers for religious and cultural ceremonies.
The bald eagle can be long-lived in captivity if well cared for, but does not breed well even under the best conditions.
The Lakota, for instance, give an eagle feather as a symbol of honor to person who achieves a task.
In modern times, it may be given on an event such as a graduation from college.
The Choctaw considered the bald eagle, who has direct contact with the upper world of the sun, as a symbol of peace.
National bird of the United States
The bald eagle is the national bird of the United States of America.
Contrary to popular legend, there is no evidence that Benjamin Franklin ever publicly supported the wild turkey (Meleagris gallopavo), rather than the bald eagle, as a symbol of the United States.
However, in a letter written to his daughter in 1784 from Paris, criticizing the Society of the Cincinnati, he stated his personal distaste for the bald eagle's behavior.
In the letter Franklin states:
QTEMPLATE |For my own part.
I wish the bald eagle had not been chosen the representative of our country.
He is a bird of bad moral character.
He does not get his living honestly ... besides he is a rank coward: The little king bird not bigger than a sparrow attacks him boldly and drives him out of the district.
Franklin opposed the creation of the Society because he viewed it, with its hereditary membership, as a noble order unwelcome in the newly independent Republic, contrary to the ideals of Lucius Quinctius Cincinnatus, for whom the Society was named.
His reference to the two kinds of birds is interpreted as a satirical comparison between the Society of the Cincinnati and Cincinnatus.
Popular culture
Largely because of its role as a symbol of the United States, but also because of its being a large predator, the bald eagle has many representations in popular culture.
Not all of these representations are accurate.
In particular, the movie or television bald eagle typically has a bold, powerful cry.
The actual eagle has a much softer, chirpy voice, not in keeping with its popular image; the call of the Red-tailed hawk is often substituted in movies and television.
Further reading
Identification
* Grant, Peter J. (1988)
"The Co. Kerry Bald Eagle" Twitching 1 (12): 379-80 - describes plumage differences between bald eagle and white-tailed eagle in juveniles
