Owls are birds from the order Strigiformes, which includes about 200 species of mostly solitary and nocturnal birds of prey typified by an upright stance, a large, broad head, binocular vision, binaural hearing, sharp talons, and feathers adapted for silent flight.
Exceptions include the diurnal northern hawk-owl and the gregarious burrowing owl.
Owls hunt mostly small mammals, insects, and other birds, although a few species specialize in hunting fish.
They are found in all regions of the Earth except polar ice caps and some remote islands.
Owls are divided into two families: the true (or typical) owl family, Strigidae, and the barn-owl family, Tytonidae.
Anatomy
Owls possess large, forward-facing eyes and ear-holes, a hawk-like beak, a flat face, and usually a conspicuous circle of feathers, a facial disc, around each eye.
The feathers making up this disc can be adjusted to sharply focus sounds from varying distances onto the owls' asymmetrically placed ear cavities.
Most birds of prey have eyes on the sides of their heads, but the stereoscopic nature of the owl's forward-facing eyes permits the greater sense of depth perception necessary for low-light hunting.
Although owls have binocular vision, their large eyes are fixed in their sockets-as are those of most other birds-so they must turn their entire heads to change views.
As owls are farsighted, they are unable to clearly see anything within a few centimeters of their eyes.
Caught prey can be felt by owls with the use of filoplumes-hairlike feathers on the beak and feet that act as "feelers".
Their far vision, particularly in low light, is exceptionally good.
Owls can rotate their heads and necks as much as 270°.
Owls have 14 neck vertebrae compared to seven in humans, which makes their necks more flexible.
They also have adaptations to their circulatory systems, permitting rotation without cutting off blood to the brain: the foramina in their vertebrae through which the vertebral arteries pass are about 10 times the diameter of the artery, instead of about the same size as the artery as in humans; the vertebral arteries enter the cervical vertebrae higher than in other birds, giving the vessels some slack, and the carotid arteries unite in a very large anastomosis or junction, the largest of any bird's, preventing blood supply from being cut off while they rotate their necks.
Other anastomoses between the carotid and vertebral arteries support this effect.
The smallest owl-weighing as little as and measuring some -is the elf owl (Micrathene whitneyi).
Around the same diminutive length, although slightly heavier, are the lesser known long-whiskered owlet (Xenoglaux loweryi) and Tamaulipas pygmy owl (Glaucidium sanchezi).
Different species of owls produce different sounds; this distribution of calls aids owls in finding mates or announcing their presence to potential competitors, and also aids ornithologists and birders in locating these birds and distinguishing species.
As noted above, their facial discs help owls to funnel the sound of prey to their ears.
In many species, these discs are placed asymmetrically, for better directional location.
Owl plumage is generally cryptic, although several species have facial and head markings, including face masks, ear tufts, and brightly coloured irises.
These markings are generally more common in species inhabiting open habitats, and are thought to be used in signaling with other owls in low-light conditions.
Sexual dimorphism
Sexual dimorphism is a physical difference between males and females of a species.
Reverse sexual dimorphism, when females are larger than males, has been observed across multiple owl species.
The degree of size dimorphism varies across multiple populations and species, and is measured through various traits, such as wing span and body mass.
However, if food is scarce, the male first feeds himself before feeding the female.
Small birds, which are agile, are an important source of food for owls.
Male burrowing owls have been observed to have longer wing chords than females, despite being smaller than females.
This optimizes the owl's ability to silently fly to capture prey without the prey hearing the owl first as it flies in.
It also allows the owl to monitor the sound output from its flight pattern.
The feather adaption that allows silent flight means that barn owl feathers are not waterproof.
To retain the softness and silent flight, the barn owl cannot use the preen oil or powder dust that other species use for waterproofing.
In wet weather, they cannot hunt and this may be disastrous during the breeding season.
Barn owls are frequently found drowned in cattle drinking troughs, since they land to drink and bathe, but are unable to climb out.
Owls can struggle to keep warm, because of their lack of waterproofing, so large numbers of downy feathers help them to retain body heat.
Vision
Eyesight is a particular characteristic of the owl that aids in nocturnal prey capture.
Owls are part of a small group of birds that live nocturnally, but do not use echolocation to guide them in flight in low-light situations.
Owls are known for their disproportionally large eyes in comparison to their skulls.
An apparent consequence of the evolution of an absolutely large eye in a relatively small skull is that the eye of the owl has become tubular in shape.
This shape is found in other so-called nocturnal eyes, such as the eyes of strepsirrhine primates and bathypelagic fishes.
Breeding and reproduction
Owl eggs typically have a white colour and an almost spherical shape, and range in number from a few to a dozen, depending on species and the particular season; for most, three or four is the more common number.
In at least one species, female owls do not mate with the same male for a lifetime.
Female burrowing owls commonly travel and find other mates, while the male stays in his territory and mates with other females.
Evolution and systematics
The systematic placement of owls is disputed.
For example, the Sibley-Ahlquist taxonomy of birds finds that, based on DNA-DNA hybridization, owls are more closely related to the nightjars and their allies (Caprimulgiformes) than to the diurnal predators in the order Falconiformes; consequently, the Caprimulgiformes are placed in the Strigiformes, and the owls in general become a family, the Strigidae.
A recent study indicates that the drastic rearrangement of the genome of the accipitrids may have obscured any close relationship of theirs with groups such as the owls.
* Minerva (Middle - Late Eocene of W USA) formerly Protostrix, includes "Aquila" ferox, "Aquila" lydekkeri, and "Bubo" leptosteus
Sophiornithidae
The family Tytonidae: barn-owls
* Genus Tyto - typical barn-owls, stand up to tall.
Some 15 species and possibly one recently extinct.
* Genus Phodilus - bay-owls, 2-3 extant species and possibly one recently extinct.
Fossil genera
* Nocturnavis - includes "Asio" henrici
* Necrobyas (Late Eocene/Early Oligocene - Late Miocene) includes "Bubo" arvernensis and Paratyto
Placement unresolved
* Tytonidae gen. et sp. indet.
"TMT 164" (Middle Miocene) - Prosybris?
The family
* Genus Athene - 2-4 species (depending on whether Speotyto and Heteroglaux are included or not)
* Genus Bubo - Horned owls, eagle-owls and fish-owls; paraphyletic with Nyctea, Ketupa, and Scotopelia, some 25 species
* Genus Glaucidium - Pygmy-owls, about 30-35 species
* Genus Grallistrix - Stilt-owls, 4 species; prehistoric
* Genus Gymnoglaux - Bare-legged owl or Cuban screech-owl
* Genus Ninox - Australasian hawk-owls, some 20 species
* Genus Ornimegalonyx - Caribbean giant owls, 1-2 species; prehistoric
* Genus Otus - Scops owls; probably paraphyletic, about 45 species
* Genus Pseudoscops - Jamaican owl and possibly striped owl
Extinct Genus
* Genus Mascarenotus - Mascarene owls, three species; extinct (c. 1850)
Fossil genera
* Mioglaux (Late Oligocene? -
Early Miocene of WC Europe) - includes "Bubo" poirreiri
* Intutula - includes "Strix" collongensis
Placement unresolved
* "Otus Middle Miocene of Wintershof West, Germany) - may be close to extant genus Ninox
Asia
In Mongolia the owl is regarded as a benign omen.
In one story, Genghis Khan was hiding from enemies in a small coppice when an owl roosted in the tree above him, which caused his pursuers to think no man could be hidden there.
In modern Japan, owls are regarded as lucky and are carried in the form of a talisman or charm.
Ancient European and modern Western culture
The modern West generally associates owls with wisdom and vigilance.
This link goes back at least as far as Ancient Greece, where Athens, noted for art and scholarship, and Athena, Athens' patron goddess and the goddess of wisdom, had the owl as a symbol.
Marija Gimbutas traces veneration of the owl as a goddess, among other birds, to the culture of Old Europe, long pre-dating Indo-European cultures.
T. F. Thiselton-Dyer in his Folk-lore of Shakespeare says that "from the earliest period it has been considered a bird of ill-omen," and Pliny tells us how, on one occasion, even Rome itself underwent a lustration, because one of them strayed into the Capitol.
He represents it also as a funereal bird, a monster of the night, the very abomination of human kind.
Virgil describes its death-howl from the top of the temple by night, a circumstance introduced as a precursor of Dido's death.
Ovid, too, constantly speaks of this bird's presence as an evil omen; and indeed the same notions respecting it may be found among the writings of most of the ancient poets."
A list of "omens drear" in John Keats' Hyperion includes the "gloom-bird's hated screech."
Pliny the Elder reports that owl's eggs were commonly used as a hangover cure.
Hinduism
In Hinduism, an owl is the vahana, mount, of the Goddess Lakshmi.
Native American cultures
People often allude to the reputation of owls as bearers of supernatural danger when they tell misbehaving children, "the owls will get you", and in most Native American folklore, owls are a symbol of death.
For example:
*According to Apache and Seminole tribes, hearing owls hooting is considered the subject of numerous "bogeyman" stories told to warn children to remain indoors at night or not cry too much, otherwise the owl may carry them away.
In some tribal legends, owls are associated with spirits of the dead, and the bony circles around an owl's eyes are said to comprise the fingernails of apparitional humans.
Sometimes owls are said to carry messages from beyond the grave or deliver supernatural warnings to people who have broken tribal taboos.
*The Aztecs and Maya, along with other natives of Mesoamerica, considered the owl a symbol of death and destruction.
In fact, the Aztec god of death, Mictlantecuhtli, was often depicted with owls.
There is an old saying in Mexico that is still in use: Cuando el tecolote canta, el indio muere ("When the owl cries/sings, the Indian dies").
The Popol Vuh, a Mayan religious text, describes owls as messengers of Xibalba (the Mayan "Place of Fright").
*The belief that owls are messengers and harbingers of the dark powers is also found among the Hočągara (Winnebago) of Wisconsin.
When in earlier days the Hočągara committed the sin of killing enemies while they were within the sanctuary of the chief's lodge, an owl appeared and spoke to them in the voice of a human, saying, "From now on the Hočągara will have no luck."
This marked the beginning of the decline of their tribe.
An owl appeared to Glory of the Morning, the only female chief of the Hočąk nation, and uttered her name.
Soon afterwards she died.
*According to the culture of the Hopi, a Uto-Aztec tribe, taboos surround owls, which are associated with sorcery and other evils.
*Ojibwe tribes, as well as their Aboriginal Canadian counterparts, used an owl as a symbol for both evil and death.
In addition, they used owls as a symbol of very high status of spiritual leaders of their spirituality.
*Pawnee tribes viewed owls as the symbol of protection from any danger within their realms.
Attacks on humans
Although humans and owls frequently live together in harmony, there have been incidents when owls have attacked humans.
For example, in January 2013, a man from Inverness, Scotland suffered heavy bleeding and went into shock after being attacked by an owl, which was likely a 50-cm tall eagle owl.
The photographer Eric Hosking lost his left eye after attempting to photograph a tawny owl, which inspired the title of his 1970 autobiography, An Eye for a Bird.
Conservation issues
All owls are listed in Appendix II of the international CITES treaty (the Convention on Illegal Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora).
Although owls have long been hunted, a 2008 news story from Malaysia indicates that the magnitude of owl poaching may be on the rise.
In November 2008, TRAFFIC reported the seizure of 900 plucked and "oven-ready" owls in Peninsular Malaysia.
Said Chris Shepherd, Senior Programme Officer for TRAFFIC's Southeast Asia office, "This is the first time we know of where 'ready-prepared' owls have been seized in Malaysia, and it may mark the start of a new trend in wild meat from the region.
We will be monitoring developments closely."
TRAFFIC commended the Department of Wildlife and National Parks in Malaysia for the raid that exposed the huge haul of owls.
Included in the seizure were dead and plucked barn owls, spotted wood owls, crested serpent eagles, barred eagles, and brown wood owls, as well as 7,000 live lizards.
Further reading
* Calaprice, Alice & Heinrich, Bernd (1990): Owl in the House: A Naturalist's Diary.
Joy Street Books, Boston.
* Duncan, James. 2013.
The Complete Book of North American Owls.
Thunder Bay Press, San Diego.
* Duncan, James. 2003.
Owls of the World.
Key Porter Books, Toronto.
* Johnsgard, Paul A. (2002): North American Owls: Biology and Natural History, 2nd ed.
Smithsonian Institution Press, Washington DC. .
* Maslow, Jonathan Evan (1983): The Owl Papers, 1st
Vintage Books ed.
Vintage Books, New York. .
* Sibley, Charles Gald & Monroe, Burt L. Jr. (1990): Distribution and taxonomy of the birds of the world: A Study in Molecular Evolution.
Yale University Press, New Haven, CT.
