Sir Peter Paul Rubens (; ; 28 June 1577 - 30 May 1640) was a Flemish artist.
He is considered the most influential artist of Flemish Baroque tradition.
Rubens's highly charged compositions reference erudite aspects of classical and Christian history.
His unique and immensely popular Baroque style emphasized movement, color, and sensuality, which followed the immediate, dramatic artistic style promoted in the Counter-Reformation.
Rubens specialized in making altarpieces, portraits, landscapes, and history paintings of mythological and allegorical subjects.
In addition to running a large studio in Antwerp that produced paintings popular with nobility and art collectors throughout Europe, Rubens was a classically educated humanist scholar and diplomat who was knighted by both Philip IV of Spain and Charles I of England.
Rubens was a prolific artist.
The catalogue of his works by Michael Jaffé lists 1,403 pieces, excluding numerous copies made in his workshop.
His commissioned works were mostly "history paintings", which included religious and mythological subjects, and hunt scenes.
He painted portraits, especially of friends, and self-portraits, and in later life painted several landscapes.
Rubens designed tapestries and prints, as well as his own house.
He also oversaw the ephemeral decorations of the royal entry into Antwerp by the Cardinal-Infante Ferdinand of Austria in 1635.
His drawings are predominantly very forceful and without great detail.
He also made great use of oil sketches as preparatory studies.
He was one of the last major artists to make consistent use of wooden panels as a support medium, even for very large works, but he used canvas as well, especially when the work needed to be sent a long distance.
For altarpieces he sometimes painted on slate to reduce reflection problems.
Biography
Early life
Rubens was born in the city of Siegen to Jan Rubens and Maria Pypelincks.
He was named in honour of Saint Peter and Saint Paul, because he was born on their solemnity.
His father, a Calvinist, and mother fled Antwerp for Cologne in 1568, after increased religious turmoil and persecution of Protestants during the rule of the Habsburg Netherlands by the Duke of Alba.
Jan Rubens became the legal adviser (and lover) of Anna of Saxony, the second wife of William I of Orange, and settled at her court in Siegen in 1570, fathering her daughter Christine who was born in 1571.
Following Jan Rubens's imprisonment for the affair, Peter Paul Rubens was born in 1577.
The family returned to Cologne the next year.
In 1589, two years after his father's death, Rubens moved with his mother Maria Pypelincks to Antwerp, where he was raised as a Catholic.
Religion figured prominently in much of his work, and Rubens later became one of the leading voices of the Catholic Counter-Reformation style of painting .
Apprenticeship
In Antwerp, Rubens received a Renaissance humanist education, studying Latin and classical literature.
By fourteen he began his artistic apprenticeship with Tobias Verhaeght.
Subsequently, he studied under two of the city's leading painters of the time, the late Mannerist artists Adam van Noort and Otto van Veen.
Much of his earliest training involved copying earlier artists' works, such as woodcuts by Hans Holbein the Younger and Marcantonio Raimondi's engravings after Raphael.
Rubens completed his education in 1598, at which time he entered the Guild of St. Luke as an independent master.
Italy (1600-1608)
In 1600 Rubens travelled to Italy.
He stopped first in Venice, where he saw paintings by Titian, Veronese, and Tintoretto, before settling in Mantua at the court of Duke Vincenzo I Gonzaga.
The colouring and compositions of Veronese and Tintoretto had an immediate effect on Rubens's painting, and his later, mature style was profoundly influenced by Titian.
With financial support from the Duke, Rubens travelled to Rome by way of Florence in 1601.
There, he studied classical Greek and Roman art and copied works of the Italian masters.
The Hellenistic sculpture Laocoön and His Sons was especially influential on him, as was the art of Michelangelo, Raphael, and Leonardo da Vinci.
He was also influenced by the recent, highly naturalistic paintings by Caravaggio.
Rubens later made a copy of Caravaggio's Entombment of Christ and recommended his patron, the Duke of Mantua, to purchase The Death of the Virgin (Louvre).
After his return to Antwerp he was instrumental in the acquisition of The Madonna of the Rosary (Kunsthistorisches Museum, Vienna) for the St. Paul's Church in Antwerp.
During this first stay in Rome, Rubens completed his first altarpiece commission, St. Helena with the True Cross for the Roman church of Santa Croce in Gerusalemme.
Rubens travelled to Spain on a diplomatic mission in 1603, delivering gifts from the Gonzagas to the court of Philip III.
While there, he studied the extensive collections of Raphael and Titian that had been collected by Philip II.
He also painted an equestrian portrait of the Duke of Lerma during his stay (Prado, Madrid) that demonstrates the influence of works like Titian's (1548; Prado, Madrid).
This journey marked the first of many during his career that combined art and diplomacy.
He returned to Italy in 1604, where he remained for the next four years, first in Mantua and then in Genoa and Rome.
In Genoa, Rubens painted numerous portraits, such as the .
He also began a book illustrating the palaces in the city, which was published in 1622 as Palazzi di Genova.
From 1606 to 1608, he was mostly in Rome.
During this period Rubens received, with the assistance of Cardinal Jacopo Serra (the brother of Maria Pallavicini), his most important commission to date for the High Altar of the city's most fashionable new church, Santa Maria in Vallicella also known as the Chiesa Nuova.
The subject was to be St. Gregory the Great and important local saints adoring an icon of the Virgin and Child.
The first version, a single canvas , was immediately replaced by a second version on three slate panels that permits the actual miraculous holy image of the "Santa Maria in Vallicella" to be revealed on important feast days by a removable copper cover, also painted by the artist.
Rubens's experiences in Italy continued to influence his work.
He continued to write many of his letters and correspondences in Italian, signed his name as "Pietro Paolo Rubens", and spoke longingly of returning to the peninsula-a hope that never materialized.
Antwerp (1609-1621)
Upon hearing of his mother's illness in 1608, Rubens planned his departure from Italy for Antwerp.
However, she died before he arrived home.
His return coincided with a period of renewed prosperity in the city with the signing of the Treaty of Antwerp in April 1609, which initiated the Twelve Years' Truce.
In September 1609 Rubens was appointed as court painter by Albert VII, Archduke of Austria, and Infanta Isabella Clara Eugenia of Spain, sovereigns of the Low Countries.
He received special permission to base his studio in Antwerp instead of at their court in Brussels, and to also work for other clients.
He remained close to the Archduchess Isabella until her death in 1633, and was called upon not only as a painter but also as an ambassador and diplomat.
Rubens further cemented his ties to the city when, on 3 October 1609, he married Isabella Brant, the daughter of a leading Antwerp citizen and humanist, Jan Brant.
In 1610 Rubens moved into a new house and studio that he designed.
Now the Rubenshuis Museum, the Italian-influenced villa in the centre of Antwerp accommodated his workshop, where he and his apprentices made most of the paintings, and his personal art collection and library, both among the most extensive in Antwerp.
During this time he built up a studio with numerous students and assistants.
His most famous pupil was the young Anthony van Dyck, who soon became the leading Flemish portraitist and collaborated frequently with Rubens.
He also often collaborated with the many specialists active in the city, including the animal painter Frans Snyders, who contributed the eagle to Prometheus Bound (c. 1611-12, completed by 1618), and his good friend the flower-painter Jan Brueghel the Elder.
Another house was built by Rubens to the north of Antwerp in the polder village of Doel, "Hooghuis" (1613/1643), perhaps as an investment.
The "High House" was built next to the village church.
Altarpieces such as The Raising of the Cross (1610) and The Descent from the Cross (1611-1614) for the Cathedral of Our Lady were particularly important in establishing Rubens as Flanders' leading painter shortly after his return.
The Raising of the Cross, for example, demonstrates the artist's synthesis of 's dynamic figures, and Rubens's own personal style.
This painting has been held as a prime example of Baroque religious art.
Rubens used the production of prints and book title-pages, especially for his friend Balthasar Moretus, the owner of the large Plantin-Moretus publishing house, to extend his fame throughout Europe during this part of his career.
In 1618, Rubens embarked upon a printmaking enterprise by soliciting an unusual triple privilege (an early form of copyright) to protect his designs in France, the Southern Netherlands, and United Provinces.
He enlisted Lucas Vorsterman to engrave a number of his notable religious and mythological paintings, to which Rubens appended personal and professional dedications to noteworthy individuals in the Southern Netherlands, United Provinces, England, France, and Spain.
He recruited a number of engravers trained by Christoffel Jegher, whom he carefully schooled in the more vigorous style he wanted.
Rubens also designed the last significant woodcuts before the 19th-century revival in the technique.
Marie de' Medici Cycle and diplomatic missions (1621-1630)
In 1621, the Queen Mother of France, Marie de' Medici, commissioned Rubens to paint two large allegorical cycles celebrating her life and the life of her late husband, Henry IV, for the Luxembourg Palace in Paris.
The Marie de' Medici cycle (now in the Louvre) was installed in 1625, and although he began work on the second series it was never completed.
Marie was exiled from France in 1630 by her son, Louis XIII, and died in 1642 in the same house in Cologne where Rubens had lived as a child.
After the end of the Twelve Years' Truce in 1621, the Spanish Habsburg rulers entrusted Rubens with a number of diplomatic missions.
While in Paris in 1622 to discuss the Marie de' Medici cycle, Rubens engaged in clandestine information gathering activities, which at the time was an important task of diplomats.
He relied on his friendship with Nicolas-Claude Fabri de Peiresc to get information on political developments in France.
Between 1627 and 1630, Rubens's diplomatic career was particularly active, and he moved between the courts of Spain and England in an attempt to bring peace between the Spanish Netherlands and the United Provinces.
He also made several trips to the northern Netherlands as both an artist and a diplomat.
At the courts he sometimes encountered the attitude that courtiers should not use their hands in any art or trade, but he was also received as a gentleman by many.
Rubens was raised by Philip IV of Spain to the nobility in 1624 and knighted by Charles I of England in 1630.
Philip IV confirmed Rubens's status as a knight a few months later.
Rubens was awarded an honorary Master of Arts degree from Cambridge University in 1629.
Rubens was in Madrid for eight months in 1628-1629.
In addition to diplomatic negotiations, he executed several important works for Philip IV and private patrons.
He also began a renewed study of Titian's paintings, copying numerous works including the Madrid Fall of Man (1628-29).
During this stay, he befriended the court painter Diego Velázquez and the two planned to travel to Italy together the following year.
Rubens, however, returned to Antwerp and Velázquez made the journey without him.
His stay in Antwerp was brief, and he soon travelled on to London where he remained until April 1630.
An important work from this period is the Allegory of Peace and War (1629; National Gallery, London).
It illustrates the artist's lively concern for peace, and was given to Charles I as a gift.
While Rubens's international reputation with collectors and nobility abroad continued to grow during this decade, he and his workshop also continued to paint monumental paintings for local patrons in Antwerp.
The Assumption of the Virgin Mary (1625-6) for the Cathedral of Antwerp is one prominent example.
Last decade (1630-1640)
Rubens's last decade was spent in and around Antwerp.
Major works for foreign patrons still occupied him, such as the ceiling paintings for the Banqueting House at Inigo Jones's Palace of Whitehall, but he also explored more personal artistic directions.
In 1630, four years after the death of his first wife Isabella, the 53-year-old painter married his first wife's niece, the 16-year-old Hélène Fourment.
Hélène inspired the voluptuous figures in many of his paintings from the 1630s, including .
In 1635, Rubens bought an estate outside Antwerp, the Steen, where he spent much of his time.
Landscapes, such as his Château de Steen with Hunter (National Gallery, London) and (c. 1630; Louvre, Paris).
Death
Rubens died from heart failure, a result of his chronic gout, on 30 May 1640.
He was interred in Saint James' Church, Antwerp.
His epitaph read:
QTEMPLATE |D.O.M. IOANNIS, huius urbis senatoris qui inter cæteras quibus ad miraculum omniumq.
bonarum artiu.
et elegantiaru.
dotes sed et omnes ævi atque ad Regum Principumq.
Virorum amicitias a. PHILIPPO IV.
Hispaniarum Indiarumq.
Rege et ad CAROLVM Magmnæ Brittaniæ Regem pacis inter eosdem principes mox initæ Obiit anno sal.
M.DC.XL.XXX.
May ætatis LXIV.
Hoc momumenteum a Clarissimo GEVARTIO a Posteris huc usque neglectum, hoc anno M.DCC.LV.
Poni Curavit.
ex matre et avia Rubenia nepos. /
Descendants
The artist had eight children, three with Isabella and five with Hélène; his youngest child was born eight months after his death.
Many of his descendants married into important noble families of Antwerp.
Descendants by Isabella Brant:
* Albert Rubens (1614-1657), married Clara del Monte
* Nicolaas Rubens, Lord of Rameyen (1618-1655), married Constancia Helman
** Albert Marie Nicolaas Peter Rubens (1642-1672), married Maria Catharina Vecquemans
** Hélène Françoise Baptiste (1641-1710), married John Lunden.
** Maria Constantia Rubens (1649-?), married Lambert Frederik of Bronckhorst, Lord of Berlaer.
Art
His nudes of various biblical and mythological women are especially well-known.
Painted in the Baroque tradition of depicting women as soft-bodied, passive, and highly sexualized beings, his nudes emphasize the concepts of fertility, desire, physical beauty, temptation, and virtue.
Skillfully rendered, these paintings of nude women were undoubtedly created to appeal to his largely male audience of patrons.
Additionally, Rubens was quite fond of painting full-figured women, giving rise to terms like 'Rubensian' or 'Rubenesque' (sometimes 'Rubensesque').
And while the male gaze features heavily in Rubens's paintings of females generally, he brings multi-layered allegory and symbolism to his portraits.
His large-scale cycle representing Marie de Medicis focuses on several classic female archetypes like the virgin, consort, wife, widow, and diplomatic regent.
The inclusion of this iconography in his female portraits, along with his art depicting noblewomen of the day, serve to elevate his female portrait sitters to the status and importance of his male portrait sitters.
* Susannah and the Elders is now known only from engraving from 1620 by Lucas Vostermanand.
* Satyr, Nymph, Putti and Leopards is now known only from engraving
* Judith Beheading Holofernes c. 1609 known only through the 1610 engraving by Cornelis Galle the Elder.
* Works destroyed in the bombardment of Brussels are the Madonna of the Rosary painted for the Royal Chapel of the Dominican Church, Brussels; Virgin Adorned with Flowers by Saint Anne, 1610 painted for the Church of the Carmelite Friars; Saint Job Triptych, 1613, painted for Saint Nicholas Church, Brussels; Cambyses Appointing Otanes Judge, Judgment of Solomon, and the Last Judgment that were decorations for the Magistrates' Hall, Brussels.
* In the Coudenberg Palace fire there were several works by Rubens destroyed, like Nativity (1731), Adoration of the Magi and Pentecost.
The paintings Neptune and Amphitrite, Vision of Saint Hubert and Diana and Nymphs Surprised by Satyrs was destroyed in the Friedrichshain flak tower fire in 1945.
The painting The Abduction of Proserpine was destroyed in the fire at Blenheim Palace, Oxfordshire, 5 February 1861.
The painting Crucifixion with Mary, St. John, Magdalen, 1643 was destroyed in the English Civil War: English Parliamentarians in the Queen's Chapel, Somerset House, London, 1643
The painting Equestrian Portrait of Philip IV of Spain was destroyed in the fire at Royal Alcázar of Madrid fire in 1734.
A copy is in the Uffizi Gallery.
The Continence of Scipio was destroyed in a Fire in the Western Exchange, Old Bond Street, London, March 1836
The painting The Lion Hunt was removed by Napoleon's agents from Schloss Schleissheim, near Munich, 1800 and was destroyed later in a fire at the Musée des Beaux-Arts de Bordeaux
An alleged Rubens painting Portrait of a Girl reported to have been in the collection of Alexander Dumas; reported lost in a fire.
The painting Equestrian Portrait of the Duke of Buckingham (1625) and the ceiling painting The Duke of Buckingham Triumphing over Envy and Anger (circa 1625), both later owned by the Earl of Jersey at Osterley Park, were destroyed in a fire at the Le Gallais depository in St Helier, Jersey, on 30 September 1949
* Portrait of Philip IV of Spain from 1628 was destroyed in the Incendiary attack at the Kunsthaus Zürich in 1985.
* Portrait of George Villiers, c. 1625.
This painting that had been deemed lost for nearly 400 years was rediscovered in 2017 in Pollok House, Glasgow, Scotland.
File:Peter Paul Rubens - The Judgement of Paris, c.1606 (Museo del Prado).jpg|The Judgement of Paris, c. 1606
File:Jan Brueghel de Oude en Peter Paul Rubens - Het aards paradijs met de zondeval van Adam en Eva.jpg|Jan Brueghel the Elder and Peter Paul Rubens, The Garden of Eden with the Fall of Man, Mauritshuis, The Hague
File:'Equestrian Portrait of the George Villiers, 1st Duke of Buckingham'.jpg|Sketch for Equestrian Portrait of George Villiers, 1st Duke of Buckingham
File:Peter Paul Rubens - Portrait of George Villiers, 1st Duke of Buckingham GL GM PC 49.jpg|Portrait of George Villiers, 1st Duke of Buckingham, Pollok House
Art market
At a Sotheby's auction on 10 July 2002, Rubens's painting Massacre of the Innocents, rediscovered not long before, sold for £49.5 million (US$76.2 million) to Lord Thomson.
At the end of 2013 this remained the record auction price for an Old Master painting.
At a Christie's auction in 2012, Portrait of a Commander sold for £9.1 million (US$13.5 million) despite a dispute over the authenticity so that Sotheby's refused to auction it as a Rubens.
Selected exhibitions
* 1997
The Century of Rubens in French Collections, Paris.
* 2005 Peter Paul Rubens: The Drawings, Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York.
* 2015 Rubens and His Legacy, The Royal Academy, London.
* 2017 Rubens: the Power of Transformation, Kunsthistorisches Museum, Vienna.
Notes
Sources
* Auwers, Michael, Pieter Paul Rubens als diplomatiek debutant.
Het verhaal van een ambitieus politiek agent in de vroege zeventiende eeuw, in: Tijdschrift voor Geschiedenis - 123e jaargang, nummer 1, p. 20-33
* Held, Julius S. (1975) "On the Date and Function of Some Allegorical Sketches by Rubens."
In: Journal of the Warburg and Courtauld Institutes.
Vol. 38: 218-233.
* Held, Julius S. (1983) "Thoughts on Rubens' Beginnings."
In: Ringling Museum of Art Journal: 14-35. .
* Pauw-De Veen, Lydia de. "Rubens and the graphic arts".
In: Connoisseur CXCV katalog/rubens_zwischen_predigt_und_kunst-443.html Heinen, Ulrich, "Rubens zwischen Predigt und Kunst."
Weimar 1996.
* Corpus Rubenianum Ludwig Burchard.
An Illustrated Catalogue Raisonne of the Work of Peter Paul Rubens Based on the Material Assembled by the Late Dr. Ludwig Burchard in Twenty-Seven Parts, Edited by the Nationaal Centrum Voor de Plastische Kunsten Van de XVI en de XVII Eeuw.
* Lamster, Mark.
http:/ 2009 20 Master of Shadows, The Secret Diplomatic Career of Peter Paul Rubens New York, Doubleday, 2009.
* Lilar, Suzanne, Le Couple (1963), Paris, Grasset; Reedited 1970, Bernard Grasset Coll.
Diamant, 1972, Livre de Poche; 1982, Brussels, Les Éperonniers, ; Translated as Aspects of Love in Western Society in 1965, by and with a foreword by Jonathan Griffin, New York, McGraw-Hill, LC 65-19851.
* Sauerlander, Willibald.
The Catholic Rubens: Saints and Martyrs (Getty Research Institute; 2014); 311 pages; looks at his altarpieces in the context of the Counter-Reformation.
* Schrader, Stephanie, http:/ products/looking-east-rubenss-encounter-with-asia-978-1606061312 Looking East: Ruben's Encounter with Asia, Getty Publications, Los Angeles, 2013.
* Vlieghe, Hans, https:/ books?id
AS_NXFoY0M4C&printsec
frontcover&source
gbs_ge_summary_r&cad
0#v
onepage&q&f
false Flemish Art and Architecture 1585-1700, Yale University Press, Pelican History of Art, New Haven and London, 1998.
