An Internet Protocol address (IP address) is a numerical label assigned to each device connected to a computer network that uses the Internet Protocol for communication.
An IP address serves two main functions: host or network interface identification and location addressing.
Internet Protocol version 4 (IPv4) defines an IP address as a 32-bit number.
IPv6 deployment has been ongoing since the mid-2000s.
IP addresses are written and displayed in human-readable notations, such as in IPv4, and in IPv6.
The size of the routing prefix of the address is designated in CIDR notation by suffixing the address with the number of significant bits, e.g., , which is equivalent to the historically used subnet mask .
The IP address space is managed globally by the Internet Assigned Numbers Authority (IANA), and by five regional Internet registries (RIRs) responsible in their designated territories for assignment to local Internet registries, such as Internet service providers, and other end users.
IPv4 addresses were distributed by IANA to the RIRs in blocks of approximately 16.8 million addresses each, but have been exhausted at the IANA level since 2011.
Only one of the RIRs still has a supply for local assignments in Africa.
Network administrators assign an IP address to each device connected to a network.
Such assignments may be on a static (fixed or permanent) or dynamic basis, depending on network practices and software features.
Function
An IP address serves two principal functions.
It identifies the host, or more specifically its network interface, and it provides the location of the host in the network, and thus the capability of establishing a path to that host.
Its role has been characterized as follows: "A name indicates what we seek.
An address indicates where it is.
A route indicates how to get there."
These addresses are not routed on the Internet and thus their use need not be coordinated with an IP address registry.
Any user may use any of the reserved blocks.
Typically, a network administrator will divide a block into subnets; for example, many home routers automatically use a default address range of through ().
IPv6 addresses
In IPv6, the address size was increased from 32 bits in IPv4 to 128 bits, thus providing up to 2128 (approximately ) addresses.
This is deemed sufficient for the foreseeable future.
The intent of the new design was not to provide just a sufficient quantity of addresses, but also redesign routing in the Internet by allowing more efficient aggregation of subnetwork routing prefixes.
This resulted in slower growth of routing tables in routers.
The smallest possible individual allocation is a subnet for 264 hosts, which is the square of the size of the entire IPv4 Internet.
At these levels, actual address utilization ratios will be small on any IPv6 network segment.
The new design also provides the opportunity to separate the addressing infrastructure of a network segment, i.e. the local administration of the segment's available space, from the addressing prefix used to route traffic to and from external networks.
IPv6 has facilities that automatically change the routing prefix of entire networks, should the global connectivity or the routing policy change, without requiring internal redesign or manual renumbering.
The large number of IPv6 addresses allows large blocks to be assigned for specific purposes and, where appropriate, to be aggregated for efficient routing.
With a large address space, there is no need to have complex address conservation methods as used in CIDR.
All modern desktop and enterprise server operating systems include native support for the IPv6 protocol, but it is not yet widely deployed in other devices, such as residential networking routers, voice over IP (VoIP) and multimedia equipment, and some networking hardware.
Private addresses
Just as IPv4 reserves addresses for private networks, blocks of addresses are set aside in IPv6.
In IPv6, these are referred to as unique local addresses (ULAs).
The routing prefix is reserved for this block, which is divided into two blocks with different implied policies.
The addresses include a 40-bit pseudorandom number that minimizes the risk of address collisions if sites merge or packets are misrouted.
Early practices used a different block for this purpose (), dubbed site-local addresses.
However, the definition of what constituted a site remained unclear and the poorly defined addressing policy created ambiguities for routing.
This address type was abandoned and must not be used in new systems.
Addresses starting with , called link-local addresses, are assigned to interfaces for communication on the attached link.
The addresses are automatically generated by the operating system for each network interface.
This provides instant and automatic communication between all IPv6 host on a link.
This feature is used in the lower layers of IPv6 network administration, such as for the Neighbor Discovery Protocol.
Private and link-local address prefixes may not be routed on the public Internet.
IP address assignment
IP addresses are assigned to a host either dynamically as they join the network, or persistently by configuration of the host hardware or software.
Persistent configuration is also known as using a static IP address.
In contrast, when a computer's IP address is assigned each time it restarts, this is known as using a dynamic IP address.
Dynamic IP addresses are assigned by network using Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol (DHCP).
DHCP is the most frequently used technology for assigning addresses.
It avoids the administrative burden of assigning specific static addresses to each device on a network.
It also allows devices to share the limited address space on a network if only some of them are online at a particular time.
Typically, dynamic IP configuration is enabled by default in modern desktop operating systems.
The address assigned with DHCP is associated with a lease and usually has an expiration period.
If the lease is not renewed by the host before expiry, the address may be assigned to another device.
Some DHCP implementations attempt to reassign the same IP address to a host (based on its MAC address) each time it joins the network.
A network administrator may configure DHCP by allocating specific IP addresses based on MAC address.
DHCP is not the only technology used to assign IP addresses dynamically.
Bootstrap Protocol is a similar protocol and predecessor to DHCP.
Dialup and some broadband networks use dynamic address features of the Point-to-Point Protocol.
Computers and equipment used for the network infrastructure, such as routers and mail servers, are typically configured with static addressing.
In the absence or failure of static or dynamic address configurations, an operating system may assign a link-local address to a host using stateless address autoconfiguration.
Sticky dynamic IP address
A sticky dynamic IP address is an informal term used by cable and DSL Internet access subscribers to describe a dynamically assigned IP address which seldom changes.
The addresses are usually assigned with DHCP.
Since the modems are usually powered on for extended periods of time, the address leases are usually set to long periods and simply renewed.
If a modem is turned off and powered up again before the next expiration of the address lease, it often receives the same IP address.
Address autoconfiguration
Address block is defined for the special use in link-local addressing for IPv4 networks.
In IPv6, every interface, whether using static or dynamic address assignments, also receives a link-local address automatically in the block .
APIPA has been deployed on millions of machines and became a de facto standard in the industry.
In May 2005, the IETF defined a formal standard for it.
Addressing conflicts
An IP address conflict occurs when two devices on the same local physical or wireless network claim to have the same IP address.
A second assignment of an address generally stops the IP functionality of one or both of the devices.
Many modern operating systems notify the administrator of IP address conflicts.
When IP addresses are assigned by multiple people and systems with differing methods, any of them may be at fault.
If one of the devices involved in the conflict is the default gateway access beyond the LAN for all devices on the LAN may be impaired.
Routing
IP addresses are classified into several classes of operational characteristics: unicast, multicast, anycast and broadcast addressing.
Unicast addressing
The most common concept of an IP address is in unicast addressing, available in both IPv4 and IPv6.
It normally refers to a single sender or a single receiver, and can be used for both sending and receiving.
Usually, a unicast address is associated with a single device or host, but a device or host may have more than one unicast address.
Sending the same data to multiple unicast addresses requires the sender to send all the data many times over, once for each recipient.
Broadcast addressing
Broadcasting is an addressing technique available in IPv4 to address data to all possible destinations on a network in one transmission operation as an all-hosts broadcast.
All receivers capture the network packet.
The address is used for network broadcast.
In addition, a more limited directed broadcast uses the all-ones host address with the network prefix.
For example, the destination address used for directed broadcast to devices on the network is .
IPv6 does not implement broadcast addressing, and replaces it with multicast to the specially defined all-nodes multicast address.
Multicast addressing
A multicast address is associated with a group of interested receivers.
In IPv4, addresses through (the former Class D addresses) are designated as multicast addresses.
IPv6 uses the address block with the prefix for multicast.
In either case, the sender sends a single datagram from its unicast address to the multicast group address and the intermediary routers take care of making copies and sending them to all interested receivers (those that have joined the corresponding multicast group).
1laa5ngvyyxxq8x03i8xeusrdf7yfxw
