Black Beauty is an 1877 novel by English author Anna Sewell.
It was composed in the last years of her life, during which she remained in her house as an invalid.
The novel became an immediate best-seller, with Sewell dying just five months after its publication, but having lived long enough to see her only novel become a success.
With fifty million copies sold, Black Beauty is one of the best-selling books of all time.
While forthrightly teaching animal welfare, it also teaches how to treat people with kindness, sympathy, and respect.
In 2003, the novel was listed at number 58 on the BBC's survey The Big Read.
It is seen as a forerunner of the pony book.
Background
QTEMPLATE |...there is no religion without love, and people may talk as much as they like about their religion, but if it does not teach them to be good and kind to man and beast, it is all a sham...|Black Beauty| , last paragraph.
Anna Sewell was born in Great Yarmouth, England, and had a brother named Philip, who was an engineer in Europe.
At the age of 14, Anna fell while walking home from school in the rain and injured both ankles.
Through mistreatment of the injury, she became unable to walk or stand for any length of time for the rest of her life.
Disabled and unable to walk, she began learning about horses, spending many hours driving her father to and from the station from which he commuted to work.
Her dependence on horse-drawn transportation fostered her respect for horses.
By telling the story of a horse's life in the form of an autobiography and describing the world through the eyes of the horse, Anna Sewell broke new literary ground.
Her sympathetic portrayal of the plight of working animals led to a vast outpouring of concern for animal welfare and is said to have been instrumental in the abolition of the cruel practice of using the checkrein (or "bearing rein", a strap used to keep horses' heads high, fashionable in Victorian England but painful and damaging to a horse's neck).
Black Beauty also mentions the use of blinkers on horses, concluding that this use is likely to cause accidents at night due to interference with "the full use of" a horse's ability to "see much better in the dark than men can."
Plot summary
The story is narrated in the first person as an autobiographical memoir told by the titular horse named Black Beauty-beginning with his carefree days as a colt on an English farm with his mother, to his difficult life pulling cabs in London, to his happy retirement in the country.
Along the way, he meets with many hardships and recounts many tales of cruelty and kindness.
Each short chapter recounts an incident in Black Beauty's life containing a lesson or moral typically related to the kindness, sympathy, and understanding treatment of horses, with Sewell's detailed observations and extensive descriptions of horse behaviour lending the novel a good deal of verisimilitude.
Tess Coslett highlights that Black Beauty's story is structured in a way that makes him similar to those he serves.
The horses in the text have reactions as well as emotions and characteristics, like love and loyalty, which are similar to those of human beings.
Coslett emphasises that, while Black Beauty is not the first book written in the style of an animal autobiography, it is a novel that "allows the reader to slide in and out of horse-consciousness, blurring the human/animal divide".
Reception
Upon publication of the book, many readers related to the pain of the victimised horses, sympathised and ultimately wanted to see the introduction of reforms that would improve the well-being of horses.
Two years after the release of the novel, one million copies of Black Beauty were in circulation in the United States.
In addition, animal rights activists would habitually distribute copies of the novel to horse drivers and to people in stables.
The depiction of the "bearing rein" in Black Beauty spurred so much outrage and empathy from readers that its use was not only abolished in Victorian England, but public interest in anti-cruelty legislation in the United States also grew significantly.
The arguably detrimental social practices concerning the use of horses in Black Beauty inspired the development of legislation in various states that would condemn such abusive behaviours towards animals.
The impact of the novel is still very much recognised today.
Writing in the Encyclopedia of Animal Rights and Animal Welfare, Bernard Unti calls Black Beauty "the most influential anticruelty novel of all time".
Comparisons have also been made between Black Beauty and the most important social protest novel in the United States, Uncle Tom's Cabin, by Harriet Beecher Stowe, on account of the strong degree of outrage and protest action that both novels triggered in society.
on its Disneyland Records label with music by Disney's musical director at the time, Tutti Camarata, complete with narration and singing by Robie Lester similar to an old-time radio program; Disney has never made an animated or live-action version and none is known to have ever been planned by Disney.
Theatrical adaptations
*Black Beauty Live (2011), adapted by James Stone and directed by Chris Ford
Black Beauty was adapted for the stage in 2011 by playwright James Stone.
The play was perform at the Broughton Hall Estate, North Yorkshire and Epsom Racecourse, Surrey.
The production was a critical success and was performed around the UK in 2012.
Influence upon other works
*Beautiful Joe was a best-selling 1893 novel about a dog that was directly influenced by Black Beauty and followed a similar path to fame through awareness of cruelty to animals.
*The Strike at Shane's: A Prize Story of Indiana is an anonymous American novel that won a monetary award and national publication in 1893 in a contest sponsored by the American Humane Society, and was reprinted several times commercially thereafter.
Described in the introduction as a "Sequel to Black Beauty"', it tells the story of good and bad treatment of farm animals and local wildlife, especially songbirds, in the America Midwest.
The novel is generally attributed as the first published work of the novelist Gene Stratton Porter, and bears a remarkable textual similarity to her other books.
*One of the most popular of the interwar pony stories for children, Moorland Mousie (1929), by 'Golden Gorse' (Muriel Wace), is heavily influenced by Black Beauty.
* Phyllis Briggs wrote a sequel called Son of Black Beauty, published in 1950.
*The Pullein-Thompson sisters wrote several stories concerning relatives of Black Beauty.
They are "Black Ebony" (1975; by Josephine), "Black Velvet" (1975; by Christine), "Black Princess" (1975; by Diana), "Black Nightshade" (1978; by Josephine), "Black Romany" (1978; by Diana), "Blossom" (1978; by Christine), "Black Piper" (1982; by Diana), "Black Raven" (1982; by Josephine) and "Black Pioneer" (1982; by Christine).
The book Black Swift (1991) by Josephine is not about a Black Beauty relative.
These were published in several compilations as well as some of them being available separately.
Each compilation was subsequently republished, sometimes with a change of name.
*Spike Milligan wrote a parody of the novel called Black Beauty According to Spike Milligan (1996).
