Li Bai (701-762), also known as Li Bo, courtesy name Taibai, was a Chinese poet acclaimed from his own day to the present as a genius and a romantic figure who took traditional poetic forms to new heights.
He and his friend Du Fu (712-770) were the two most prominent figures in the flourishing of Chinese poetry in the Tang dynasty, which is often called the "Golden Age of Chinese Poetry".
The expression "Three Wonders" denote Li Bai's poetry, Pei Min's swordplay, and Zhang Xu's calligraphy.
Around a thousand poems attributed to him are extant.
His poems have been collected into the most important Tang dynasty poetry anthology Heyue yingling ji, compiled in 753 by Yin Fan, and thirty-four of his poems are included in the anthology Three Hundred Tang Poems, which was first published in the 18th century.
In the same century, translations of his poems began to appear in Europe.
The poems were models for celebrating the pleasures of friendship, the depth of nature, solitude, and the joys of drinking wine.
Among the most famous are "Waking from Drunkenness on a Spring Day", "The Hard Road to Shu", and "Quiet Night Thought", which still appear in school texts in China.
In the West, multilingual translations of Li's poems continue to be made.
His life has even taken on a legendary aspect, including tales of drunkenness, chivalry, and the well-known fable that Li drowned when he reached from his boat to grasp the moon’s reflection in the river while drunk.
Much of Li's life is reflected in his poetry: places which he visited, friends whom he saw off on journeys to distant locations perhaps never to meet again, his own dream-like imaginations embroidered with shamanic overtones, current events of which he had news, descriptions taken from nature in a timeless moment of poetry, and so on.
However, of particular importance are the changes in the times through which he lived.
His early poetry took place in the context of a "golden age" of internal peace and prosperity in the Chinese empire of the Tang dynasty, under the reign of an emperor who actively promoted and participated in the arts.
This all changed suddenly and shockingly, beginning with the rebellion of the general An Lushan, when all of northern China was devastated by war and famine.
Li's poetry as well takes on new tones and qualities.
Unlike his younger friend Du Fu, Li did not live to see the quelling of these disorders.
However, much of Li's poetry has survived, retaining enduring popularity in China and elsewhere.
Family name and surname
Li Bai, Li Po, Li Bo, Ri Haku have been all used in the West, but are all written with the same characters.
His given name, ( was called at the time.
Thus, combining the family name with the courtesy name, his name appears in variants such as Li Taibo, Li Taibai, Li Tai-po, among others.
He is also known by his (hao), or pen-name Qīnglián Jūshì (青蓮 (, or "Poet-Hero").
The Japanese pronunciation may be romanized as "Ri Haku"or "Ri Taihaku".
Life
The two "Books of Tang", The Old Book of Tang and The New Book of Tang, remain the primary sources of bibliographical material on Li Bai.
Other sources include internal evidence from poems by or about Li Bai, and certain other sources, such the preface to his collected poems by his relative and literary executor, Li Yangbin.
Background and birth
Li Bai is generally considered to have been born in 701, in Suyab (碎葉) of ancient Chinese Central Asia (present-day Kyrgyzstan), where his family had prospered in business at the frontier.
Afterwards, the family under the leadership of his father, Li Ke (李客), moved to Jiangyou (江油), near modern Chengdu, in Sichuan province, when the youngster was about five years old.
There is some mystery or uncertainty about the circumstances of the family relocations, due to a lack of legal authorization which would have generally been required to move out of the border regions, especially if one's family had been assigned (exiled) there.
Background
Two accounts given by contemporaries Li Yangbing (a family relative) and Fan Chuanzheng state that Li's family was originally from what is now southwestern Jingning County, Gansu.
Li's ancestry is traditionally traced back to Li Gao, the noble founder of the state of Western Liang.
This provides some support for Li's own claim to be related to the Li dynastic royal family of the Tang dynasty: the Tang emperors also claimed descent from the Li rulers of West Liang.
This family was known as the Longxi Li lineage (, and the Li family were likely merchants.
Their business was quite prosperous.
Birth
In one hagiographic account, while Li Bai's mother was pregnant with him, she had a dream of a great white star falling from heaven.
This seems to have contributed to the idea of his being a banished immortal (one of his nicknames).
That the Great White Star was synonymous with Venus helps to explain his courtesy name: "Tai Bai", or "Venus".
Marriage and family
Li is known to have married four times.
His first marriage, in 727, was to the granddaughter of a former government minister.
and exchanges of poems, including many expressions of love for her and their children.
His wife, Zong, was a granddaughter of Zong Chuke (宗楚客, died 710), an important government official during the Tang dynasty and the interegnal period of Wu Zetian.
Early years
In 705, when Li Bai was four years old, his father secretly moved his family to Sichuan, near Chengdu, where he spent his childhood.
There is currently a monument commemorating this in Zhongba Town, Jiangyou, Sichuan province (the area of the modern province then being known as Shu, after a former independent state which had been annexed by the Sui dynasty and later incorporated into the Tang dynasty lands).
The young Li spent most of his growing years in Qinglian (青莲; lit.
"Blue also translated as 'green', 'azure', or 'nature-coloured' Lotus"), a town in Chang-ming County, Sichuan, China.
Before he was twenty, Li had fought and killed several men, apparently for reasons of chivalry, in accordance with the knight-errant tradition (youxia).
During the first year of his trip, he met celebrities and gave away much of his wealth to needy friends.
In 730, Li Bai stayed at Zhongnan Mountain near the capital Chang'an (Xi'an), and tried but failed to secure a position.
He sailed down the Yellow River, stopped by Luoyang, and visited Taiyuan before going home.
In 735, Li Bai was in Shanxi, where he intervened in a court martial against Guo Ziyi, who was later, after becoming one of the top Tang generals, to repay the favour during the An Shi disturbances.
Emperor Xuanzong employed him as a translator, as Li Bai knew at least one non-Chinese language.
A story, probably apocryphal, circulates about Li Bai during this period.
Once, while drunk, Li Bai had gotten his boots muddy, and Gao Lishi, the most politically powerful eunuch in the palace, was asked to assist in the removal of these, in front of the Emperor.
Gao took offense at being asked to perform this menial service, and later managed to persuade Yang Guifei to take offense at Li's poems concerning her.
After leaving the court, Li Bai formally became a Taoist, making a home in Shandong, but wandering far and wide for the next ten some years, writing poems.
Meeting Du Fu
He met Du Fu in the autumn of 744, when they shared a single room and various activities together, such as traveling, hunting, wine, and poetry, thus established a close and lasting friendship.
They met again the following year.
These were the only occasions on which they met, in person, although they continued to maintain a relationship through poetry.
This is reflected in the dozen or so Du Fu poems to or about Li Bai, which survive, and the one from Li Bai directed toward Du Fu which remains.
War and exile
At the end of 755, the disorders instigated by the rebel general An Lushan burst across the land.
The Emperor eventually fled to Sichuan and abdicated.
During the confusion, the Crown Prince opportunely declared himself Emperor and head of the government.
The An Shi disturbances continued (as they were later called, since they lasted beyond the death of their instigator, carried on by Shi Siming, and others).
Li Bai became a staff adviser to Prince Yong, one of Ming Huang's (Emperor Xuanzong's) sons, who was far from the top of the primogeniture list, yet named to share the imperial power as a general after Xuanzong had abdicated, in 756.
However, even before the empire's external enemies were defeated, the two brothers fell to fighting each other with their armies.
Upon the defeat of the Prince's forces by his brother the new emperor in 757, Li Bai escaped, but was later captured, imprisoned in Jiujiang, and sentenced to death.
The famous and powerful army general Guo Ziyi and others intervened; Guo Ziyi was the very person whom Li Bai had saved from court martial a couple of decades before.
Upon General Guo Ziyi's offering to exchange his official rank for Li Bai's life, Li Bai's death sentence was commuted to exile: he was consigned to Yelang.
Death
The new Emperor Daizong named Li Bai the Registrar of the Left Commandant's office in 762.
However, by the time that the imperial edict arrived in Dangtu, Anhui, Li Bai was already dead.
There is a long and sometimes fanciful tradition regarding his death, from uncertain Chinese sources, that Li Bai drowned after falling from his boat one day he had gotten very drunk as he tried to embrace the reflection of the moon in the Yangtze River, something later believed by Herbert Giles.
A memorial of Li Bai lies just west of Ma'anshan.
Calligraphy
Li Bai was also a skilled calligrapher, though there is only one surviving piece of his work in his own handwriting that exists today.
Surviving texts and editing
Even Li Bai and Du Fu, the two most famous and most comprehensively edited Tang poets, were affected by the destruction of the imperial Tang libraries and the loss of many private collections in the periods of turmoil (An Lushan Rebellion and Huang Chao Rebellion).
Although many of Li Bai's poems have survived, even more were lost and there is difficulty regarding variant texts.
One of the earliest endeavors at editing Li Bai's work was by his relative Li Yangbing, the magistrate of Dangtu, with whom he stayed in his final years and to whom he entrusted his manuscripts.
However, the most reliable texts are not necessarily in the earliest editions.
Song dynasty scholars produced various editions of his poetry, but it was not until the Qing dynasty that such collections as the Quan Tangshi (Complete Tang Poems) made the most comprehensive studies of the then surviving texts.
Themes
Critics have focused on Li Bai's strong sense of the continuity of poetic tradition, his glorification of alcoholic beverages (and, indeed, frank celebration of drunkenness), his use of persona, the fantastic extremes of some of his imagery, his mastery of formal poetic rules-and his ability to combine all of these with a seemingly effortless virtuosity in order to produce inimitable poetry.
Other themes in Li's poetry, noted especially in the 20th century, are sympathy for the common folks and antipathy towards needless wars (even when conducted by the emperor himself).
Poetic tradition
Li Bai had a strong sense of himself as being part of a poetic tradition.
The "genius" of Li Bai, says one recent account, "lies at once in his total command of the literary tradition before him and his ingenuity in bending (without breaking) it to discover a uniquely personal idiom...." Burton Watson, comparing him to Du Fu, says Li's poetry, "is essentially backward-looking, that it represents more a revival and fulfillment of past promises and glory than a foray into the future."
Watson adds, as evidence, that of all the poems attributed to Li Bai, about one sixth are in the form of yuefu, or, in other words, reworked lyrics from traditional folk ballads.
As further evidence, Watson cites the existence of a fifty-nine poem collection by Li Bai entitled Gu Feng, or In the Old Manner, which is, in part, tribute to the poetry of the Han and Wei dynasties.
His admiration for certain particular poets is also shown through specific allusions, for example to Qu Yuan or Tao Yuanming, and occasionally by name, for example Du Fu.
A more general appreciation for history, is shown on the part of Li Bai in his poems of the huaigu genre, or meditations on the past, wherein following "one of the perennial themes of Chinese poetry", "the poet contemplates the ruins of past glory".
Rapt with wine and moon
John C. H. Wu observed that "while some may have drunk more wine than Li Bai, no-one has written more poems about wine."
Classical Chinese poets were often associated with drinking wine, and Li Bai was part of the group of Chinese scholars in Chang'an his fellow poet Du Fu called the "Eight Immortals of the Wine Cup."
The Chinese generally did not find the moderate use of alcohol to be immoral or unhealthy.
James J. Y Liu comments that zui in poetry "does not mean quite the same thing as 'drunk', 'intoxicated', or 'inebriated', but rather means being mentally carried away from one's normal preoccupations ..."
Liu translates zui as "rapt with wine".
The "Eight Immortals", however, drank to an unusual degree, though they still were viewed as pleasant eccentrics.
Burton Watson concluded that "nearly all Chinese poets celebrate the joys of wine, but none so tirelessly and with such a note of genuine conviction as Li Bai".
One of Li Bai's most famous poems is Waking From Drunkenness on a Spring Day ().
Arthur Waley translated it as follows:
Fantastic imagery
An important characteristic of Li Bai's poetry "is the fantasy and note of childlike wonder and playfulness that pervade so much of it".
Liu gives as a prime example Li's poem "A Quiet Night Thought" (also translated as "Contemplating Moonlight"), which is often learned by schoolchildren in China.
In a mere 20 words, the poem uses the vivid moonlight and frost imagery to convey the feeling of homesickness.
There are several editions of the poem.
This is translated from a 17th-century Kangxi edition moonlight poem:
The following version has been translated by Jarek Zawadzki from the Gujin Tushu Jicheng edition:
Use of persona
Li Bai also wrote a number of poems from various viewpoints, including the personae of women.
For example, he wrote several poems in the Zi Ye, or "Lady Midnight" style, as well as Han folk-ballad style poems.
Technical virtuosity
Li Bai is well known for the technical virtuosity of his poetry and the mastery of his verses.
Li Bai's yuefu poems have been called the greatest of all time by Ming-dynasty scholar and writer Hu Yinglin.
Li Bai especially excelled in the Gushi form, or "old style" poems, a type of poetry allowing a great deal of freedom in terms of the form and content of the work.
An example is his poem "蜀道難", translated by Witter Bynner as "Hard Roads in Shu".
Shu is a poetic term for Sichuan, the destination of refuge that Emperor Xuanzong considered fleeing to escape the approaching forces of the rebel General An Lushan.
Watson comments that, this poem, "employs lines that range in length from four to eleven characters, the form of the lines suggesting by their irregularity the jagged peaks and bumpy mountain roads of Sichuan depicted in the poem."
Ming-dynasty poet Li Pan Long thought Li Bai was the greatest jueju master of the Tang dynasty.
Li Bai was noted for his mastery of the Lüshi (poetry), or "regulated verse", the formally most demanding verse form of the times.
Watson notes, however, that his poem "Seeing a Friend Off" was "unusual in that it violates the rule that the two middle couplets ... must observe verbal parallelism", adding that Chinese critics excused this kind of violation in the case of a genius like Li.
Influence
In the East
Li Bai's poetry was immensely influential in his own time, as well as for subsequent generations in China.
From early on, he was paired with Du Fu.
The recent scholar Paula Varsano observes that "in the literary imagination they were, and remain, the two greatest poets of the Tang-or even of China".
Yet she notes the persistence of "what we can rightly call the 'Li-Du debate', the terms of which became so deeply ingrained in the critical discourse surrounding these two poets that almost any characterization of the one implicitly critiqued the other".
Li's influence has also been demonstrated in the immediate geographical area of Chinese cultural influence, being known as Ri Haku in Japan.
This influence continues even today.
Examples range from poetry to painting and to literature.
In his own lifetime, during his many wanderings and while he was attending court in Chang'an, he met and parted from various contemporary poets.
These meetings and separations were typical occasions for versification in the tradition of the literate Chinese of the time, a prime example being his relationship with Du Fu.
After his lifetime, his influence continued to grow.
Some four centuries later, during the Song dynasty, for example, just in the case of his poem that is sometimes translated "Drinking Alone Beneath the Moon", the poet Yang Wanli wrote a whole poem alluding to it (and to two other Li Bai poems), in the same gushi, or old-style poetry form.
In the 20th century, Li Bai even influenced the poetry of Mao Zedong.
In China, his poem "Quiet Night Thoughts", reflecting a nostalgia of a traveller away from home, has been widely "memorized by school children and quoted by adults".
In the West
There is another musical setting of Li Bai's verse by the American composer Harry Partch, whose Seventeen Lyrics by Li Po for intoning voice and Adapted Viola are based on the texts in The Works of Li Po, the Chinese Poet translated by Shigeyoshi Obata.
In Brazil, the songwriter Beto Furquim included a musical setting of the poem "Jing Ye Si" in his album "Muito Prazer".
Ezra Pound
Li Bai is influential in the West partly due to Ezra Pound's versions of some of his poems in the collection Cathay,
Gustav Mahler
The ideas underlying Li Bai's poetry had a profound impact in shaping American Imagist and Modernist poetry through the 20th century.
Also, Gustav Mahler integrated four of Li Bai's works into his symphonic song cycle Das Lied von der Erde.
These were derived from free German translations by Hans Bethge, published in an anthology called (The Chinese Flute), Bethge based his versions on the collection Chinesische Lyrik by Hans Heilmann (1905).
Heilmann worked from pioneering 19th-century translations into French: three by the Marquis d'Hervey-Saint-Denys and one (only distantly related to the Chinese) by Judith Gautier.
Mahler freely changed Bethge's text.
Reference in Beat Generation
Li Bai's poetry can be seen as being an influence to Beat Generation writer Gary Snyder during Snyder's years of studying Asian Culture and Zen.
Bai's haiku style of descriptive writing assisted in the diversity within the Beat writing style.
As well as D.T. Suzuki being a big influence on Snyder's writing and life.
Translation
Li Bai's poetry was introduced to Europe by Jean Joseph Marie Amiot, a Jesuit missionary in Beijing, in his Portraits des Célèbres Chinois, published in the series Mémoires concernant l'histoire, les sciences, les arts, les mœurs, les usages, &c. des Chinois, par les missionnaires de Pekin.
(1776-1797).
Joseph Edkins read a paper, "On Li Tai-po", to the Peking Oriental Society in 1888, which was subsequently published in that society's journal.
The early sinologist Herbert Allen Giles included translations of Li Bai in his 1898 publication Chinese Poetry in English Verse, and again in his History of Chinese Literature (1901).
The third early translator into English was L. Cranmer-Byng (1872-1945).
His Lute of Jade: Being Selections from the Classical Poets of China (1909) and A Feast of Lanterns (1916) both featured Li's poetry.
Renditions of Li Bai's poetry into modernist English poetry were influential through Ezra Pound in Cathay (1915) and Amy Lowell in Fir-Flower Tablets (1921).
Neither worked directly from the Chinese: Pound relied on more or less literal, word for word, though not terribly accurate, translations of Ernest Fenollosa and what Pound called the "decipherings" of professors Mori and Ariga; Lowell on those of Florence Ayscough.
Witter Bynner with the help of Kiang Kang-hu included several of Li's poems in The Jade Mountain (1939).
Although Li was not his preferred poet, Arthur Waley translated a few of his poems into English for the Asiatic Review, and included them in his More Translations from the Chinese.
Shigeyoshi Obata, in his 1922 The Works of Li Po, claimed he had made "the first attempt ever made to deal with any single Chinese poet exclusively in one book for the purpose of introducing him to the English-speaking world.
A translation of Li Bai's poem Green Moss by poet William Carlos Williams was sent as a letter to Chinese American poet David Rafael Wang where Williams was seen as having a similar tone as Pound.
Li Bai became a favorite among translators for his straightforward and seemingly simple style.
Later translations are too numerous to discuss here, but an extensive selection of Li's poems, translated by various translators, is included in John Minford and Joseph S. M. Lau, Classical Chinese Literature (2000)
Exemplary translation
One of Li Bai's best known poems and a good example of his writing is his Drinking Alone by Moonlight (, pinyin: Yuè Xià Dú Zhuó), which has been translated into English by various authors, including this translation, by Arthur Waley:
To hear the poem read in Chinese and to see another translation, go to http:/ at lb04.html Great Tang Poets: Li Bo (701-762) "Drinking Alone under the Moon" Asia For Educators (Columbia University)
* Simians (Chinese poetry)#In Baidicheng, back from the way to exile
Notes
* Cooper, Arthur (1973).
Li Po and Tu Fu: Poems Selected and Translated with an Introduction and Notes (Penguin Classics, 1973). .
* Hinton, David (2008).
Classical Chinese Poetry: An Anthology.
New York: Farrar, Straus, and Giroux.
* Hinton, David (1998).
The Selected Poems of Li Po (Anvil Press Poetry, 1998).
* Holyoak, Keith (translator) (2007).
Facing the Moon: Poems of Li Bai and Du Fu. (Durham, NH: Oyster River Press).
* Obata, Shigeyoshi (1922).
The Works of Li Po, the Chinese Poet.
(New York: Dutton).
Reprinted: New York: Paragon, 1965.
https:/ books?id
CnQuAAAAYAAJ&printsec
frontcover#v
onepage&q&f
false Free E-Book.
* Pound, Ezra (1915).
Cathay (Elkin Mathews, London).
* Stimson, Hugh M. (1976).
Fifty-five T'ang Poems.
Far Eastern Publications: Yale University.
* Seth, Vikram (translator) (1992).
Three Chinese Poets: Translations of Poems by Wang Wei, Li Bai, and Du Fu.
(London: Faber & Faber).
* Weinberger, Eliot.
The New Directions Anthology of Classical Chinese Poetry.
(New York: New Directions, 2004). .
Introduction, with translations by William Carlos Williams, Ezra Pound, Kenneth Rexroth, Gary Snyder, and David Hinton.
* Watson, Burton (1971).
Chinese Lyricism: Shih Poetry from the Second to the Twelfth Century.
New York: Columbia University Press.
* Sun, Yu 孫瑜, translation, introduction, and commentary (1982).
Li Po-A New Translation 李白詩新譯.
Hong Kong: The Commercial Press,
Background and criticism
* Edkins, Joseph (1888).
"Li Tai-po as a Poet", The China Review, Vol. 17 No. 1 (1888 Jul) http:/ hkjo 26 hkjo/result.jsp?noOfRec
20&totalRec
182&img
h&firstRec
61, 19 January 2011.
* Eide, Elling (1973).
"On Li Po", in Perspectives on the T'ang.
New Haven, London: Yale University Press, 367-403.
* Frankel, Hans H. (1978).
The Flowering Plum and the Palace Lady.
(New Haven and London: Yale University Press) .
* Kroll, Paul (2001).
“Poetry of the T’ang Dynasty,” in Victor H. Mair.
ed., The Columbia History of Chinese Literature.
(New York: Columbia University Press, 2001).
, pp. 274-313.
* Stephen Owen 'Li Po: a new concept of genius," in Stephen Owen.
The Great Age of Chinese Poetry : The High T'ang.
(New Haven Conn.:
Yale University Press, 1981). .
* Varsano, Paula M. (2003).
Tracking the Banished Immortal: The Poetry of Li Bo and its Critical Reception (University of Hawai'i Press, 2003).
, https:/ books?id
v9dX7fh4OWgC&printsec
frontcover&dq
ISBN9780824825737&hl
en&sa
X&ei
QYKeUb-BObSCyAH22IHwAg&ved
0CDAQ6AEwAA#v
onepage&q&f=false
* .
Lists and evaluates scholarship and translations.
* Waley, Arthur (1950).
The Poetry and Career of Li Po (New York: MacMillan, 1950).
* Wu, John C.H. (1972).
The Four Seasons of Tang Poetry.
Rutland, Vermont: Charles E. Tuttle.
Further reading
* Hsieh, Chinghsuan Lily.
"https:/ !etd.send_file?accession
osu1086095656&disposition
inline Chinese Poetry of Li Po Set by Four Twentieth Century British Composers: Bantock, Warlock, Bliss and Lambert" (PhD thesis).
The Ohio State University, 2004.
