An atlas is a collection of maps; it is typically a bundle of maps of Earth or a region of Earth.
Atlases have traditionally been bound into book form, but today many atlases are in multimedia formats.
In addition to presenting geographic features and political boundaries, many atlases often feature geopolitical, social, religious and economic statistics.
They also have information about the map and places in it.
Etymology
The use of the word "atlas" in a geographical context dates from 1595 when the German-Flemish geographer Gerardus Mercator published Atlas Sive Cosmographicae Meditationes de Fabrica Mundi et Fabricati Figura.
This title provides Mercator's definition of the word as a description of the creation and form of the whole universe, not simply as a collection of maps.
The volume that was published posthumously one year after his death is a wide-ranging text but, as the editions evolved, it became simply a collection of maps and it is in that sense that the word was used from the middle of the seventeenth century.
The neologism coined by Mercator was a mark of his respect for the Titan, Atlas, the "King of Mauretania", whom he considered to be the first great geographer.
History of atlases
The first work that contained systematically arranged woodcut maps of uniform size, published in a book, thus representing the first modern atlas is conventionally awarded to the Brabantian cartographer Abraham Ortelius who in 1570 published the collection of maps Theatrum Orbis Terrarum.
Types of atlases
A travel atlas is made for easy use during travel, and often has spiral bindings so it may be folded flat (for example Geographers' A-Z Map Company famous A-Z atlases).
It has maps at a large zoom so the maps can be reviewed easily.
A travel atlas may also be referred to as a road map.
A desk atlas is made similar to a reference book.
It may be in hardback or paperback form.
There are atlases of the other planets (and their satellites) in the Solar System.
Atlases of anatomy exist, mapping out organs of the human body or other organisms.
Selected atlases
Some cartographically or commercially important atlases include the following:
;17th century and earlier
*Atlas Sive Cosmographicae (Mercator, Duisburg, in present-day Germany, 1595)
*Cartes générales de toutes les parties du monde (France, 1658-1676)
*Theatrum Orbis Terrarum (Ortelius, Netherlands, 1570-1612)
*Klencke Atlas (1660; one of the world's largest books)
;18th century
*Cary's New and Correct English Atlas (London, 1787)
;19th century
*Andrees Allgemeiner Handatlas (Germany, 1881-1939; in the UK as Times Atlas of the World, 1895)
*Times Atlas of the World (United Kingdom, 1895-present)
;20th century
*Atlante Internazionale del Touring Club Italiano (Italy, 1927-1978)
*Geographers' A-Z Street Atlas (United Kingdom, 1938-present)
*National Geographic Atlas of the World (United States, 1963-present)
;21st century
