The Romance languages (nowadays rarely Romanic languages, Latin languages, Neo-Latin languages) are the modern languages that evolved from Vulgar Latin between the third and eighth centuries.
They are a subgroup of the Italic languages in the Indo-European language family.
Today, around 800 million people are native speakers worldwide, mainly in Europe, Africa, and the Americas, but also elsewhere.
Additionally, the major Romance languages have many non-native speakers and are in widespread use as lingua francas.
This is especially the case for French, which is in widespread use throughout Central and West Africa, Madagascar, Mauritius, and the Maghreb.
The five most widely spoken Romance languages by number of native speakers are Spanish (470 million), Portuguese (250 million), French (150 million), Italian (90 million), and Romanian (25 million).
Because of the difficulty of imposing boundaries on a continuum, various counts of the modern Romance languages are given; for example, Dalby lists 23 based on mutual intelligibility.
The following, more extensive list, includes 35 current, living languages, and one extinct language, Dalmatian:
*Ibero-Romance: Portuguese, Galician, Mirandese, Asturian, Leonese, Spanish, Aragonese, Ladino (Judaeo-Spanish);
*Occitano-Romance: Catalan Oïl languages, Franco-Provençal (Arpitan);
*Gallo-Italic: Piedmontese, Ligurian, Lombard, Emilian-Romagnol;
*Italo-Dalmatian: Italian, Tuscan and Corsican, Sassarese, Sicilian, Neapolitan, Dalmatian (extinct in 1898), Venetian, Istriot;
*Eastern Romance: Romanian (standard known as Daco-Romanian), Istro-Romanian, Aromanian, Megleno-Romanian.
Origins
Romance languages are the continuation of Vulgar Latin, the popular and colloquial sociolect of Latin spoken by soldiers, settlers, and merchants of the Roman Empire, as distinguished from the classical form of the language spoken by the Roman upper classes, the form in which the language was generally written.
Between 350 BC and 150 AD, the expansion of the Empire, together with its administrative and educational policies, made Latin the dominant native language in continental Western Europe.
Latin also exerted a strong influence in southeastern Britain, the Roman province of Africa, western Germany, Pannonia and the whole Balkans.
During the Empire's decline, and after its fragmentation and the collapse of Western half in the fifth and sixth centuries, the spoken varieties of Latin became more isolated from each other, with the western dialects coming under heavy Germanic influence and the eastern dialects coming under Slavic influence.
The dialects diverged from classical Latin at an accelerated rate and eventually evolved into a continuum of recognizably different typologies.
The colonial empires established by Portugal, Spain, and France from the fifteenth century onward spread their languages to the other continents to such an extent that about two-thirds of all Romance language speakers today live outside Europe.
Despite other influences (e.g. substratum from pre-Roman languages, especially Continental Celtic languages; and superstratum from later Germanic or Slavic invasions), the phonology, morphology, and lexicon of all Romance languages consist mainly of evolved forms of Vulgar Latin.
However, some notable differences occur between today's Romance languages and their Roman ancestor.
With only one or two exceptions, Romance languages have lost the declension system of Latin and, as a result, have SVO sentence structure and make extensive use of prepositions.
Name
The term ).
From this adverb the noun romance originated, which applied initially to anything written , or "in the Roman vernacular".
The word 'romance' with the modern sense of romance novel or love affair has the same origin.
In the medieval literature of Western Europe, serious writing was usually in Latin, while popular tales, often focusing on heroic adventures and courtly love, were composed in the vernacular and came to be called "romances".
Samples
Lexical and grammatical similarities among the Romance languages, and between Latin and each of them, are apparent from the following examples having the same meaning in various Romance lects:
English: She always closes the window before she dines / before dining.
Romance-based creoles and pidgins
Some of the divergence comes from semantic change: where the same root word has developed different meanings.
For example, the Portuguese word is descended from Latin "window" (and is thus cognate to French , Italian , Romanian and so on), but now means "skylight" and "slit".
Cognates may exist but have become rare, such as in Spanish, or dropped out of use entirely.
The Spanish and Portuguese terms meaning "to throw through a window" and meaning "replete with windows" also have the same root, but are later borrowings from Latin.
Likewise, Portuguese also has the word , a cognate of Italian and Spanish , but uses it in the sense of "to have a late supper" in most varieties, while the preferred word for "to dine" is (related to archaic Spanish "to eat") because of semantic changes in the 19th century.
Galician has both (from medieval fẽestra, the ancestor of standard Portuguese ) and the less frequently used and .
As an alternative to (originally the genitive form), Italian has the pronoun , a cognate of the other words for "she", but it is hardly ever used in speaking.
Spanish, Asturian, and Leonese and Mirandese and Sardinian come from Latin "wind" (cf. English window, etymologically 'wind eye'), and Portuguese , Galician , Mirandese from Latin
Sardinian (alternative for /) comes from Old Italian and is similar to other Romance languages such as French (from Italian ), Portuguese , Romanian , Spanish , Catalan and Corsican (alternative for ).
History
Vulgar Latin
Documentary evidence is limited about Vulgar Latin for the purposes of comprehensive research, and the literature is often hard to interpret or generalize.
Many of its speakers were soldiers, slaves, displaced peoples, and forced resettlers, more likely to be natives of conquered lands than natives of Rome.
In Western Europe, Latin gradually replaced Celtic and other Italic languages, which were related to it by a shared Indo-European origin.
Commonalities in syntax and vocabulary facilitated the adoption of Latin.
Vulgar Latin is believed to have already had most of the features shared by all Romance languages, which distinguish them from Classical Latin, such as the almost complete loss of the Latin grammatical case system and its replacement by prepositions; the loss of the neuter grammatical gender and comparative inflections; replacement of some verb paradigms by innovations (e.g. the synthetic future gave way to an originally analytic strategy now typically formed by infinitive + evolved present indicative forms of 'have'); the use of articles; and the initial stages of the palatalization of the plosives , , and .
To some scholars, this suggests the form of Vulgar Latin that evolved into the Romance languages was around during the time of the Roman Empire (from the end of the first century BC), and was spoken alongside the written Classical Latin which was reserved for official and formal occasions.
Other scholars argue that the distinctions are more rightly viewed as indicative of sociolinguistic and register differences normally found within any language.
Both were mutually intelligible as one and the same language, which was true until very approximately the second half of the 7th century.
However, within two hundred years Latin became a dead language since "the Romanized people of Europe could no longer understand texts that were read aloud or recited to them," i.e. Latin had ceased to be a first language and became a foreign language that had to be learned, if the label Latin is constrained to refer to a state of the language frozen in past time and restricted to linguistic features for the most part typical of higher registers.
With the rise of the Roman Empire, Vulgar Latin spread first throughout Italy and then through southern, western, central, and southeast Europe, and northern Africa along parts of western Asia.
Fall of the Western Roman Empire
During the political decline of the Western Roman Empire in the fifth century, there were large-scale migrations into the empire, and the Latin-speaking world was fragmented into several independent states.
Central Europe and the Balkans were occupied by Germanic and Slavic tribes, as well as by Huns.
These incursions isolated the Vlachs from the rest of Romance-speaking Europe.
British and African Romance-the forms of Vulgar Latin used in southeastern Britain and the Roman province of Africa, where it had been spoken by much of the urban population-disappeared in the Middle Ages (as did Pannonian Romance in what is now Hungary, and Moselle Romance in Germany).
But the Germanic tribes that had penetrated Roman Italy, Gaul, and Hispania eventually adopted Latin/Romance and the remnants of the culture of ancient Rome alongside existing inhabitants of those regions, and so Latin remained the dominant language there.
In part due to regional dialects of the Latin language and local environments, several languages evolved from it.
The invasion of the Turks and conquest of Constantinople in 1453 marked the end of the empire.
The Slavs named the Romance-speaking population Vlachs, while the latter called themselves "Rumân" or "Român", from the Latin "Romanus" The Daco-Roman dialect became fully distinct from the three dialects spoken South of the Danube-Macedo-Romanian, Istro-Romanian, and Megleno-Romanian-during the ninth and tenth centuries, when the Romanians (sometimes called Vlachs or Wallachians) emerged as a people.
Early Romance
Over the course of the fourth to eighth centuries, local changes in phonology, morphology, syntax and lexicon accumulated to the point that the speech of any locale was noticeably different from another.
In principle, differences between any two lects increased the more they were separated geographically, reducing easy mutual intelligibility between speakers of distant communities.
Clear evidence of some levels of change is found in the Reichenau Glosses, an eighth-century compilation of about 1,200 words from the fourth-century Vulgate of Jerome that had changed in phonological form or were no longer normally used, along with their eighth-century equivalents in proto-Franco-Provençal.
The following are some examples with reflexes in several modern Romance languages for comparison:
In all of the above examples, the words appearing in the fourth century Vulgate are the same words as would have been used in Classical Latin of c. 50 BC.
It is likely that some of these words had already disappeared from casual speech by the time of the Glosses; but if so, they may well have been still widely understood, as there is no recorded evidence that the common people of the time had difficulty understanding the language.
By the 8th century, the situation was very different.
During the late 8th century, Charlemagne, holding that "Latin of his age was by classical standards intolerably corrupt",
Recognition of the vernaculars
Between the 10th and 13th centuries, some local vernaculars developed a written form and began to supplant Latin in many of its roles.
In some countries, such as Portugal, this transition was expedited by force of law; whereas in others, such as Italy, many prominent poets and writers used the vernacular of their own accord - some of the most famous in Italy being Giacomo da Lentini and Dante Alighieri.
Well before that, the vernacular was also used for practical purposes, such as the testimonies in the Placiti Cassinesi, written 960-963.
Uniformization and standardization
The invention of the printing press brought a tendency towards greater uniformity of standard languages within political boundaries, at the expense of other Romance languages and dialects less favored politically.
In France, for instance, the dialect spoken in the region of Paris gradually spread to the entire country, and the Occitan of the south lost ground.
Modern status
The Romance language most widely spoken natively today is Spanish, followed by Portuguese, French, Italian and Romanian, which together cover a vast territory in Europe and beyond, and work as official and national languages in dozens of countries.
French, Italian, Portuguese, Spanish, and Romanian are also official languages of the European Union.
Spanish, Portuguese, French, Italian, Romanian, and Catalan are the official languages of the Latin Union; and French and Spanish are two of the six official languages of the United Nations.
Outside Europe, French, Portuguese and Spanish are spoken and enjoy official status in various countries that emerged from the respective colonial empires.
Spanish is an official language in Spain and in nine countries of South America, home to about half that continent's population; in six countries of Central America (all except Belize); and in Mexico.
In the Caribbean, it is official in Cuba, the Dominican Republic, and Puerto Rico.
In all these countries, Latin American Spanish is the vernacular language of the majority of the population, giving Spanish the most native speakers of any Romance language.
In Africa it is an official language of Equatorial Guinea.
Portuguese, in its original homeland, Portugal, is spoken by virtually the entire population of 10 million.
As the official language of Brazil, it is spoken by more than 200 million people in that country, as well as by neighboring residents of eastern Paraguay and northern Uruguay, accounting for a little more than half the population of South America.
It is the official language of six African countries (Angola, Cape Verde, Guinea-Bissau, Mozambique, Equatorial Guinea, and São Tomé and Príncipe), and is spoken as a first language by perhaps 30 million residents of that continent.
In Asia, Portuguese is co-official with other languages in East Timor and Macau, while most Portuguese-speakers in Asia-some 400,000-are in Japan due to return immigration of Japanese Brazilians.
In North America 1,000,000 people speak Portuguese as their home language.
In Oceania, Portuguese is the second most spoken Romance language, after French, due mainly to the number of speakers in East Timor.
Its closest relative, Galician, has official status in the autonomous community of Galicia in Spain, together with Spanish.
Outside Europe, French is spoken natively most in the Canadian province of Quebec, and in parts of New Brunswick and Ontario.
Canada is officially bilingual, with French and English being the official languages.
In parts of the Caribbean, such as Haiti, French has official status, but most people speak creoles such as Haitian Creole as their native language.
French also has official status in much of Africa, but relatively few native speakers.
In France's overseas possessions, native use of French is increasing.
Although Italy also had some colonial possessions before World War II, its language did not remain official after the end of the colonial domination.
As a result, Italian outside of Italy and Switzerland is now spoken only as a minority language by immigrant communities in North and South America and Australia.
In some former Italian colonies in Africa-namely Libya, Eritrea and Somalia-it is spoken by a few educated people in commerce and government.
Romania did not establish a colonial empire, but beyond its native territory in southeastern Europe, the Romanian language is spoken as a minority language by autochthonous populations in Serbia, Bulgaria, and Hungary, and in some parts of the former Greater Romania (before 1945), as well as in Ukraine (Bukovina, Budjak) and in some villages between the Dniester and Bug rivers.
The Aromanian language is spoken today by Aromanians in Bulgaria, Macedonia, Albania, Kosovo, and Greece.
Romanian also spread to other countries on the Mediterranean (especially the other Romance-speaking countries, most notably Italy and Spain), and elsewhere such as Israel, where it is the native language of five percent of the population, and is spoken by many more as a secondary language.
This is due to the large number of Romanian-born Jews who moved to Israel after World War II.
And finally, some 2.6 million people in the former Soviet republic of Moldova speak a variety of Romanian, called variously Moldovan or Romanian by them.
The total native speakers of Romance languages are divided as follows (with their ranking within the languages of the world in brackets):
Catalan is the official language of Andorra.
In Spain, it is co-official with Spanish in Catalonia, the Valencian Community, and the Balearic Islands, and it is recognized, but not official, in La Franja, and in Aragon.
In addition, it is spoken by many residents of Alghero, on the island of Sardinia, and it is co-official in that city.
Galician, with more than a million native speakers, is official together with Spanish in Galicia, and has legal recognition in neighbouring territories in Castilla y León.
A few other languages have official recognition on a regional or otherwise limited level; for instance, Asturian and Aragonese in Spain; Mirandese in Portugal; Friulan, Sardinian and Franco-Provençal in Italy; and Romansh in Switzerland.
The remaining Romance languages survive mostly as spoken languages for informal contact.
National governments have historically viewed linguistic diversity as an economic, administrative or military liability, as well as a potential source of separatist movements; therefore, they have generally fought to eliminate it, by extensively promoting the use of the official language, restricting the use of the other languages in the media, recognizing them as mere "dialects", or even persecuting them.
As a result, all of these languages are considered endangered to varying degrees according to the UNESCO
Red Book of Endangered Languages, ranging from "vulnerable" (e.g. Sicilian and Venetian) to "severely endangered" (Arpitan, most of the Occitan varieties).
Since the late twentieth and early twenty-first centuries, increased sensitivity to the rights of minorities has allowed some of these languages to start recovering their prestige and lost rights.
Yet it is unclear whether these political changes will be enough to reverse the decline of minority Romance languages.
Classification and related languages
The classification of the Romance languages is inherently difficult, because most of the linguistic area is a dialect continuum, and in some cases political biases can come into play.
Along with Latin (which is not included among the Romance languages) and a few extinct languages of ancient Italy, they make up the Italic branch of the Indo-European family.
Proposed divisions
There are various schemes used to subdivide the Romance languages.
Three of the most common schemes are as follows:
* Italo-Western vs. Eastern vs. Southern.
This is the scheme followed by Ethnologue, and is based primarily on the outcome of the ten monophthong vowels in Classical Latin.
This is discussed more below.
* West vs. East.
This scheme divides the various languages along the La Spezia-Rimini Line, which runs across north-central Italy just to the north of the city of Florence (whose speech forms the basis of standard Italian).
In this scheme, "East" includes the languages of central and southern Italy, and the Balkan Romance (or "Eastern Romance") languages in Romania, Greece, and elsewhere in the Balkans; "West" includes the languages of Portugal, Spain, France, northern Italy and Switzerland.
Sardinian does not easily fit in this scheme.
* "Conservative" vs. "innovatory".
This is a non-genetic division whose precise boundaries are subject to debate.
Generally, the Gallo-Romance languages (discussed further below) form the core "innovatory" languages, with standard French generally considered the most innovatory of all, while the languages near the periphery (which include Spanish, Portuguese, Italian and Romanian) are "conservative".
Sardinian is generally acknowledged the most conservative Romance language, and was also the first language to split off genetically from the rest, possibly as early as the first century BC.
Dante famously denigrated the Sardinians for the conservativeness of their speech, remarking that they imitate Latin "like monkeys imitate men".
Italo-Western vs. Eastern vs. Sardinian
The main subfamilies that have been proposed by Ethnologue within the various classification schemes for Romance languages are:
* Italo-Western, the largest group, which includes languages such as Catalan, Portuguese, Italian, Spanish, and French.
* Eastern Romance, which includes the Romance languages of Eastern Europe, such as Romanian.
* Southern Romance, which includes a few languages with particularly archaic features, such as Sardinian and, according to some authors, Corsican as well to a more limited extent.
This family is thought to have included the now-vanished Romance languages of North Africa (or at least, they appear to have evolved some phonological features and their vowels in the same way).
This three-way division is made primarily based on the outcome of Vulgar Latin (Proto-Romance) vowels:
Italo-Western is in turn split along the so-called La Spezia-Rimini Line in northern Italy, which divides the central and southern Italian languages from the so-called Western Romance languages to the north and west.
The primary characteristics dividing the two are:
* Phonemic lenition of intervocalic stops, which happens to the northwest but not to the southeast.
* Degemination of geminate stops (producing new intervocalic single voiceless stops, after the old ones were lenited), which again happens to the northwest but not to the southeast.
* Deletion of intertonic vowels (between the stressed syllable and either the first or last syllable), again in the northwest but not the southeast.
* Use of plurals in in the northwest vs. plurals using vowel change in the southeast.
* Development of palatalized before to in the northwest vs. in the southeast.
* Development of , which develops to > (sometimes progressing further to ) in the northwest but in the southeast.
The reality is somewhat more complex.
All of the "southeast" characteristics apply to all languages southeast of the line, and all of the "northwest" characteristics apply to all languages in France and (most of) Spain.
However, the Gallo-Italic languages are somewhere in between.
All of these languages do have the "northwest" characteristics of lenition and loss of gemination.
However:
The Gallo-Italic languages have vowel-changing plurals rather than plurals.
The Lombard language in north-central Italy and the Rhaeto-Romance languages have the "southeast" characteristic of instead of for palatalized .
The Venetian language in northeast Italy and some of the Rhaeto-Romance languages have the "southeast" characteristic of developing to .
* Lenition of post-vocalic is widespread as an allophonic phonetic realization in Italy below the La Spezia-Rimini line, including Corsica and most of Sardinia.
On top of this, the ancient Mozarabic language in southern Spain, at the far end of the "northwest" group, had the "southeast" characteristics of lack of lenition and palatalization of to .
Certain languages around the Pyrenees (e.g. some highland Aragonese dialects) also lack lenition, and northern French dialects such as Norman and Picard have palatalization of to .
The usual solution to these issues is to create various nested subgroups.
Western Romance is split into the Gallo-Iberian languages, in which lenition happens and which include nearly all the Western Romance languages, and the Pyrenean-Mozarabic group, which includes the remaining languages without lenition (and is unlikely to be a valid clade; probably at least two clades, one for Mozarabic and one for Pyrenean).
Gallo-Iberian is split in turn into the Iberian languages (e.g. Spanish and Portuguese), and the larger Gallo-Romance languages (stretching from eastern Spain to northeast Italy).
Probably a more accurate description, however, would be to say that there was a focal point of innovation located in central France, from which a series of innovations spread out as areal changes.
The La Spezia-Rimini Line represents the farthest point to the southeast that these innovations reached, corresponding to the northern chain of the Apennine Mountains, which cuts straight across northern Italy and forms a major geographic barrier to further language spread.
This would explain why some of the "northwest" features (almost all of which can be characterized as innovations) end at differing points in northern Italy, and why some of the languages in geographically remote parts of Spain (in the south, and high in the Pyrenees) are lacking some of these features.
It also explains why the languages in France (especially standard French) seem to have innovated earlier and more extensively than other Western Romance languages.
Many of the "southeast" features also apply to the Eastern Romance languages , despite the geographic discontinuity.
Examples are lack of lenition, maintenance of intertonic vowels, use of vowel-changing plurals, and palatalization of to .
This has led some researchers to postulate a basic two-way East-West division, with the "Eastern" languages including Romanian and central and southern Italian, although this view is troubled by the contrast of numerous Romanian phonological developments with those found in Italy below the La Spezia-Rimini line.
Among these features, in Romanian geminates reduced historically to single units - which may be an independent development or perhaps due to Slavic influence - and developed into , whereas in central and southern Italy geminates are preserved and underwent assimilation to .
Despite being the first Romance language to evolve from Vulgar Latin, It is clear that Sardinian became linguistically independent from the remainder of the Romance languages at an extremely early date, possibly already by the first century BC.
Sardinian contains a large number of archaic features, including total lack of palatalization of and and a large amount of vocabulary preserved nowhere else, including some items already archaic by the time of Classical Latin (first century BC).
Sardinian has plurals in but post-vocalic lenition of voiceless consonants is normally limited to the status of an allophonic rule (e.g. kane 'dog' but su gane or su ɣane 'the dog'), and there are a few innovations unseen elsewhere, such as a change of to .
Use of su cent , cantum "song" > chant .
* Other than the Occitano-Romance languages, most Gallo-Romance languages are subject-obligatory (whereas all the rest of the Romance languages are pro-drop languages).
This is a late development triggered by progressive phonetic erosion: Old French was still a null-subject language, and this only changed upon loss of secondarily final consonants in Middle French.
Pidgins, creoles, and mixed languages
Some Romance languages have developed varieties which seem dramatically restructured as to their grammars or to be mixtures with other languages.
It is not always clear whether they should be classified as Romance, pidgins, creole languages, or mixed languages.
Some other languages, such as Modern English, are sometimes thought of as creoles of semi-Romance ancestry.
There are several dozens of creoles of French, Spanish, and Portuguese origin, some of them spoken as national languages in former European colonies.
Creoles of French:
* Antillean (French Antilles, Saint Lucia, Dominica)
Creoles of Spanish:
Creoles of Portuguese:
* Angolar (regional language in São Tomé and Principe)
* Cape Verdean (Cape Verde's national language; includes several distinct languages)
* Forro (regional language in São Tomé and Príncipe)
Auxiliary and constructed languages
Latin and the Romance languages have also served as the inspiration and basis of numerous auxiliary and constructed languages, so-called "neo-romantic languages".
The concept was first developed in 1903 by Italian mathematician Giuseppe Peano, under the title Latino sine flexione.
He wanted to create a naturalistic international language, as opposed to an autonomous constructed language like Esperanto or Volapuk which were designed for maximal simplicity of lexicon and derivation of words.
Peano used Latin as the base of his language, because at the time of his flourishing it was the de facto international language of scientific communication.
Other languages developed since include Idiom Neutral, Occidental, Lingua Franca Nova, and most famously and successfully, Interlingua.
Each of these languages has attempted to varying degrees to achieve a pseudo-Latin vocabulary as common as possible to living Romance languages.
There are also languages created for artistic purposes only, such as Talossan.
Because Latin is a very well attested ancient language, some amateur linguists have even constructed Romance languages that mirror real languages that developed from other ancestral languages.
These include Brithenig (which mirrors Welsh), Breathanach (mirrors Irish), Wenedyk (mirrors Polish), Þrjótrunn (mirrors Icelandic), and Helvetian (mirrors German).
Linguistic features
Basic features
Romance languages have a number of shared features across all languages:
* Romance languages are moderately inflecting, i.e. there is a moderately complex system of affixes (primarily suffixes) that are attached to words to convey grammatical information such as number, gender, person, tense, etc.
Verbs have much more inflection than nouns.
The amount of synthesis is significantly more than English, but less than Classical Latin and much less than the oldest Indo-European languages (e.g. Ancient Greek, Sanskrit).
Inflection is fusional, with a single affix representing multiple features (as contrasted with agglutinative languages such as Turkish or Japanese).
For example, Portuguese amei "I loved" is composed of am- "love" and the fusional suffix -ei "first-person singular preterite indicative".
* Romance languages have a primarily subject-verb-object word order, with varying degrees of flexibility from one language to another.
Constructions are predominantly of the head-first (right-branching) type.
Adjectives, genitives and relative clauses all tend to follow their head noun, although (except in Romanian) determiners usually precede.
* In general, nouns, adjectives and determiners inflect only according to grammatical gender (masculine or feminine) and grammatical number (singular or plural).
Grammatical case is marked only on pronouns, as in English; case marking, as in English, is of the nominative-accusative type (rather than e.g. the ergative-absolutive marking of Basque or the split ergativity of Hindi).
A significant exception, however, is Romanian, with two-case marking on nominal elements.
* Verbs are inflected according to a complex morphology that marks person, number (singular or plural), tense, mood (indicative, subjunctive, imperative), and sometimes aspect or gender.
Grammatical voice (active, passive, middle/reflexive) and some grammatical aspects are expressed using periphrastic constructions, as in the Italian present perfect (passato prossimo)
io ho amato I have been loved".
Most Romance languages are null subject languages (but modern French is not, as a result of the phonetic decay of verb endings).
* All Romance languages have two articles (definite and indefinite), and many have in addition a partitive article (expressing the concept of "some").
In some languages (notably, French), the use of an article with a noun is nearly obligatory; it serves to express grammatical number (no longer marked on most nouns) and to cope with the extreme homophony of French vocabulary as a result of extensive sound reductions.
The phonemic inventory of most Romance languages is of moderate size with few unusual phonemes.
Phonemic vowel length is uncommon.
Some languages have developed nasal vowels or front rounded vowels.
* Word accent is of the stress (dynamic) type, rather than making use of pitch (as in Ancient Greek and some modern Slavic languages).
Stress occurs more or less predictably on one of the last three syllables.
Changes from Classical Latin
Loss of the case system
The most significant changes between Classical Latin and Proto-Romance (and hence all the modern Romance languages) relate to the reduction or loss of the Latin case system, and the corresponding syntactic changes that were triggered.
The case system was drastically reduced from the six-case system of Classical Latin.
Although five cases can be reconstructed for Vulgar Latin nouns (nominative, accusative, genitive, dative, and ablative), for Proto-Romance this had been reduced to three: nominative, accusative-ablative, and genitive-dative.
This system is preserved best in pronouns.
In the West, the genitive-dative disappeared with the genitive replaced by de + ablative and the dative by ad + accusative.
This left only two cases: nominative and oblique.
Some of the older Gallo-Romance languages preserved this two-case system well into the literary period, and in Ibero-Romance languages, such as Spanish and Portuguese, as well as in Italian (see under Case), a couple of examples are found which preserve the old nominative.
In the East, a genitive-dative made entirely of dative forms was retained but the nominative and accusative-ablative eventually merged.
Concomitant with the loss of cases, freedom of word order was greatly reduced.
Classical Latin had a generally verb-final (SOV) but overall quite free word order, with a significant amount of word scrambling and mixing of left-branching and right-branching constructions.
The Romance languages eliminated word scrambling and nearly all left-branching constructions, with most languages developing a rigid SVO, right-branching syntax.
Some freedom, however, is allowed in the placement of adjectives relative to their head noun.
In addition, some languages (e.g. Spanish, Romanian) have an "accusative preposition" (Romanian pe, Spanish "personal a") along with clitic doubling, which allows for some freedom in ordering the arguments of a verb.
The Romance languages developed grammatical articles where Latin had none.
Articles are often introduced around the time a robust case system falls apart in order to disambiguate the remaining case markers (which are usually too ambiguous by themselves) and to serve as parsing clues that signal the presence of a noun (a function that used to be served by the case endings themselves).
This was the pattern followed by the Romance languages: In the Romance languages that still preserved a functioning nominal case system (e.g., Romanian and Old French), only the combination of article and case ending serves to uniquely identify number and case (compare the similar situation in modern German).
All Romance languages have a definite article (originally developed from ipse "self" but replaced in nearly all languages by ille "that (over there)") and an indefinite article (developed from ūnus "one").
Many also have a partitive article .
Latin had a large number of syntactic constructions expressed through infinitives, participles, and similar nominal constructs.
Examples are the ablative absolute, the accusative-plus-infinitive construction used for reported speech, gerundive constructions, and the common use of reduced relative clauses expressed through participles.
All of these are replaced in the Romance languages by subordinate clauses expressed with finite verbs, making the Romance languages much more "verbal" and less "nominal" than Latin.
Under the influence of the Balkan sprachbund, Romanian has progressed the furthest, largely eliminating the infinitive.
Other changes
* Loss of phonemic vowel length, and change into a free-stressed language.
Classical Latin had an automatically determined stress on the second or third syllable from the end, conditioned by vowel length; once vowel length was neutralized, stress was no longer predictable so long as it remained where it was (which it mostly did).
* Development of a series of palatal consonants as a result of palatalization.
* Development of a series of analytic perfect tenses, comparable to English "I have done, I had done, I will have done".
* Loss of the Latin synthetic passive voice, replaced by an analytic construction comparable to English "it is/was done".
* Loss of deponent verbs, replaced by active-voice verbs.
* Replacement of the Latin future tense with a new tense formed (usually) by a periphrasis of infinitive + present tense of habēre "have", which usually contracts into a new synthetic tense.
A corresponding conditional tense is formed in the same way but using one of the past-tense forms of habēre.
* Numerous lexical changes.
A number of words were borrowed from the Germanic languages and Celtic languages.
Many basic nouns and verbs, especially those that were short or had irregular morphology, were replaced by longer derived forms with regular morphology.
Throughout the medieval period, words were borrowed from Classical Latin in their original form (learned words) or in something approaching the original form (semi-learned words), often replacing the popular forms of the same words.
Phonology
Vowels
Every language has a different set of vowels from every other.
Common characteristics are as follows:
* Most languages have at least five monophthongs .
The parent language of most of the Italo-Western Romance languages (which includes the vast majority) actually had a seven-vowel system , which is kept in most Italo-Western languages.
In some languages, like Spanish and Romanian, the phonemic status and difference between open-mid and close-mid vowels was lost.
French has probably the largest inventory of monophthongs, with conservative varieties having 12 oral vowels and 4 nasal vowels .
European Portuguese also has a large inventory, with 9 oral monophthongs , 5 nasal monophthongs , and a large number of oral and nasal diphthongs (see below).
Some languages have a large inventory of falling diphthongs.
These may or may not be considered as phonemic units (rather than sequences of vowel+glide or vowel+vowel), depending on their behavior.
As an example, French, Spanish and Italian have occasional instances of putative falling diphthongs formed from a vowel plus a non-syllabic or (e.g. Spanish veinte "twenty", deuda "debt"; French paille "straw", caoutchouc "rubber"; Italian potei "I could"), but these are normally analyzed as sequences of vowel and glide.
The diphthongs in Romanian, Portuguese, Catalan and Occitan, however, have various properties suggesting that they are better analyzed as unit phonemes.
Portuguese, for example, has the diphthongs , where (and to a lesser extent ) appear only in some dialects.
All except appear frequently in verb or noun inflections.
* Among the major Romance languages, Portuguese and French have nasal vowel phonemes, stemming from nasalization before a nasal consonant followed by loss of the consonant (this occurred especially when the nasal consonant was not directly followed by a vowel).
Originally, vowels in both languages were nasalized before all nasal consonants, but have subsequently become denasalized before nasal consonants that still remain (except in Brazilian Portuguese, where the pre-nasal vowels in words such as cama "bed", menos "less" remain highly nasalized).
In Portuguese, nasal vowels are sometimes analyzed as phonemic sequences of oral vowels plus an underlying nasal consonant, but such an analysis is difficult in French because of the existence of minimal pairs such as bon "good (masc.)
", bonne "good (fem.)".
In both languages, there are fewer nasal than oral vowels.
Nasalization triggered vowel lowering in French, producing the 4 nasal vowels (although most speakers in France nowadays pronounce as ).
Vowel raising was triggered in Portuguese, however, producing the 5 nasal vowels .
Vowel contraction and other changes also resulted in the Portuguese nasal diphthongs (of which occurs in only two words, muito "much, many, very", and mui "very"; and is actually a final-syllable allophones of ).
* Most languages have fewer vowels in unstressed syllables than stressed syllables.
This again reflects the Italo-Western Romance parent language, which had a seven-vowel system in stressed syllables (as described above) but only (with no low-mid vowels) in unstressed syllables.
Some languages have seen further reductions: e.g. Standard Catalan has only in unstressed syllables.
In French, on the other hand, any vowel may take prosodic stress.
* Most languages have even fewer vowels in word-final unstressed syllables than elsewhere.
For example, Old Italian allowed only , while the early stages of most Western Romance languages allowed only .
The Gallo-Romance languages went even farther, deleting all final vowels except .
Of these languages, French has carried things to the extreme by deleting all vowels after the accented syllable and uniformly accenting the final syllable (except for a more-or-less non-phonemic final unstressed that occasionally appears).
Modern Spanish now allows final unstressed , and modern Italian allows final unstressed , but they tend to occur largely in borrowed or onomatopoeic words, e.g. guru "guru", taxi "taxi", Spanish tribu "tribe" and espíritu "spirit" (loanwords from Classical Latin), Italian babau "bogeyman" (onomatopoeic, cf. English "boo!").
The apparent Spanish exception casi "almost" originates from Latin quasi "as if" Spanish trece, Portuguese treze; Latin amāre "to love" > Spanish Portuguese fábrica "factory" (the corresponding inherited word is Spanish fragua, Portuguese frágua "forge").
This process has gone even farther in French, with deletion of all post-stressed vowels, leading to consistent, predictable stress on the last syllable: e.g. Latin Stephanum "Stephen" > Old French Estievne > French Étienne ; Latin juvenis "young" > Old French juevne > French jeune .
This applies even to borrowings: e.g. Latin fabrica > French borrowing fabrique (the inherited word in this case being monosyllabic forge Spanish and Portuguese ambos, Old Romanian îmbi > Romanian ambii, Old French ambe, Italian ambedue, entrambi.
Gender
Most Romance languages have two grammatical genders, masculine and feminine.
The gender of animate nouns is generally natural (i.e. nouns referring to men are generally masculine, and vice versa), but for nonanimate nouns it is arbitrary.
Although Latin had a third gender (neuter), there is little trace of this in most languages.
The biggest exception is Romanian, where there is a productive class of "neuter" nouns, which include the descendants of many Latin neuter nouns and which behave like masculines in the singular and feminines in the plural, both in the endings used and in the agreement of adjectives and pronouns (e.g. un deget "one finger" vs. două degete "two fingers", cf. Latin digitus, pl. digiti).
Such nouns arose because of the identity of the Latin neuter singular -um with the masculine singular, and the identity of the Latin neuter plural -a with the feminine singular.
A similar class exists in Italian, although it is no longer productive (e.g. il dito "the finger" vs. le dita "the fingers", l'uovo "the egg" vs. le uova "the eggs").
A similar phenomenon may be observed in Albanian (which is heavily Romance-influenced), and the category remains highly productive with a number of new words loaned or coined in the neuter ( (një) hotel one hotel (m) vs. (tri) hotele three hotels (f)).
Spanish also has vestiges of the neuter in the demonstrative adjectives: esto, eso, aquello, the pronoun ello (meaning "it") and the article lo (used to intensify adjectives).
Portuguese also has neuter demonstrative adjectives: "isto", "isso", "aquilo" (meaning "this near me", "this/that near you", "that far from the both of us").
Remnants of the neuter, interpretable now as "a sub-class of the non-feminine gender" (Haase 2000:233), are vigorous in Italy in an area running roughly from Ancona to Matera and just north of Rome to Naples.
Oppositions with masculine typically have been recategorized, so that neuter signifies the referent in general, while masculine indicates a more specific instance, with the distinction marked by the definite article.
In Southeast Umbrian, for example, neuter lo pane is 'the bread', while masculine lu pane refers to an individual piece or loaf of bread.
Similarly, neuter lo vinu is wine in general, while masculine lu vinu is a specific sort of wine, with the consequence that mass lo vinu has no plural counterpart, but lu vinu can take a sortal plural form li vini, referring to different types of wine.
Phonological forms of articles vary by locale.
Case
Latin had an extensive case system, where all nouns were declined in six cases (nominative, vocative, accusative, dative, genitive, and ablative) and two numbers.
A few of these multi-stem nouns derive from Latin forms without stress shift, e.g. li om - le ome "man" (homō - hominem).
All of these multi-stem nouns refer to people; other nouns with stress shift in Latin (e.g. amor - amōrem "love") have not survived.
Some of the same nouns with multiple stems in Old French or Old Occitan have come down in Italian in the nominative rather than the accusative (e.g. uomo "man" Italian tempo permettendo; L. hoc facto > I. ciò fatto.
Lexicon
Loanwords
Romance languages have borrowed heavily, though mostly from other Romance languages.
However, some, such as Spanish, Portuguese, Romanian, and French, have borrowed heavily from other language groups.
Vulgar Latin borrowed first from indigenous languages of the Roman empire, and during the Germanic folk movements, from Germanic languages, especially Gothic; for Eastern Romance languages, during Bulgarian Empires, from Slavic languages, especially Bulgarian.
Notable examples are *blancus "white", replacing native albus (but Romansh alv, Dalmatian jualb, Romanian alb); *guerra "war", replacing native bellum; and the words for the cardinal directions, where cognates of English "north", "south", "east" and "west" replaced the native words septentriō, merīdiēs (also "noon; midday nap"; cf. Romanian meriză), oriens, and occidens.
Some Celtic words were incorporated into the core vocabulary, partly for words with no Latin equivalent (betulla "birch", camisia "shirt", cerevisia "beer"), but in some cases replacing Latin vocabulary and eliminating frustum).
Many Greek loans also entered the lexicon, e.g. spatha "sword" (Greek: spáthē, replacing gladius which shifted to "iris", cf. French épée, Spanish espada, Italian spada and Romanian spată); cara "face" ; colpe "blow" (Greek: κόλαφος kólaphos, replacing ictus, cf. Spanish golpe, French coup); cata "each" (Greek: katá, replacing quisque); common suffixes *-ijāre/-izāre , -ista (Greek: -istes).
Lexical innovation
Many basic nouns and verbs, especially those that were short or had irregular morphology, were replaced by longer derived forms with regular morphology.
Nouns, and sometimes adjectives, were often replaced by diminutives, e.g. auris "ear" > auricula (orig.
"outer ear") > oricla (Sardinian origra, Italian orecchia/o, Portuguese orelha, etc.); avis "bird" > avicellus (orig.
"chick, nestling") > aucellu (Occitan aucèl, Friulian ucel, Neapolitan auciello, etc.); caput "head" > capitium (Portuguese cabeça, Spanish cabeza, French chevet "headboard"; but reflexes of caput were retained also, sometimes without change of meaning, as in Italian capo "head", alongside testa); vetus "old" > vetulus > veclus (Dalmatian vieklo, Italian vecchio, Portuguese velho, etc.).
Sometimes augmentative constructions were used instead: piscis "fish" >
Old French peis > peisson (orig.
"big fish") > French poisson.
Verbs were often replaced by frequentative constructions: canere "to sing" > cantāre; iacere "to throw" > iactāre > *iectāre (Italian gettare, Portuguese jeitar, Spanish echar, etc.); iuvāre > adiūtāre (Italian aiutare, Spanish ayudar, French aider, etc., meaning "help", alongside e.g. iuvāre > Italian giovare "to be of use"); vēnārī "hunt" (Romanian vâna, Aromanian avinari) > replaced by *captiāre "to hunt", frequentative of capere "to seize" (Italian cacciare, Portuguese caçar, Romansh catschar, French chasser, etc.).
Many Classical Latin words became archaic or poetic and were replaced by more colloquial terms: equus "horse" > caballus (orig.
"nag") (but equa "mare" remains, cf. Spanish yegua, Portuguese égua, Sardinian ebba, Romanian iapă); domus "house" > casa (orig.
"hut"); ignis "fire" > focus ; strāta "street" > rūga (orig.
"furrow") or callis (orig.
"footpath") (but strāta is continued in Italian strada).
In some cases, terms from common occupations became generalized: invenīre "to find" replaced by afflāre (orig.
"to sniff out", in hunting, cf. Spanish hallar, Portuguese achar, Romansh dial.
anflar, Southern Italian asciare, acchiare, Romanian afla 'to find out'); advenīre "to arrive" gave way to plicāre (orig.
"to fold (sails; tents)", cf. Spanish llegar, Portuguese chegar; Romanian pleca), elsewhere arripāre (orig.
"to harbor at a riverbank", cf. Italian arrivare, French arriver) (advenīre is continued with the meaning "to achieve, manage to do" as in Middle French aveindre, or "to happen" in Italian avvenire) .
The same thing sometimes happened to religious terms, due to the pervasive influence of Christianity: loquī "to speak" succumbed to parabolāre (orig.
"to tell parables", cf. Occitan parlar, French parler, Italian parlare) or fabulārī ~ fābellāre (orig.
"to tell stories", cf. Spanish hablar, Dalmatian favlur, Sardinian faeddare), based on Jesus' way of speaking in parables.
Many prepositions were used as verbal particles to make new roots and verb stems, e.g. Italian estrarre, Aromanian astragu, astradziri "to extract" from Latin ex-
"out of" and trahere "to pull" (Italian trarre "draw, pull", Aromanian tragu, tradziri), or to augment already existing words, e.g. French coudre, Italian cucire, Portuguese coser "to sew", from cōnsuere "to sew up", from suere "to sew", with total loss of the bare stem.
Many prepositions and commonly became compounded, e.g. de ex > French dès "as of", ab ante > Italian avanti "forward".
Some words derived from phrases, e.g. Portuguese agora, Spanish ahora "now" Portuguese artículo "joint, knuckle" (learned), artigo "article" (semi-learned), artelho "ankle" (inherited; archaic and dialectal).
In many cases, the learned word simply displaced the original popular word: e.g. Spanish crudo "crude, raw" (Old Spanish cruo); French légume "vegetable" (Old French leüm); Portuguese flor "flower" (Galician-Portuguese chor).
The learned loan always sounds (and, in writing, looks) more like the original than the inherited word does, because regular sound change has been bypassed; likewise, the learned word usually has a meaning closer to that of the original.
In French, the stress of the modern form of the learned loan may be on the "wrong" syllable vis-à-vis Latin, whereas the stress of the inherited word always corresponds to the Latin stress: e.g. Latin , inherited.
Borrowing from Classical Latin has produced a large number of suffix doublets.
Examples from Spanish (learned form first): -ción vs. -zon; -cia vs. -za; -ificar vs. -iguar; -izar vs. -ear; -mento vs. -miento; -tud ( *) but Spanish mío and Portuguese and Catalan meu
As a result, only the following final consonants occurred in Vulgar Latin:
* Final -t in third-person singular verb forms, and -nt (later reduced in many languages to -n) in third-person plural verb forms.
* Final -s (including -x) in a large number of morphological endings and certain other words (trēs "three", sex "six", crās "tomorrow", etc.).
* Final -n in some monosyllables (from earlier -m).
* Final -r, -d in some prepositions (e.g. ad, per), which were clitics that attached phonologically to the following word.
* Very occasionally, final -c, e.g. Occitan oc "yes" Old French aime but venit "he comes" >
Old French vient: the was never dropped and survives into Modern French in liaison, e.g. vient-il?
"is he coming?"
(the corresponding in aime-t-il? is analogical, not inherited).
Old French also kept the third-person plural ending -nt intact.
In Italo-Romance and the Eastern Romance languages, eventually all final consonants were either dropped or protected by an epenthetic vowel, except in clitic forms (e.g. prepositions con, per).
Modern Standard Italian still has almost no consonant-final words, although Romanian has resurfaced them through later loss of final and .
For example, amās "you love" > ame > Italian ami; amant "they love" > *aman > Ital.
amano.
On the evidence of "sloppily written" Lombardic language documents, however, the loss of final in Italy did not occur until the 7th or 8th century, after the Vulgar Latin period, and the presence of many former final consonants is betrayed by the syntactic gemination (raddoppiamento sintattico) that they trigger.
It is also thought that after a long vowel became rather than simply disappearing: nōs > noi
"we", se (d)ēs > sei "you are", crās > crai "tomorrow" (southern Italian).
In unstressed syllables, the resulting diphthongs were simplified: canēs > > cani "dogs"; amīcās > > amiche " (female) friends", where nominative amīcae should produce **amice rather than amiche (note masculine amīcī > amici not
Central Western Romance languages eventually regained a large number of final consonants through the general loss of final and , e.g. Catalan llet "milk" Old French freit > froid , feminine frigidam > Old French freide > froide .
Palatalization
Palatalization was one of the most important processes affecting consonants in Vulgar Latin.
This eventually resulted in a whole series of "" and consonants in most Romance languages, e.g. Italian .
The following historical stages occurred:
Note how the environments become progressively less "palatal", and the languages affected become progressively fewer.
The outcomes of palatalization depended on the historical stage, the consonants involved, and the languages involved.
The primary division is between the Western Romance languages, with resulting from palatalization of , and the remaining languages (Italo-Dalmatian and Eastern Romance), with resulting.
It is often suggested that was the original result in all languages, with > a later innovation in the Western Romance languages.
Evidence of this is the fact that Italian has both and as outcomes of palatalization in different environments, while Western Romance has only .
Even more suggestive is the fact that the Mozarabic language in al-Andalus (modern southern Spain) had as the outcome despite being in the "Western Romance" area and geographically disconnected from the remaining areas; this suggests that Mozarabic was an outlying "relic" area where the change > failed to reach.
Note that eventually became in most Western Romance languages.
Thus Latin caelum (sky, heaven), pronounced with an initial , became Italian cielo , Romanian cer , Spanish cielo /, French ciel , Catalan cel , and Portuguese céu .
The outcome of palatalized and is less clear:
* Original has the same outcome as palatalized everywhere.
* Romanian fairly consistently has > either or depending on location, while palatalized > ; after this, > in most areas, but Spanish and Gascon (originating from isolated districts behind the western Pyrenees) were relic areas unaffected by this change.
In French, the outcomes of palatalized by and by were different: centum "hundred" > cent but cantum "song" > chant .
French also underwent palatalization of labials before : Vulgar Latin > Old French (sēpia "cuttlefish" > seiche, rubeus "red" > rouge, sīmia "monkey" > singe).
The original outcomes of palatalization must have continued to be phonetically palatalized even after they had developed into //etc.
consonants.
This is clear from French, where all originally palatalized consonants triggered the development of a following glide in certain circumstances (most visible in the endings -āre, -ātum/ātam).
In some cases this came from a consonant palatalized by an adjoining consonant after the late loss of a separating vowel.
For example, mansiōnātam > > > >
early Old French maisnieḍe "household".
Similarly, mediētātem > > > > early Old French meitieḍ > modern French moitié "half".
In both cases, phonetic palatalization must have remained in primitive Old French at least through the time when unstressed intertonic vowels were lost (?8th century), well after the fragmentation of the Romance languages.
The effect of palatalization is indicated in the writing systems of almost all Romance languages, where the letters have the "hard" pronunciation in most situations, but a "soft" pronunciation before .
This has the effect of keeping the modern spelling similar to the original Latin spelling, but complicates the relationship between sound and letter.
In particular, the hard sounds must be written differently before (e.g. Italian , Portuguese ), and likewise for the soft sounds when not before these letters (e.g. Italian , Portuguese ).
Furthermore, in Spanish, Catalan, Occitan and Brazilian Portuguese, the use of digraphs containing to signal the hard pronunciation before means that a different spelling is also needed to signal the sounds before these vowels (Spanish , Catalan, Occitan and Brazilian Portuguese ).
This produces a number of orthographic alternations in verbs whose pronunciation is entirely regular.
The following are examples of corresponding first-person plural indicative and subjunctive in a number of regular Portuguese verbs: marcamos, marquemos "we mark"; caçamos, cacemos "we hunt"; chegamos, cheguemos "we arrive"; averiguamos, averigüemos "we verify"; adequamos, adeqüemos "we adapt"; oferecemos, ofereçamos "we offer"; dirigimos, dirijamos "we drive" erguemos, ergamos "we raise"; delinquimos, delincamos
"we commit a crime".
In the case of Italian, the convention of digraphs and to represent and before written results in similar orthographic alternations, such as dimentico 'I forget', dimentichi 'you forget', baco 'worm', bachi 'worms' with k or pago 'I pay', paghi 'you pay' and lago 'lake', laghi 'lakes' with g.
The use in Italian of and to represent or before vowels written neatly distinguishes dico 'I say' with from dici 'you say' with or ghiro 'dormouse' and giro 'turn, revolution' , but with orthographic and also representing the sequence of or and the actual vowel , and no generally observed convention of indicating stress position, the status of i when followed by another vowel in spelling can be unrecognizable.
For example, the written forms offer no indication that in camicia 'shirt' represents a single unstressed syllable with no at any level .
Lenition
Stop consonants shifted by lenition in Vulgar Latin in some areas.
The voiced labial consonants and (represented by and , respectively) both developed a fricative as an intervocalic allophone.
This is clear from the orthography; in medieval times, the spelling of a consonantal is often used for what had been a in Classical Latin, or the two spellings were used interchangeably.
In many Romance languages (Italian, French, Portuguese, Romanian, etc.), this fricative later developed into a ; but in others (Spanish, Galician, some Catalan and Occitan dialects, etc.) reflexes of and simply merged into a single phoneme.
Several other consonants were "softened" in intervocalic position in Western Romance (Spanish, Portuguese, French, Northern Italian), but normally not phonemically in the rest of Italy (except some cases of "elegant" or Ecclesiastical words), nor apparently at all in Romanian.
The dividing line between the two sets of dialects is called the La Spezia-Rimini Line and is one of the most important isoglosses of the Romance dialects.
The changes (instances of diachronic lenition resulting in phonological restructuring) are as follows:
Single voiceless plosives became voiced: -p-, -t-, -c- > -b-, -d-, -g-.
Subsequently, in some languages they were further weakened, either becoming fricatives or approximants, (as in Spanish) or disappearing entirely (as and , but not , in French).
The following example shows progressive weakening of original : e.g. vītam > Italian vita , Portuguese vida (European Portuguese ), Spanish vida (Southern Peninsular Spanish ), and French vie .
Some scholars once speculated that these sound changes may be due in part to the influence of Continental Celtic languages, but scholarship of the past few decades challenges that hypothesis.
The plain sibilant -s- was also voiced to between vowels, although in many languages its spelling has not changed.
The double plosives became single: -pp-, -tt-, -cc-, -bb-, -dd-, -gg- > -p-, -t-, -c-, -b-, -d-, -g- in most languages.
In French spelling, double consonants are merely etymological, except for -ll- after -i (pronounced ij), in most cases.
* The double sibilant -ss- also became phonetically single , although in many languages its spelling has not changed.
Consonant length is no longer phonemically distinctive in most Romance languages.
However some languages of Italy (Italian, Sardinian, Sicilian, and numerous other varieties of central and southern Italy) do have long consonants like , , etc., where the doubling indicates either actual length or, in the case of plosives and affricates, a short hold before the consonant is released, in many cases with distinctive lexical value: e.g. note (notes) vs. notte (night), cade , caro (dear, expensive) vs. carro .
They may even occur at the beginning of words in Romanesco, Neapolitan, Sicilian and other southern varieties, and are occasionally indicated in writing, e.g. Sicilian cchiù (more), and ccà (here).
In general, the consonants , , and are long at the start of a word, while the archiphoneme is realised as a trill in the same position.
In much of central and southern Italy, the affricates and weaken synchronically to fricative ʃ and ʒ between vowels, while their geminate congeners do not, e.g. cacio (cheese) vs. caccio (I chase).
A few languages have regained secondary geminate consonants.
The double consonants of Piedmontese exist only after stressed , written ë, and are not etymological: vëdde (Latin vidēre, to see), sëcca (Latin sicca, dry, feminine of sech).
In standard Catalan and Occitan, there exists a geminate sound written ŀl (Catalan) or ll (Occitan), but it is usually pronounced as a simple sound in colloquial (and even some formal) speech in both languages.
Vowel prosthesis
In Late Latin a prosthetic vowel was inserted at the beginning of any word that began with (referred to as s impura) and a voiceless consonant (#sC- > isC-):
* scrībere 'to write' > Sardinian iscribere, Spanish escribir, Portuguese escrever, Catalan escriure, Old French escri (v)re (mod. écrire);
* spatha "sword" >
Sard ispada, Sp/Pg espada, Cat espasa, OFr espeḍe (modern épée);
* spiritus "spirit" >
Sard ispìritu, Sp espíritu, Pg espírito, Cat esperit, French esprit;
* Stephanum "Stephen" >
Sard Istèvene, Sp Esteban, Cat Esteve, Pg Estêvão, OFr Estievne (mod. Étienne);
* status "state"
Sard istadu, Sp i e/ in Romance languages may have been influenced by Continental Celtic languages, although the phenomenon exists or existed in some areas where Celtic was never present (e.g. Sardinia, southern Italy).
While Western Romance words undergo prothesis, cognates in Balkan Romance and southern Italo-Romance do not, e.g. Italian scrivere, spada, spirito, Stefano, and stato.
In Italian, syllabification rules were preserved instead by vowel-final articles, thus feminine spada as la spada, but instead of rendering the masculine *il spaghetto, lo spaghetto came to be the norm.
Though receding at present, Italian once had a prosthetic if a consonant preceded such clusters, so that 'in Switzerland' was in Svizzera.
Some speakers still use the prothetic productively, and it is fossilized in a few set locutions such as in ispecie 'especially' or per iscritto 'in writing' , the near-close vowels lowered and merged into the high-mid vowels .
As a result, Latin pira "pear" and vēra "true", came to rhyme (e.g. Italian and Spanish pera, vera, and Old French poire, voire).
Similarly, Latin nucem (from nux "nut") and vōcem (from vōx "voice") become Italian noce, voce, Portuguese noz, voz, and French noix, voix.
This produced a seven-vowel system , still maintained in conservative languages such as Italian and Portuguese, and lightly transformed in Spanish (where ).
* In the Eastern Romance languages , the front vowels evolved as in the majority of languages, but the back vowels evolved as in Sardinian.
This produced an unbalanced six-vowel system: .
In modern Romanian, this system has been significantly transformed, with and with new vowels evolving, leading to a balanced seven-vowel system with central as well as front and back vowels: .
* Sicilian is sometimes described as having its own distinct vowel system.
In fact, Sicilian passed through the same developments as the main bulk of Italo-Western languages.
Subsequently, however, high-mid vowels (but not low-mid vowels) were raised in all syllables, stressed and unstressed; i.e. .
The result is a five-vowel .
The Proto-Romance allophonic vowel-length system was rephonemicized in the Gallo-Romance languages as a result of the loss of many final vowels.
Some northern Italian languages (e.g. Friulan) still maintain this secondary phonemic length, but most languages dropped it by either diphthongizing or shortening the new long vowels.
French phonemicized a third vowel length system around AD 1300 as a result of the sound change > > (where V is any vowel and C any consonant).
This vowel length was eventually lost by around AD 1700, but the former long vowels are still marked with a circumflex.
A fourth vowel length system, still non-phonemic, has now arisen: All nasal vowels as well as the oral vowels (which mostly derive from former long vowels) are pronounced long in all stressed closed syllables, and all vowels are pronounced long in syllables closed by the voiced fricatives .
This system in turn has been phonemicized in some non-standard dialects (e.g. Haitian Creole), as a result of the loss of final .
Latin diphthongs
The Latin diphthongs ae and oe, pronounced and in earlier Latin, were early on monophthongized.
ae became by the 1st century at the latest.
Although this sound was still distinct from all existing vowels, the neutralization of Latin vowel length eventually caused its merger with French ciel, Spanish Spanish miel, Italian miele, Portuguese mel .
Some words show an early merger of ae with , as in praeda "booty" > *prēda > French proie (vs. expected **priée), Italian preda (not **prieda) "prey"; or faenum "hay" > *fēnum > Spanish heno, French foin and so oe was mostly limited to Greek loanwords, which were typically learned (high-register) terms.
au merged with ō in the popular speech of Rome already by the 1st century .
A number of authors remarked on this explicitly, e.g. Cicero's taunt that the populist politician Publius Clodius Pulcher had changed his name from Claudius to ingratiate himself with the masses.
This change never penetrated far from Rome, however, and the pronunciation was maintained for centuries in the vast majority of Latin-speaking areas, although it eventually developed into some variety of o in many languages.
For example, Italian and French have as the usual reflex, but this post-dates diphthongization of and the French-specific palatalization > (hence causa > French chose, Italian cosa not **cuosa).
Spanish has , but Portuguese spelling maintains , which has developed to (and still remains as in some dialects, and in others).
Occitan, Romanian, southern Italian languages, and many other minority Romance languages still have .
A few common words, however, show an early merger with ō , evidently reflecting a generalization of the popular Roman pronunciation: e.g. French queue, Italian coda , Occitan co (d)a, Romanian coadă (all meaning "tail") must all derive from cōda rather than Classical cauda (but notice Portuguese cauda).
Similarly, Spanish oreja, Portuguese orelha, French oreille, Romanian ureche, and Sardinian olícra, orícla "ear" must derive from ōric (u)la rather than Classical auris (Occitan aurelha was probably influenced by the unrelated ausir .
In many dialects, unstressed and merge into as in Portuguese, and unstressed and merge into .
However, some dialects preserve the original five-vowel system, most notably standard Valencian.
Intertonic vowels
The so-called intertonic vowels are word-internal unstressed vowels, i.e. not in the initial, final, or tonic (i.e. stressed) syllable, hence intertonic.
Intertonic vowels were the most subject to loss or modification.
Already in Vulgar Latin intertonic vowels between a single consonant and a following or tended to drop: vétulum "old" > veclum > Dalmatian vieklo, Sicilian vecchiu, Portuguese velho.
But many languages ultimately dropped almost all intertonic vowels.
Generally, those languages south and east of the La Spezia-Rimini Line (Romanian and Central-Southern Italian) maintained intertonic vowels, while those to the north and west (Western Romance) dropped all except .
Standard Italian generally maintained intertonic vowels, but typically raised unstressed > .
Examples:
* septimā́nam "week" > Italian settimana, Romanian săptămână vs. Spanish Catalan setmana, Piedmontese sman-a
* quattuórdecim "fourteen" > Italian quattordici, Venetian cuatòrdexe, Lombard French quatorze
* metipsissimus > medipsimus ~ "self" > Italian medésimo vs. Venetian medemo, Lombard medemm, Old Spanish meísmo, meesmo (> modern mismo), Galician-Portuguese meesmo (> modern mesmo), Old French meḍisme (> later meïsme > MF mesme > modern même)
* bonitā́tem "goodness" > Italian bonità ~ bontà, Romanian bunătate but Spanish bondad, Portuguese bondade, French bonté
* collocā́re "to position, arrange" > Italian coricare vs. Spanish colgar "to hang", Romanian culca "to lie down", French coucher "to lay sth on its side; put s.o. to bed"
* commūnicā́re "to take communion" > Romanian cumineca vs. Portuguese comungar, Spanish comulgar, Old French comungier
* carricā́re "to load " > Portuguese Occitan cargar "to load", French charger, Lombard cargà cargar (e) "to load"
* fábricam "forge" > > Spanish fragua, Portuguese frágua, Occitan/Catalan farga, French forge
* disjējūnā́re "to break a fast" > *disjūnā́re > Old French disner "to have lunch" > French dîner "to dine" (but *disjū́nat > Old French desjune
"he has lunch" > French (il) déjeune "he has lunch")
* adjūtā́re "to help" > Italian aiutare, Romanian ajuta but French aider, Lombard aidà/aiuttà in the USSR.
The non-Christian populations of Spain also used the scripts of their religions (Arabic and Hebrew) to write Romance languages such as Ladino and Mozarabic in aljamiado.
Letters
The Romance languages are written with the classical Latin alphabet of 23 letters - A, B, C, D, E, F, G, H, I, K, L, M, N, O, P, Q, R, S, T, V, X, Y, Z - subsequently modified and augmented in various ways.
In particular, the single Latin letter V split into V (consonant) and U (vowel), and the letter I split into I and J. The Latin letter K and the new letter W, which came to be widely used in Germanic languages, are seldom used in most Romance languages - mostly for unassimilated foreign names and words.
Indeed, in Italian prose is properly .
Catalan eschews importation of "foreign" letters more than most languages.
Thus Wikipedia is in Catalan but in Spanish.
While most of the 23 basic Latin letters have maintained their phonetic value, for some of them it has diverged considerably; and the new letters added since the Middle Ages have been put to different uses in different scripts.
Some letters, notably H and Q, have been variously combined in digraphs or trigraphs (see below) to represent phonetic phenomena that could not be recorded with the basic Latin alphabet, or to get around previously established spelling conventions.
Most languages added auxiliary marks (diacritics) to some letters, for these and other purposes.
The spelling rules of most Romance languages are fairly simple, and consistent within any language.
Since the spelling systems are based on phonemic structures rather than phonetics, however, the actual pronunciation of what is represented in standard orthography can be subject to considerable regional variation, as well as to allophonic differentiation by position in the word or utterance.
Among the letters representing the most conspicuous phonological variations, between Romance languages or with respect to Latin, are the following:
: B, V: Merged in Spanish and some dialects of Catalan, where both letters represent a single phoneme pronounced as either or depending on position, with no differentiation between B and V.
: C: Generally a "hard" , but "soft" (fricative or affricate) before e, i, or y.
: G: Generally a "hard" , but "soft" (fricative or affricate) before e, i, or y.
In some languages, like Spanish, the hard g, phonemically , is pronounced as a fricative after vowels.
In Romansch, the soft g is a voiced palatal plosive or a voiced alveolo-palatal affricate .
: H: Silent in most languages; used to form various digraphs.
But represents in Romanian, Walloon and Gascon Occitan.
: J: Represents the fricative in most languages, or the palatal approximant in Romansh and in several of the languages of Italy.
Italian does not use this letter in native words.
: Q: As in Latin, its phonetic value is that of a hard c, i.e. , and in native words it is almost always followed by a (sometimes silent) u. Romanian does not use this letter in native words.
: S: Generally voiceless , but voiced between vowels in some languages.
In Spanish, Romanian, Galician and several varieties of Italian, however, it is always pronounced voiceless between vowels.
If the phoneme is represented by the letter S, predictable assimilations are normally not shown (e.g. Italian 'sled', spelled slitta but pronounced , never with ).
Also at the end of syllables it may represent special allophonic pronunciations.
In Romansh, it also stands for a voiceless or voiced fricative, or , before certain consonants.
: W: No Romance language uses this letter in native words, with the exception of Walloon.
: X: Its pronunciation is rather variable, both between and within languages.
In the Middle Ages, the languages of Iberia used this letter to denote the voiceless postalveolar fricative , which is still the case in Modern Catalan and Portuguese.
With the Renaissance the classical pronunciation - or similar consonant clusters, such as , , or - were frequently reintroduced in latinisms and hellenisms.
In Venetian it represents , and in Ligurian the voiced postalveolar fricative .
Italian does not use this letter in native words.
: Y: This letter is not used in most languages, with the prominent exceptions of French and Spanish, where it represents before vowels (or various similar fricatives such as the palatal fricative , in Spanish), and the vowel or semivowel elsewhere.
: Z: In most languages it represents the sound .
However, in Italian it denotes the affricates and (which are two separate phonemes, but rarely contrast; among the few examples of minimal pairs are "ray" with , "race" with (note that both are phonetically long between vowels); in Romansh the voiceless affricate ; and in Galician and Spanish it denotes either the voiceless dental fricative or .
Otherwise, letters that are not combined as digraphs generally represent the same phonemes as suggested by the International Phonetic Alphabet (IPA), whose design was, in fact, greatly influenced by Romance spelling systems.
Digraphs and trigraphs
Since most Romance languages have more sounds than can be accommodated in the Roman Latin alphabet they all resort to the use of digraphs and trigraphs - combinations of two or three letters with a single phonemic value.
The concept (but not the actual combinations) is derived from Classical Latin, which used, for example, TH, PH, and CH when transliterating the Greek letters "θ", "ϕ" (later "φ"), and "χ".
These were once aspirated sounds in Greek before changing to corresponding fricatives, and the H represented what sounded to the Romans like an following , , and respectively.
Some of the digraphs used in modern scripts are:
:CI: used in Italian, Romance languages in Italy, Corsican and Romanian to represent before A, O, or U.
:CH: used in Italian, Romance languages in Italy, Corsican, Romanian, Romansh and Sardinian to represent before E or I (including yod ); in Occitan, Spanish, Astur-leonese and Galician; or in Romansh before A, O or U; and in most other languages.
In Catalan it is used in some old spelling conventions for .
:DD: used in Sicilian and Sardinian to represent the voiced retroflex plosive .
In recent history more accurately transcribed as DDH.
:DJ: used in Walloon and Catalan for .
:GI: used in Italian, Romance languages in Italy, Corsican and Romanian to represent before A, O, or U, and in Romansh to represent or or (before A, E, O, and U) or
:GH: used in Italian, Romance languages in Italy, Corsican, Romanian, Romansh and Sardinian to represent before E or I (including yod ), and in Galician for the voiceless pharyngeal fricative (not standard sound).
:GL: used in Romansh before consonants and I and at the end of words for .
:GLI: used in Italian and Corsican for and Romansh for .
:GN: used in French, some Romance languages in Italy, Corsican and Romansh for , as in champignon; in Italian to represent , as in "ogni" or "lo gnocco".
:GU: used before E or I to represent or in all Romance languages except Italian, Romance languages in Italy, Corsican, Romansh, and Romanian, which use GH instead.
:IG: used at the end of word in Catalan for , as in maig, safareig or enmig.
:IX: used between vowels or at the end of word in Catalan for , as in caixa or calaix.
:LH: used in Portuguese and Occitan .
:LL: used in Spanish, Catalan, Galician, Astur-leonese, Norman and Dgèrnésiais, originally for which has merged in some cases with .
Represents in French unless it follows I (i) when it represents (or in some dialects).
As in Italian, it is used in Occitan for a long .
:L·L: used in Catalan for a geminate consonant .
:NH: used in Portuguese and Occitan for , used in official Galician for .
:N-: used in Piedmontese and Ligurian for between two vowels.
:NN: used in Leonese for , in Italian for geminate .
:NY: used in Catalan for .
:QU: represents in Italian, Romance languages in Italy, and Romansh; in French, Astur-leonese (normally before e or i); (before e or i) or (normally before a or o) in Occitan, Catalan and Portuguese; in Spanish (always before e or i).
:RR: used between vowels in several languages (Occitan, Catalan, Spanish...) to denote a trilled or a guttural R, instead of the flap .
:SC: used before E or I in Italian, Romance languages in Italy as , in European Portuguese as and in French, Brazilian Portuguese, Catalan and Latin American Spanish as in words of certain etymology (notice this would represent in standard peninsular Spanish)
:SCH: used in Romansh for or , in Italian for before "E"or "I", including yod .
:SCI: used in Italian, Romance languages in Italy, and Corsican to represent before A, O, or U.
:SH: used in Aranese Occitan for .
:SS: used in French, Portuguese, Piedmontese, Romansh, Occitan, and Catalan for between vowels, in Italian, Romance languages of Italy, and Corsican for long .
:TS: used in Catalan for .
:TG: used in Romansh for or .
In Catalan is used for before E and I, as in metge or fetge.
:TH: used in Jèrriais for ; used in Aranese for either or .
:TJ: used between vowels and before A, O or U, in Catalan for , as in sotjar or mitjó.
:TSCH: used in Romansh for .
:TX: used at the beginning or at the end of word or between vowels in Catalan for , as in txec, esquitx or atxa.
:TZ: used in Catalan for .
While the digraphs CH, PH, RH and TH were at one time used in many words of Greek origin, most languages have now replaced them with C/QU, F, R and T. Only French has kept these etymological spellings, which now represent or , , and , respectively.
Double consonants
Gemination, in the languages where it occurs, is usually indicated by doubling the consonant, except when it does not contrast phonemically with the corresponding short consonant, in which case gemination is not indicated.
In Jèrriais, long consonants are marked with an apostrophe: is a long , is a long , and is a long .
The phonemic contrast between geminate and single consonants is widespread in Italian, and normally indicated in the traditional orthography: 'done' vs. 'fate, destiny'; 's he, it falls'.
The double consonants in French orthography, however, are merely etymological.
In Catalan, the gemination of is marked by a ("flying point"): .
Diacritics
Romance languages also introduced various marks (diacritics) that may be attached to some letters, for various purposes.
In some cases, diacritics are used as an alternative to digraphs and trigraphs; namely to represent a larger number of sounds than would be possible with the basic alphabet, or to distinguish between sounds that were previously written the same.
Diacritics are also used to mark word stress, to indicate exceptional pronunciation of letters in certain words, and to distinguish words with same pronunciation (homophones).
Depending on the language, some letter-diacritic combinations may be considered distinct letters, e.g. for the purposes of lexical sorting.
This is the case, for example, of Romanian ș () and Spanish ñ ().
The following are the most common use of diacritics in Romance languages.
* Vowel quality: the system of marking close-mid vowels with an acute accent, é, and open-mid vowels with a grave accent, è, is widely used (e.g. Catalan, French, Italian).
Portuguese, however, uses the circumflex (ê) for the former, and the acute (é), for the latter.
Some minority Romance languages use an umlaut (diaeresis mark) in the case of ä, ö, ü to indicate fronted vowel variants, as in German.
Centralized vowels () are indicated variously (â in Portuguese, ă/î in Romanian, ë in Piedmontese, etc.).
In French, Occitan and Romanian, these accents are used whenever necessary to distinguish the appropriate vowel quality, but in the other languages, they are used only when it is necessary to mark unpredictable stress, or in some cases to distinguish homophones.
* Vowel length: French uses a circumflex to indicate what had been a long vowel (although nowadays this rather indicates a difference in vowel quality, if it has any effect at all on pronunciation).
This same usage is found in some minority languages.
* Nasality: Portuguese marks nasal vowels with a tilde (ã) when they occur before other written vowels and in some other instances.
* Palatalization: some historical palatalizations are indicated with the cedilla (ç) in French, Catalan, Occitan and Portuguese.
In Spanish and several other world languages influenced by it, the grapheme ñ represents a palatal nasal consonant.
* Separate pronunciation: when a vowel and another letter that would normally be combined into a digraph with a single sound are exceptionally pronounced apart, this is often indicated with a diaeresis mark on the vowel.
This is particularly common in the case of gü before e or i, because plain gu in this case would be pronounced .
This usage occurs in Spanish, French, Catalan and Occitan, and occurred before the 2009 spelling reform in Brazilian Portuguese.
French also uses the diaeresis on the second of two adjacent vowels to indicate that both are pronounced separately, as in Noël "Christmas" and haïr "to hate".
* Stress: the stressed vowel in a polysyllabic word may be indicated with an accent, when it cannot be predicted by rule.
In Italian, Portuguese and Catalan, the choice of accent (acute, grave or circumflex) may depend on vowel quality.
When no quality needs to be indicated, an acute accent is normally used (ú), but Italian and Romansh use a grave accent (ù).
Portuguese puts a diacritic on all stressed monosyllables that end in a e o as es os, to distinguish them from unstressed function words: chá "tea", más "bad (fem.
pl.)", sé "seat (of government)", dê "give!
(imperative)", mês "month", só "only", nós "we" that are pronounced exactly or nearly the same way and are spelled identically, but have different meanings, can be differentiated by a diacritic.
Typically, if one of the pair is stressed and the other isn't, the stressed word gets the diacritic, using the appropriate diacritic for notating stressed syllables (see above).
Portuguese does this consistently as part of notating stress in certain monosyllables, whether or not there is an unstressed homophone (see examples above).
Spanish also has many pairs of identically pronounced words distinguished by an acute accent on the stressed word: si "if" vs. sí "yes", mas "but" vs. más "more", mi "my" vs. mí "me", se "oneself" vs. sé "I know", te "you (object)" vs. té "tea", que cuando who how" vs. qué cuándo who?
how?
", etc.
A similar strategy is common for monosyllables in writing Italian, but not necessarily determined by stress: stressed dà "it, s/he gives" vs. unstressed da "by, from", but also tè "tea" and te "you", both capable of bearing phrasal stress.
Catalan has some pairs where both words are stressed, and one is distinguished by a vowel-quality diacritic, e.g. os "bone" vs. ós "bear".
When no vowel-quality needs distinguishing, French and Catalan use a grave accent: French ou "or" vs. où "where", French la "the" vs. "là "there", Catalan ma "my" vs. mà "hand".
Upper and lower case
Most languages are written with a mixture of two distinct but phonetically identical variants or "cases" of the alphabet: majuscule ("uppercase" or "capital letters"), derived from Roman stone-carved letter shapes, and minuscule ("lowercase"), derived from Carolingian writing and Medieval quill pen handwriting which were later adapted by printers in the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries.
In particular, all Romance languages capitalize (use uppercase for the first letter of) the following words: the first word of each complete sentence, most words in names of people, places, and organizations, and most words in titles of books.
The Romance languages do not follow the German practice of capitalizing all nouns including common ones.
Unlike English, the names of months, days of the weeks, and derivatives of proper nouns are usually not capitalized: thus, in Italian one capitalizes Francia ("France") and Francesco ("Francis"), but not francese ("French") or francescano ("Franciscan").
However, each language has some exceptions to this general rule.
Degrees of lexical similarity between the Romance languages
Data from Ethnologue:
Vocabulary comparison
The tables below provide a vocabulary comparison that illustrates a number of examples of sound shifts that have occurred between Latin and Romance languages.
Words are given in their conventional spellings.
In addition, for French the actual pronunciation is given, due to the dramatic differences between spelling and pronunciation.
Notes
* Frederick Browning Agard.
A Course in Romance Linguistics.
Vol. 1: A Synchronic View, Vol. 2: A Diachronic View.
Georgetown University Press, 1984.
* Gerhard Ernst et al., eds.
Romanische Sprachgeschichte: Ein internationales Handbuch zur Geschichte der romanischen Sprachen.
3 vols.
Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter, 2003 (vol. 1), 2006 (vol. 2).
* Martin Maiden, John Charles Smith & Adam Ledgeway, eds., The Cambridge History of the Romance Languages.
Vol. 1: Structures, Vol. 2: Contexts.
Cambridge: Cambridge UP, 2011 (vol. 1) & 2013 (vol. 2).
* Martin Maiden & Adam Ledgeway, eds.
The Oxford Guide to the Romance Languages.
Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2016.
Phonology:
* Cravens, Thomas D. Comparative Historical Dialectology: Italo-Romance Clues to Ibero-Romance Sound Change.
Amsterdam: John Benjamins, 2002.
* Sónia Frota & Pilar Prieto, eds.
Intonation in Romance.
Oxford: Oxford UP, 2015.
* Christoph Gabriel & Conxita Lleó, eds.
Intonational Phrasing in Romance and Germanic: Cross-Linguistic and Bilingual studies.
Amsterdam: John Benjamins, 2011.
* Philippe Martin.
The Structure of Spoken Language: Intonation in Romance.
Cambridge: Cambridge UP, 2016.
* Rodney Sampson.
Vowel Prosthesis in Romance.
Oxford: Oxford UP, 2010.
Lexicon:
French:
Portuguese:
Spanish:
Italian:
Rhaeto-Romance:
* John Haiman & Paola Benincà, eds., The Rhaeto-Romance Languages.
London: Routledge, 1992.
