Napoléon François Joseph Charles Bonaparte (20 March 181122 July 1832), Prince Imperial, King of Rome, known in the Austrian court as Franz from 1814 onward, Duke of Reichstadt from 1818, was the son of Napoleon, Emperor of the French, and his second wife, Archduchess Marie Louise of Austria.
By Title III, the French Constitution of the time, he was Prince Imperial, but he was also known from birth as the King of Rome, which Napoleon I declared was the courtesy title of the heir apparent.
His nickname of L'Aiglon by Joseph Fesch with his full name of Napoleon François Charles Joseph.
The baptism, inspired by the baptismal ceremony of Louis, Grand Dauphin of France, was held on 9 June 1811 in Notre Dame de Paris.
On 4 April 1814, he abdicated in favour of his three-year-old son after the Six Days' Campaign and the Battle of Paris.
The child became Emperor of the French under the regnal name of Napoleon II.
However, on 6 April 1814, Napoleon I fully abdicated and renounced not only his own rights to the French throne, but also those of his descendants.
The Treaty of Fontainebleau in 1814 gave the child the right to use the title of Prince of Parma, of Placentia, and of Guastalla, and his mother was styled the Duchess of Parma, of Placentia, and of Guastalla.
Reign
On 29 March 1814, accompanied by her suite, Marie Louise left the Tuileries Palace with her son.
Their first stop was the Château de Rambouillet; then, fearing the advancing enemy troops, they continued on to the Château de Blois.
On 13 April, with her suite much diminished, Marie Louise and her three-year-old son were back in Rambouillet, where they met her father, the Emperor Francis I of Austria, and the Emperor Alexander I of Russia.
On 23 April, escorted by an Austrian regiment, mother and son left Rambouillet and France forever, for their exile in Austria.
In 1815, after his resurgence and his defeat at Waterloo, Napoleon I abdicated for the second time in favour of his four-year-old son, whom he had not seen since his exile to Elba.
The day after Napoleon's abdication, a Commission of Government of five members took the rule of France, awaiting the return of the Bourbon King Louis XVIII, who was in Le Cateau-Cambrésis.
The Commission held power for two weeks, but never formally summoned Napoleon II as Emperor or appointed a regent.
The entrance of the Allies into Paris on 7 July brought a rapid end to his supporters' wishes.
Napoleon II was residing in Austria with his mother and was probably not aware at the time that he had been proclaimed Emperor on his father's abdication.
The next Bonaparte to ascend the throne of France, in 1852, would be Louis-Napoleon, the son of Napoleon's brother Louis I, King of Holland.
He took the regnal name of Napoleon III.
Life in Austria
From the spring of 1814 onwards, the young Napoleon lived in Austria and was known as "Franz", his second given name.
In 1818, he was awarded the title of Duke of Reichstadt by his maternal grandfather, Emperor Francis.
He was educated by a staff of military tutors and developed a passion for soldiering, dressing in a miniature uniform like his father's and performing maneuvers in the palace.
At the age of 8, it was apparent to his tutors that he had chosen his career.
By 1820, Napoleon had completed his elementary studies and begun his military training, learning German, Italian and mathematics as well as receiving advanced physical training.
His official army career began at age 12, in 1823, when he was made a cadet in the Austrian Army.
Accounts from his tutors describe Napoleon as intelligent, serious and focused.
Additionally, he was a very tall young man: he had grown to nearly 6 feet by the time he was 17.
His budding military career gave some concern and fascination to the monarchies of Europe and French leaders over his possible return to France.
However, he was allowed to play no political role and instead was used by Austrian Chancellor Klemens von Metternich in bargaining with France to gain advantage for Austria.
Fearful of anyone in the Bonaparte family regaining political power, Metternich even rejected a request for Franz to move to a warmer climate in Italy.
He received another rejection when his grandfather refused to allow him to join the army traveling to Italy to put down a rebellion.
Upon the death of his stepfather, Adam Albert von Neipperg, and the revelation that his mother had borne two illegitimate children to Neipperg prior to their marriage, Franz grew distant from his mother and felt that his Austrian family were holding him back to avoid political controversy.
He said to his friend, Anton von Prokesch-Osten, "If Josephine had been my mother, my father would not have been buried at Saint Helena, and I should not be at Vienna.
My mother is kind but weak; she was not the wife my father deserved".
Death
In 1831, Franz was given command of an Austrian battalion, but he never got the chance to serve in any meaningful capacity.
In 1832, he caught pneumonia and was bedridden for several months.
His poor health eventually overtook him and on 22 July 1832 Franz died of tuberculosis at Schönbrunn Palace in Vienna.
He left no issue; thus the Napoleonic claim to the throne of France passed to his cousin, Louis-Napoléon Bonaparte, who later successfully restored the empire as Napoleon III.
Disposition of his remains
On 15 December 1940, Adolf Hitler ordered the remains of Napoleon II to be transferred from Vienna to the dome of Les Invalides in Paris.
The remains of Napoleon I had been returned to France in December 1840, at the time of the July Monarchy.
For some time, the remains of the young prince who had briefly been an emperor rested beside those of his father.
Later, the prince's remains were moved to the lower church.
While most of his remains were transferred to Paris, his heart and intestines remained in Vienna, which is traditional for members of the Habsburg house.
They are in Urn 42 in the "Heart Crypt" (Herzgruft) and his viscera are in Urn 76 of the Ducal Crypt.
Legacy
* Napoleon II was also known as "The Eaglet" (French: L'Aiglon).
In 1900, Edmond Rostand wrote a play, L'Aiglon, about his life.
* Serbian composer Petar Stojanović composed the operetta Napoleon II: Herzog von Reichstadt, which premiered in Vienna in the 1920s.
* Victor Tourjansky directed a French-language film titled L'Aiglon in 1931, and he also directed a separate German-language version.
* Arthur Honegger and Jacques Ibert collaborated on an opera, L'Aiglon, which premiered in 1937.
The journalist Henri Rochefort joked that Napoleon II, having never really governed, was France's best leader, since he brought no war, taxes or tyranny.
He was noted for his friendship with Sophie, a Bavarian princess of the House of Wittelsbach.
Intelligent, ambitious and strong-willed, Sophie had little in common with her husband Franz Karl.
There were rumors of a love affair between Sophie and Napoleon II, as well as the possibility that Sophie's second son, Maximilian I of Mexico (born 1832), was the result issue of the affair.
Titles, styles, arms and honours
Titles and styles
* 20 March 1811 - 6 April 1814:
His Majesty The King of Rome
* 6 April 1814 - 22 July 1818: His Serene Highness The Prince of Parma, of Piacencia, and Guastalla
**20 March 1815 - 22 June 1815: His Imperial Highness The Prince Imperial of France
** 22 June 1815 - 7 July 1815: His Imperial Majesty The Emperor of the French
* 22 July 1818 - 22 July 1832: His Serene Highness The Duke of Reichstadt
** in pretense: 7 July 1815 - 22 July 1832:
His Imperial Majesty Emperor Napoleon II
Honours
* :
Knight Grand Cross of the Order of Saint Stephen of Hungary
* First French Empire: Grand Eagle of the Legion of Honour
* :
Knight Grand Cross of the Sacred Military Constantinian Order of Saint George
Coat of arms
Image:Blason Roi de Rome.svg|King of Rome
Image:Grandes Armes Impériales (1804-1815)2.svg|Emperor of the French (titular ruler)
Image:Coat of Arms of the Duke of Reichstadt (Variant 2).svg|Duke of Reichstadt (181832)
Sources
* Welschinger, Le roi de Rome, 1811-32, (Paris, 1897)
* Wertheimer, The Duke of Reichstadt, (London, 1905)
