The pronghorn (, ) (Antilocapra americana) is a species of artiodactyl (even-toed, hoofed) mammal indigenous to interior western and central North America.
Though not an antelope, it is often known colloquially in North America as the American antelope, prong buck, pronghorn antelope, prairie antelope, or simply antelope because it closely resembles the true antelopes of the Old World and fills a similar ecological niche due to parallel evolution.
It is the only surviving member of the family Antilocapridae.
During the Pleistocene epoch, about 12 antilocaprid species existed in North America.
Three other genera (Capromeryx, Stockoceros and Tetrameryx) existed when humans entered North America but are now extinct.
As a member of the superfamily Giraffoidea, the pronghorn's closest living relatives are the giraffes and okapi.
The Giraffoidea are in turn members of the infraorder Pecora, making pronghorns more distant relatives of the Cervidae (deer) and Bovidae (cattle, goats, sheep, antelopes, and gazelles), among others.
The pronghorn is the symbol of the American Society of Mammalogists.
Discovery and taxonomy
The scientific name of the pronghorn is Antilocapra americana.
The pronghorn is the sole extant member of the family Antilocapridae.
This species was first described by American ornithologist George Ord in 1815.
The pronghorn were first seen and described by Spanish explorers in the 16th century, but were not formally recorded or scrutinised till the 1804-1806 expedition by Captain Meriwether Lewis and Second Lieutenant William Clark.
The expedition, which aimed to unravel water routes in the continent for commercial purposes, led to the discovery or formal recognition of a variety of flora and fauna of North America.
Following the discovery of a few subspecies of the sharp-tailed grouse, Lewis and Clark came across the pronghorn near the mouth of the Niobrara River, in present-day Nebraska.
Clark was the first to kill a pronghorn, and described his experience as follows:
QTEMPLATE |I walked on shore to find an old Vulcanoe the Ionia Volcano? ...
in my walk I killed a Buck Goat of this Countrey, about the height of the Grown Deer, its body Shorter the horns which is not very hard and forks up one prong
Short the other round & Sharp arched, and is immediately above its Eyes the Color is a light gray with black behind its ears down the neck, and its face white round its neck, its Sides and its rump round its tail which is Short & white; Verry actively made, has only a pair of hoofs to each foot, his brains on the back of his head, his Nostrals large, his eyes like a Sheep he is more like the Antilope or Gazelle of Africa than any other Species of Goat.
Lewis and Clark made several other observations on the behavior of the pronghorn and how the local tribes hunted them.
They described the animal, which they referred to as the "Antelope" or the "Goat", as follows:
The orbits (eye sockets) are prominent and set high on the skull, with never an anteorbital pit.
Their teeth are hypsodont, and their dental formula is .
Each "horn" of the pronghorn is composed of a slender, laterally flattened blade of bone that grows from the frontal bones of the skull, forming a permanent core.
As in the Giraffidae, skin covers the bony cores, but in the pronghorn, it develops into a keratinous sheath which is shed and regrown annually.
Unlike the horns of the family Bovidae, the horn sheaths of the pronghorn are branched, each sheath having a forward-pointing tine (hence the name pronghorn).
Males have a horn sheath about (average ) long with a prong.
Females have smaller horns that range from (average ) and sometimes barely visible; they are straight and very rarely pronged.
The pronghorn is the fastest land mammal in the Western Hemisphere, being built for maximum predator evasion through running.
The top speed is very hard to measure accurately and varies between individuals; it can run 35 mph for 4 mi , and 55 mph for 0.5 mi (88.5 km/h for 0.8 km).
It is often cited as the second-fastest land animal, second only to the cheetah.
It can, however, sustain high speeds longer than cheetahs.
Compared to its body size, the pronghorn has a large windpipe, heart, and lungs to allow it to take in large amounts of air when running.
Additionally, pronghorn hooves have two long, cushioned, pointed toes which help absorb shock when running at high speeds.
They also have an extremely light bone structure and hollow hair.
Pronghorns are built for speed, not for jumping.
Their ranges are sometimes affected by sheep ranchers' fences.
However, they can be seen going under fences, sometimes at high speed.
For this reason, the Arizona Antelope Foundation and others are in the process of removing the bottom barbed wire from the fences, and/or installing a barbless bottom wire.
The pronghorn has been observed to have at least 13 distinct gaits, including one reaching nearly per stride.
and northern Baja California Sur, to Sonora and San Luis Potosí in northern Mexico.
The subspecies known as the Sonoran pronghorn (A. a. sonoriensis) occurs in Arizona and Mexico.
The migrating pronghorn start travel from the foothills of the Pioneer Mountains through Craters of the Moon National Monument to the Continental Divide.
Dr. Scott Bergen of Wildlife Conservation Society says, "This study shows that pronghorn are the true marathoners of the American West.
With these new findings, we can confirm that Idaho supports a major overland mammal migration - an increasingly rare phenomenon in the U.S. and worldwide."
Cougars, wolves, coyotes, and bobcats are major predators of pronghorns.
Golden eagles have been reported to prey on fawns and adults.
Social behavior and reproduction
Pronghorns form mixed-sex herds in the winter.
In early spring, the herds break up, with young males forming bachelor groups, females forming their groups, and adult males living solitarily.
Dominant females aggressively displace other females from feeding sites.
Adult males either defend a fixed territory that females may enter, or defend a harem of females.
A pronghorn may change mating strategies depending on environmental or demographic conditions.
Where precipitation is high, adult males tend to be territorial and maintain their territories with scent marking, vocalizing, and challenging intruders.
In these systems, territorial males have access to better resources than bachelor males.
Females continue this mating behavior for two to three weeks.
The scent glands on the pronghorn are on either side of the jaw, between the hooves, and on the rump.
Pronghorns have a gestation period of 7-8 months, which is longer than is typical for North American ungulates.
They breed in mid-September, and the doe carries her fawn until late May.
This gestation period is around six weeks longer than that of the white-tailed deer.
Females usually bear within a few days of each other.
The protection of habitat and hunting restrictions have allowed pronghorn numbers to recover to an estimated population between 500,000 and 1,000,000 (excluding the Sonoran pronghorn, which is down to about 200).
Some recent decline has occurred in a few localized populations,
Pronghorns are now quite numerous, and outnumbered people in Wyoming and parts of northern Colorado until just recently.
They are legally hunted in western states for purposes of population control and food.
No major range-wide threats exist, although localized declines are taking place, particularly to the Sonoran pronghorn, mainly as a result of, among others, livestock grazing, the construction of roads, fences, and other barriers that prevent access to historical habitat, illegal hunting, insufficient forage and water, and lack of recruitment.
Three subspecies are considered endangered in all (A. a. sonoriensis, A. a. peninsularis), or part of their ranges (A. a. mexicana).
Populations of the Sonoran pronghorn in Arizona and Mexico are protected under the Endangered Species Act (since 1967), and a recovery plan for this subspecies has been prepared by U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service.
Mexican animals are listed on CITES Appendix I. Pronghorns have game-animal status in all of the western states of the United States, and permits are required to trap or shoot pronghorns.
