Cattle-colloquially cows-are the most common type of large domesticated ungulates.
They are a prominent modern member of the subfamily Bovinae, are the most widespread species of the genus Bos, and are most commonly classified collectively as Bos taurus.
Cattle are commonly raised as livestock for meat (beef or veal, see beef cattle), for milk (see dairy cattle), and for hides, which are used to make leather.
They are used as riding animals and draft animals (oxen or s.
Around 10,500 years ago, cattle were domesticated from as few as 80 progenitors in central Anatolia, the Levant and Western Iran.
According to an estimate from 2011, there are 1.4 billion cattle in the world.
In 2009, cattle became one of the first livestock animals to have a fully mapped genome.
Taxonomy
Cattle were originally identified as three separate species: Bos taurus, the European or "taurine" cattle (including similar types from Africa and Asia); Bos indicus, the zebu; and the extinct Bos primigenius, the aurochs.
The aurochs is ancestral to both zebu and taurine cattle.
These have been reclassified as one species, Bos taurus, with three subspecies: Bos taurus primigenius, Bos taurus indicus, and Bos taurus taurus.
Complicating the matter is the ability of cattle to interbreed with other closely related species.
Hybrid individuals and even breeds exist, not only between taurine cattle and zebu (such as the sanga cattle, Bos taurus africanus), but also between one or both of these and some other members of the genus Bosyaks (the dzo or yattle), banteng, and gaur.
Hybrids such as the beefalo breed can even occur between taurine cattle and either species of bison, leading some authors to consider them part of the genus Bos, as well.
The hybrid origin of some types may not be obvious - for example, genetic testing of the Dwarf Lulu breed, the only taurine-type cattle in Nepal, found them to be a mix of taurine cattle, zebu, and yak.
However, cattle cannot be successfully hybridized with more distantly related bovines such as water buffalo or African buffalo.
The aurochs originally ranged throughout Europe, North Africa, and much of Asia.
In historical times, its range became restricted to Europe, and the last known individual died in Mazovia, Poland, in about 1627.
Breeders have attempted to recreate cattle of similar appearance to aurochs by crossing traditional types of domesticated cattle, creating the Heck cattle breed.
Etymology
The noun cattle (which is treated as a plural and has no singular) encompasses both sexes.
The singular, cow, technically means the female, the male being bull.
The plural form cows is sometimes used colloquially to refer to both sexes collectively, as e.g. in a herd, but that usage can be misleading as the speaker's intent may indeed be just the females.
The bovine species per se is clearly dimorphic.
Cattle did not originate as the term for bovine animals.
It was borrowed from Anglo-Norman , itself from medieval Latin 'principal sum of money, capital', itself derived in turn from Latin 'head'.
Cattle originally meant movable personal property, especially livestock of any kind, as opposed to real property .
The word is a variant of chattel (a unit of personal property) and closely related to capital in the economic sense.
The term replaced earlier Old English 'cattle, property', which survives today as fee (cf. , , ).
The word "cow" came via Anglo-Saxon (plural cȳ), from Common Indo-European (genitive ) = "a bovine animal", compare , , .
The plural cȳ became ki or kie in Middle English, and an additional plural ending was often added, giving kine, kien, but also kies, kuin and others.
This is the origin of the now archaic English plural, "kine".
The Scots language singular is coo or , and the plural is "kye".
In older English sources such as the King James Version of the Bible, "cattle" refers to livestock, as opposed to "deer" which refers to wildlife.
"Wild cattle" may refer to feral cattle or to undomesticated species of the genus Bos.
Today, when used without any other qualifier, the modern meaning of "cattle" is usually restricted to domesticated bovines.
Terminology
In general, the same words are used in different parts of the world, but with minor differences in the definitions.
The terminology described here contrasts the differences in definition between the United Kingdom and other British-influenced parts of the world such as Canada, Australia, New Zealand, Ireland and the United States.
* An "intact" (i.e., not castrated) adult male is called a bull.
A wild, young, unmarked bull is known as a micky in Australia.
An unbranded bovine of either sex is called a maverick in the US and Canada.
* An adult female that has had a calf (or two, depending on regional usage) is a cow.
A young female before she has had a calf of her own and is under three years of age is called a ( ).
A young female that has had only one calf is occasionally called a first-calf heifer.
* Young cattle of both sexes are called calves until they are weaned, then weaners until they are a year old in some areas; in other areas, particularly with male beef cattle, they may be known as feeder calves or simply feeders.
After that, they are referred to as yearlings or stirks if between one and two years of age.
A castrated male is called a steer in the United States; older steers are often called bullocks in other parts of the world, but in North America this term refers to a young bull.
Piker bullocks are micky bulls (uncastrated young male bulls) that were caught, castrated and then later lost.
In North America, draft cattle under four years old are called working steers.
Improper or late castration on a bull results in it becoming a coarse steer known as a stag in Australia, Canada and New Zealand.
In some countries, an incompletely castrated male is known also as a rig.
A castrated male (occasionally a female or in some areas a bull) kept for draft or riding purposes is called an ox (plural oxen); ox may also be used to refer to some carcass products from any adult cattle, such as ox-hide, ox-blood, oxtail, or ox-liver.
In all cattle species, a female twin of a bull usually becomes an infertile partial intersex, and is called a freemartin.
* Neat (horned oxen, from which neatsfoot oil is derived), beef (young ox) and beefing (young animal fit for slaughtering) are obsolete terms, although poll, pollard and polled cattle are still terms in use for naturally hornless animals, or in some areas also for those that have been disbudded or dehorned.
* Cattle raised for human consumption are called beef cattle.
Within the American beef cattle industry, the older term beef (plural beeves) is still used to refer to an animal of either sex.
Some Australian, Canadian, New Zealand and British people use the term beast.
* Cattle bred specifically for milk production are called milking or dairy cattle; Thus one may refer to "three cattle" or "some cattle", but not "one cattle".
"One head of cattle" is a valid though periphrastic way to refer to one animal of indeterminate or unknown age and sex; otherwise no universally used single-word singular form of cattle exists in modern English, other than the sex- and age-specific terms such as cow, bull, steer and heifer.
Historically, "ox" was not a sex-specific term for adult cattle, but generally this is now used only for working cattle, especially adult castrated males.
The term is also incorporated into the names of other species, such as the musk ox and "grunting ox" (yak), and is used in some areas to describe certain cattle products such as ox-hide and oxtail.
Cow is in general use as a singular for the collective cattle.
The word cow is easy to use when a singular is needed and the sex is unknown or irrelevant-when "there is a cow in the road", for example.
Further, any herd of fully mature cattle in or near a pasture is statistically likely to consist mostly of cows, so the term is probably accurate even in the restrictive sense.
Other than the few bulls needed for breeding, the vast majority of male cattle are castrated as calves and are used as oxen or slaughtered for meat before the age of three years.
Thus, in a pastured herd, any calves or herd bulls usually are clearly distinguishable from the cows due to distinctively different sizes and clear anatomical differences.
Merriam-Webster and Oxford Living Dictionaries recognize the sex-nonspecific use of cow as an alternate definition, whereas Collins and the OED do not.
Colloquially, more general nonspecific terms may denote cattle when a singular form is needed.
Head of cattle is usually used only after a numeral.
Australian, New Zealand and British farmers use the term beast or cattle beast.
Bovine is also used in Britain.
The term critter is common in the western United States and Canada, particularly when referring to young cattle.
In some areas of the American South , where both dairy and beef cattle are present, an individual animal was once called a "beef critter", though that term is becoming archaic.
Other terminology
Cattle raised for human consumption are called beef cattle.
Within the beef cattle industry in parts of the United States, the term beef (plural beeves) is still used in its archaic sense to refer to an animal of either sex.
Cows of certain breeds that are kept for the milk they give are called dairy cows or milking cows (formerly milch cows).
Most young male offspring of dairy cows are sold for veal, and may be referred to as veal calves.
The term dogies is used to describe orphaned calves in the context of ranch work in the American West, as in "Keep them dogies moving".
In some places, a cow kept to provide milk for one family is called a "house cow".
Other obsolete terms for cattle include "neat" (this use survives in "neatsfoot oil", extracted from the feet and legs of cattle), and "beefing" (young animal fit for slaughter).
An onomatopoeic term for one of the most common sounds made by cattle is moo (also called lowing).
There are a number of other sounds made by cattle, including calves bawling, and bulls bellowing.
Bawling is most common for cows after weaning of a calf.
The bullroarer makes a sound similar to a bull's territorial call.
Characteristics
Anatomy
Cattle are large quadrupedal ungulate mammals with cloven hooves.
Most breeds have horns, which can be as large as the Texas Longhorn or small like a scur.
Careful genetic selection has allowed polled (hornless) cattle to become widespread.
Digestive system
Cattle are ruminants, meaning their digestive system is highly specialized to allow the use of poorly digestible plants as food.
Cattle have one stomach with four compartments, the rumen, reticulum, omasum, and abomasum, with the rumen being the largest compartment.
The reticulum, the smallest compartment, is known as the "honeycomb".
The omasum's main function is to absorb water and nutrients from the digestible feed.
The omasum is known as the "many plies".
The abomasum is like the human stomach; this is why it is known as the "true stomach".
Cattle are known for regurgitating and re-chewing their food, known as cud chewing, like most ruminants.
While the animal is feeding, the food is swallowed without being chewed and goes into the rumen for storage until the animal can find a quiet place to continue the digestion process.
The food is regurgitated, a mouthful at a time, back up to the mouth, where the food, now called the cud, is chewed by the molars, grinding down the coarse vegetation to small particles.
The cud is then swallowed again and further digested by specialized microorganisms in the rumen.
These microbes are primarily responsible for decomposing cellulose and other carbohydrates into volatile fatty acids cattle use as their primary metabolic fuel.
The microbes inside the rumen also synthesize amino acids from non-protein nitrogenous sources, such as urea and ammonia.
As these microbes reproduce in the rumen, older generations die and their cells continue on through the digestive tract.
These cells are then partially digested in the small intestines, allowing cattle to gain a high-quality protein source.
These features allow cattle to thrive on grasses and other tough vegetation.
Gestation and size
The gestation period for a cow is about nine months long.
A newborn calf's size can vary among breeds, but a typical calf weighs between .
Adult size and weight vary significantly among breeds and sex.
Steers are generally killed before reaching .
Breeding stock may be allowed a longer lifespan, occasionally living as long as 25 years.
The oldest recorded cow, Big Bertha, died at the age of 48 in 1993.
Reproduction
On farms it is very common to use artificial insemination (AI), a medically assisted reproduction technique consisting of the artificial deposition of semen in the female's genital tract.
It is used in cases where the spermatozoa can not reach the fallopian tubes or simply by choice of the owner of the animal.
It consists of transferring, to the uterine cavity, spermatozoa previously collected and processed, with the selection of morphologically more normal and mobile spermatozoa.
A cow's udder contains two pairs of mammary glands, (commonly referred to as teats) creating four "quarters".
The front ones are referred to as fore quarters and the rear ones rear quarters.
Bulls become fertile at about seven months of age.
Their fertility is closely related to the size of their testicles, and one simple test of fertility is to measure the circumference of the scrotum: a young bull is likely to be fertile once this reaches ; that of a fully adult bull may be over .
Bulls have a fibro-elastic penis.
Given the small amount of erectile tissue, there is little enlargement after erection.
The penis is quite rigid when non-erect, and becomes even more rigid during erection.
Protrusion is not affected much by erection, but more by relaxation of the retractor penis muscle and straightening of the sigmoid flexure.
Induced ovulation can be manipulated to produce farming benefits.
For example, to synchronise ovulation of the cattle to benefit dairy farming.
Weight
The weight of adult cattle varies, depending on the breed.
Smaller kinds, such as Dexter and Jersey adults, range between .
Large Continental breeds, such as Charolais, Marchigiana, Belgian Blue and Chianina, adults range from .
British breeds, such as Hereford, Angus, and Shorthorn, mature between , occasionally higher, particularly with Angus and Hereford.
Bulls are larger than cows of the same breed by up to a few hundred kilograms.
Chianina bulls can weigh up to ; British bulls, such as Angus and Hereford, can weigh as little as to as much as .
The world record for the heaviest bull was , a Chianina named Donetto, when he was exhibited at the Arezzo show in 1955.
The heaviest steer was eight-year-old 'Old Ben', a Shorthorn/Hereford cross weighing in at in 1910.
In the United States, the average weight of beef cattle has steadily increased, especially since the 1970s, requiring the building of new slaughterhouses able to handle larger carcasses.
New packing plants in the 1980s stimulated a large increase in cattle weights.
Before 1790 beef cattle averaged only net; and thereafter weights climbed steadily.
Cognition
In laboratory studies, young cattle are able to memorize the locations of several food sources and retain this memory for at least 8 hours, although this declined after 12 hours.
Fifteen-month-old heifers learn more quickly than adult cows which have had either one or two calvings, but their longer-term memory is less stable.
Mature cattle perform well in spatial learning tasks and have a good long-term memory in these tests.
Cattle tested in a radial arm maze are able to remember the locations of high-quality food for at least 30 days.
Although they initially learn to avoid low-quality food, this memory diminishes over the same duration.
Under less artificial testing conditions, young cattle showed they were able to remember the location of feed for at least 48 days.
Cattle can make an association between a visual stimulus and food within 1 day-memory of this association can be retained for 1 year, despite a slight decay.
Calves are capable of discrimination learning and adult cattle compare favourably with small mammals in their learning ability in the Closed-field Test.
They are also able to discriminate between familiar individuals, and among humans.
Cattle can tell the difference between familiar and unfamiliar animals of the same species (conspecifics).
Studies show they behave less aggressively toward familiar individuals when they are forming a new group.
Although cattle can discriminate between humans by their faces alone, they also use other cues such as the color of clothes when these are available.
In audio play-back studies, calves prefer their own mother's vocalizations compared to the vocalizations of an unfamiliar mother.
In laboratory studies using images, cattle can discriminate between images of the heads of cattle and other animal species.
They are also able to distinguish between familiar and unfamiliar conspecifics.
Furthermore, they are able to categorize images as familiar and unfamiliar individuals.
When mixed with other individuals, cloned calves from the same donor form subgroups, indicating that kin discrimination occurs and may be a basis of grouping behaviour.
It has also been shown using images of cattle that both artificially inseminated and cloned calves have similar cognitive capacities of kin and non-kin discrimination.
Cattle can recognize familiar individuals.
Visual individual recognition is a more complex mental process than visual discrimination.
It requires the recollection of the learned idiosyncratic identity of an individual that has been previously encountered and the formation of a mental representation.
By using 2-dimensional images of the heads of one cow (face, profiles, views), all the tested heifers showed individual recognition of familiar and unfamiliar individuals from their own breed.
Furthermore, almost all the heifers recognized unknown individuals from different breeds, although this was achieved with greater difficulty.
Individual recognition was most difficult when the visual features of the breed being tested were quite different from the breed in the image, for example, the breed being tested had no spots whereas the image was of a spotted breed.
Cattle use visual/brain lateralisation in their visual scanning of novel and familiar stimuli.
Domestic cattle prefer to view novel stimuli with the left eye, i.e. using the right brain hemisphere (similar to horses, Australian magpies, chicks, toads and fish) but use the right eye, i.e. using the left hemisphere, for viewing familiar stimuli.
Temperament and emotions
In cattle, temperament can affect production traits such as carcass and meat quality or milk yield as well as affecting the animal's overall health and reproduction.
Cattle temperament is defined as "the consistent behavioral and physiological difference observed between individuals in response to a stressor or environmental challenge and is used to describe the relatively stable difference in the behavioral predisposition of an animal, which can be related to psychobiological mechanisms".
Generally, cattle temperament is assumed to be multidimensional.
Five underlying categories of temperament traits have been proposed:
In a study on Holstein-Friesian heifers learning to press a panel to open a gate for access to a food reward, the researchers also recorded the heart rate and behavior of the heifers when moving along the race towards the food.
When the heifers made clear improvements in learning, they had higher heart rates and tended to move more vigorously along the race.
The researchers concluded this was an indication that cattle may react emotionally to their own learning improvement.
Negative emotional states are associated with a bias toward negative responses towards ambiguous cues in judgement tasks.
After separation from their mothers, Holstein calves showed such a cognitive bias indicative of low mood.
A similar study showed that after hot-iron disbudding (dehorning), calves had a similar negative bias indicating that post-operative pain following this routine procedure results in a negative change in emotional state.
In studies of visual discrimination, the position of the ears has been used as an indicator of emotional state.
Mirrors have been used to reduce stress in isolated cattle.
Senses
Cattle use all of the five widely recognized sensory modalities.
These can assist in some complex behavioural patterns, for example, in grazing behaviour.
Cattle eat mixed diets, but when given the opportunity, show a partial preference of approximately 70% clover and 30% grass.
This preference has a diurnal pattern, with a stronger preference for clover in the morning, and the proportion of grass increasing towards the evening.
Vision
Vision is the dominant sense in cattle and they obtain almost 50% of their information visually.
Cattle are a prey animal and to assist predator detection, their eyes are located on the sides of their head rather than the front.
This gives them a wide field of view of 330° but limits binocular vision (and therefore stereopsis) to 30° to 50° compared to 140° in humans.
This means they have a blind spot directly behind them.
Cattle have good visual acuity, There are two to three rods per cone in the fovea centralis but five to six near the optic papilla.
Whilst having good color sensitivity, it is not as good as humans or sheep.
Taste
Cattle have a well-developed sense of taste and can distinguish the four primary tastes (sweet, salty, bitter and sour).
They possess around 20,000 taste buds.
The strength of taste perception depends on the individual's current food requirements.
They avoid bitter-tasting foods (potentially toxic) and have a marked preference for sweet (high calorific value) and salty foods (electrolyte balance).
Their sensitivity to sour-tasting foods helps them to maintain optimal ruminal pH.
Audition
Cattle hearing ranges from 23 Hz to 35 kHz.
Their frequency of best sensitivity is 8 kHz and they have a lowest threshold of −21 db (re 20 μN/m−2), which means their hearing is more acute than horses (lowest threshold of 7 db).
Sound localization acuity thresholds are an average of 30°.
This means that cattle are less able to localise sounds compared to goats (18°), dogs (8°) and humans (0.8°).
Because cattle have a broad foveal fields of view covering almost the entire horizon, they may not need very accurate locus information from their auditory systems to direct their gaze to a sound source.
Vocalisations are an important mode of communication amongst cattle and can provide information on the age, sex, dominance status and reproductive status of the caller.
Calves can recognize their mothers using vocalizations; vocal behaviour may play a role by indicating estrus and competitive display by bulls.
Olfaction and gustation
Cattle have a range of odiferous glands over their body including interdigital, infraorbital, response.
There is evidence that when cattle are stressed, this can be recognised by other cattle and this is communicated by alarm substances in the urine.
The odour of dog faeces induces behavioural changes prior to cattle feeding, whereas the odours of urine from either stressed or non-stressed conspecifics and blood have no effect.
In the laboratory, cattle can be trained to recognise conspecific individuals using olfaction only.
In a follow-up study, cattle exposed to various magnetic fields directly beneath or in the vicinity of power lines trending in various magnetic directions exhibited distinct patterns of alignment.
However, in 2011, a group of Czech researchers reported their failed attempt to replicate the finding using Google Earth images.
Behavior
Under natural conditions, calves stay with their mother until weaning at 8 to 11 months.
Heifer and bull calves are equally attached to their mothers in the first few months of life.
Cattle are considered to be "hider" type animals, but in the artificial environment of small calving pens, close proximity between cow and calf is maintained by the mother at the first three calvings but this changes to being mediated by the calf after these.
Primiparous dams show a higher incidence of abnormal maternal behavior.
Beef-calves reared on the range suckle an average of 5.0 times every 24 hours with an average total time of 46 min spent suckling.
There is a diurnal rhythm in suckling activity with peaks between 05:00-07:00, 10:00-13:00 and 17:00-21:00.
Studies on the natural weaning of zebu cattle (Bos indicus) have shown that the cow weans her calves over a 2-week period, but after that, she continues to show strong affiliatory behavior with her offspring and preferentially chooses them for grooming and as grazing partners for at least 4-5 years.
Reproductive behavior
Semi-wild Highland cattle heifers first give birth at 2 or 3 years of age, and the timing of birth is synchronized with increases in natural food quality.
Average calving interval is 391 days, and calving mortality within the first year of life is 5%.
Dominance and leadership
One study showed that over a 4-year period, dominance relationships within a herd of semi-wild highland cattle were very firm.
There were few overt aggressive conflicts and the majority of disputes were settled by agonistic (non-aggressive, competitive) behaviors that involved no physical contact between opponents (e.g. threatening and spontaneous withdrawing).
Such agonistic behavior reduces the risk of injury.
Dominance status depended on age and sex, with older animals generally being dominant to young ones and males dominant to females.
Young bulls gained superior dominance status over adult cows when they reached about 2 years of age.
however, this is not a dominance related behavior as has been found in other species.
In calves, the frequency of agonistic behavior decreases as space allowance increases, but this does not occur for changes in group size.
However, in adult cattle, the number of agonistic encounters increases as the group size increases.
Grazing behavior
When grazing, cattle vary several aspects of their bite, i.e. tongue and jaw movements, depending on characteristics of the plant they are eating.
Bite area decreases with the density of the plants but increases with their height.
Bite area is determined by the sweep of the tongue; in one study observing steers, bite area reached a maximum of approximately .
Bite depth increases with the height of the plants.
By adjusting their behavior, cattle obtain heavier bites in swards that are tall and sparse compared with short, dense swards of equal mass/area.
Cattle adjust other aspects of their grazing behavior in relation to the available food; foraging velocity decreases and intake rate increases in areas of abundant palatable forage.
Cattle avoid grazing areas contaminated by the faeces of other cattle more strongly than they avoid areas contaminated by sheep, but they do not avoid pasture contaminated by rabbit faeces.
Genetics
In 24 April 2009, edition of the journal Science, a team of researchers led by the National Institutes of Health and the US Department of Agriculture reported having mapped the bovine genome.
The scientists found cattle have about 22,000 genes, and 80% of their genes are shared with humans, and they share about 1000 genes with dogs and rodents, but are not found in humans.
Using this bovine "HapMap", researchers can track the differences between the breeds that affect the quality of meat and milk yields.
Behavioral traits of cattle can be as heritable as some production traits, and often, the two can be related.
The heritability of fear varies markedly in cattle from low (0.1) to high (0.53); such high variation is also found in pigs and sheep, probably due to differences in the methods used.
The heritability of temperament (response to isolation during handling) has been calculated as 0.36 and 0.46 for habituation to handling.
Rangeland assessments show that the heritability of aggressiveness in cattle is around 0.36.
Quantitative trait loci (QTLs) have been found for a range of production and behavioral characteristics for both dairy and beef cattle.
Domestication and husbandry
Cattle occupy a unique role in human history, having been domesticated since at least the early neolithic age.
Archeozoological and genetic data indicate that cattle were first domesticated from wild aurochs (Bos primigenius) approximately 10,500 years ago.
There were two major areas of domestication: one in the Near East (specifically central Anatolia, the Levant and Western Iran), giving rise to the taurine line, and a second in the area that is now Pakistan, resulting in the indicine line.
Modern mitochondrial DNA variation indicates the taurine line may have arisen from as few as 80 aurochs tamed in the upper reaches of Mesopotamia near the villages of Çayönü Tepesi in what is now southeastern Turkey and Dja'de el-Mughara in what is now northern Iraq.
Some researchers have suggested that African taurine cattle are derived from a third independent domestication from North African aurochsen.
Some evidence also exists to suggest that other animals, such as camels and goats, may have been used as currency in some parts of the world.
One of the advantages of using cattle as currency is that it allows the seller to set a fixed price.
It even created the standard pricing.
For example, two chickens were traded for one cow as cows were deemed to be more valuable than chickens.
Breeders use cattle husbandry to reduce M. bovis infection susceptibility by selective breeding and maintaining herd health to avoid concurrent disease.
Cattle are farmed for beef, veal, dairy, and leather, and they are less commonly used for conservation grazing, simply to maintain grassland for wildlife-for example, in Epping Forest, England.
They are often used in some of the most wild places for livestock.
Depending on the breed, cattle can survive on hill grazing, heaths, marshes, moors and semidesert.
Modern cattle are more commercial than older breeds and, having become more specialized, are less versatile.
For this reason, many smaller farmers still favor old breeds, such as the Jersey dairy breed.
In Portugal, Spain, southern France and some Latin American countries, bulls are used in the activity of bullfighting; Jallikattu in India is a bull taming sport radically different from European bullfighting, humans are unarmed and bulls are not killed.
In many other countries bullfighting is illegal.
Other activities such as bull riding are seen as part of a rodeo, especially in North America.
Bull-leaping, a central ritual in Bronze Age Minoan culture (see Sacred Bull), still exists in southwestern France.
In modern times, cattle are also entered into agricultural competitions.
These competitions can involve live cattle or cattle carcases in hoof and hook events.
In terms of food intake by humans, consumption of cattle is less efficient than of grain or vegetables with regard to land use, and hence cattle grazing consumes more area than such other agricultural production when raised on grains.
Nonetheless, cattle and other forms of domesticated animals can sometimes help to use plant resources in areas not easily amenable to other forms of agriculture.
Bulls are sometimes used as guard animals.
Sleep
The average sleep time of a domestic cow is about 4 hours a day.
Cattle do have a stay apparatus, but do not sleep standing up, they lie down to sleep deeply.
In spite of the urban legend, cows cannot be tipped over by people pushing on them.
Economy
The meat of adult cattle is known as beef, and that of calves is veal.
Other animal parts are also used as food products, including blood, liver, kidney, heart and oxtail.
Cattle also produce milk, and dairy cattle are specifically bred to produce the large quantities of milk processed and sold for human consumption.
Cattle today are the basis of a multibillion-dollar industry worldwide.
The international trade in beef for 2000 was over $30 billion and represented only 23% of world beef production.
Approximately 300 million cattle, including dairy cattle, are slaughtered each year for food.
The production of milk, which is also made into cheese, butter, yogurt, and other dairy products, is comparable in economic size to beef production, and provides an important part of the food supply for many of the world's people.
Cattle hides, used for leather to make shoes, couches and clothing, are another widespread product.
Cattle remain broadly used as draft animals in many developing countries, such as India.
Cattle are also used in some sporting games, including rodeo and bullfighting.
Cattle meat production
Source: Helgi Library, World Bank, FAOSTAT
About half the world's meat comes from cattle.
Dairy
Certain breeds of cattle, such as the Holstein-Friesian, are used to produce milk, For dairy cattle to continue producing milk, they must give birth to one calf per year.
If the calf is male, it generally is slaughtered at a young age to produce veal.
They will continue to produce milk until three weeks before birth.
Over the last fifty years, dairy farming has become more intensive to increase the yield of milk produced by each cow.
The Holstein-Friesian is the breed of dairy cow most common in the UK, Europe and the United States.
It has been bred selectively to produce the highest yields of milk of any cow.
Around 22 litres per day is average in the UK.
Feral cattle
Feral cattle are defined as being 'cattle that are not domesticated or cultivated'.
Populations of feral cattle are known to come from and exist in: Australia, United States of America, Colombia, Argentina, Spain, France and many islands, including New Guinea, Hawaii, Galapagos, Juan Fernández Islands, Hispaniola (Dominican Republic and Haiti), Tristan da Cunha and Île Amsterdam, and Kazura Island next to Naru Island in Japan.
Chillingham cattle is sometimes regarded as a feral breed.
Aleutian wild cattles can be found on Aleutian Islands.
The "Kinmen cattle" which is dominantly found on Kinmen Island, Taiwan is mostly domesticated while smaller portion of the population is believed to live in the wild due to accidental releases.
Other notable examples include cattle in the vicinity of Hong Kong (in the Shing Mun Country Park, among Sai Kung District and Lantau Island and on Grass Island), and semi-feral animals in Yangmingshan, Taiwan.
Environmental impact
Further reading
* Bhattacharya, S. 2003.
https:/ article.ns?id=dn4220 Cattle ownership makes it a man's world. .
Retrieved 26 December 2006.
* Cattle Today (CT).
Website.
http:/ Breeds of cattle.
Cattle Today.
Retrieved 26 December 2006
* Clay, J. 2004.
World Agriculture and the Environment: A Commodity-by-Commodity Guide to Impacts and Practices.
Washington, DC: Island Press. .
* Clutton-Brock, J. 1999.
A Natural History of Domesticated Mammals.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. .
* - A visual textbook containing History web http:/
The ultimate ungulate page. .
Retrieved 26 December 2006.
* Invasive Species Specialist Group (ISSG).
http:/ database ecology.asp?si
172&fr
1&sts=sss Bos taurus.
Global Invasive Species Database.
* Johns, Catherine.
Cattle: History, Myth, Art. London: The British Museum Press.
* Nowak, R.M. and Paradiso, J.L. 1983.
Walker's Mammals of the World.
Baltimore, MD:
The Johns Hopkins University Press.
* Oklahoma State University (OSU).
http:/ breeds wnet holycow/index.html Holy cow.
PBS Nature.
Retrieved 5 January 2007.
* Rath, S. 1998.
The Complete Cow.
Stillwater, MN: Voyageur Press. .
* Raudiansky, S. 1992.
The Covenant of the Wild.
New York: William Morrow and Company, Inc. .
* Spectrum Commodities (SC).
https:/ web http:/ education lc.html Live cattle. .
Retrieved 5 January 2007.
* Voelker, W. 1986.
The Natural History of Living Mammals.
Medford, NJ: Plexus Publishing, Inc. .
* Yogananda, P. 1946.
The Autobiography of a Yogi.
Los Angeles: Self Realization Fellowship. .
gimdqx9iv7bw28j2jjwv2nmhijo9or8
