John Ernst Steinbeck Jr. (; February 27, 1902 - December 20, 1968) was an American author.
He won the 1962 Nobel Prize in Literature "for his realistic and imaginative writings, combining as they do sympathetic humour and keen social perception."
He has been called "a giant of American letters," and many of his works are considered classics of Western literature.
During his writing career, he authored 33 books, including 16 novels, six non-fiction books, and two collections of short stories.
He is widely known for the comic novels Tortilla Flat (1935) and Cannery Row (1945), the multi-generation epic East of Eden (1952), and the novellas Of Mice and Men (1937) and The Red Pony (1937).
The Pulitzer Prize-winning The Grapes of Wrath (1939) is considered Steinbeck's masterpiece and part of the American literary canon.
In the first 75 years after it was published, it sold 14 million copies.
Most of Steinbeck's work is set in central California, particularly in the Salinas Valley and the California Coast Ranges region.
His works frequently explored the themes of fate and injustice, especially as applied to downtrodden or everyman protagonists .
Early life
Steinbeck was born on February 27, 1902, in Salinas, California.
He was of German, English, and Irish descent.
Johann Adolf Großsteinbeck (1828-1913), Steinbeck's paternal grandfather, shortened the family name to Steinbeck when he immigrated to the United States.
The family farm in Heiligenhaus, Mettmann, North Rhine-Westphalia, Germany, is still named "Großsteinbeck."
His father, John Ernst Steinbeck (1862-1935), served as Monterey County treasurer.
John's mother, Olive Hamilton (1867-1934), a former school teacher, shared Steinbeck's passion for reading and writing.
The Steinbecks were members of the Episcopal Church, although Steinbeck later became agnostic.
Steinbeck lived in a small rural valley (no more than a frontier settlement) set in some of the world's most fertile soil, about twenty-five miles from the Pacific Coast.
Both valley and coast would serve as settings for some of his best fiction.
He spent his summers working on nearby ranches and later with migrant workers on Spreckels sugar beet farms.
There he learned of the harsher aspects of the migrant life and the darker side of human nature, which supplied him with material expressed in Of Mice and Men.
He explored his surroundings, walking across local forests, fields, and farms.
While working at Spreckels Sugar Company, he sometimes worked in their laboratory, which gave him time to write.
He had considerable mechanical aptitude and fondness for repairing things he owned.
Steinbeck graduated from Salinas High School in 1919 and went on to study English Literature at Stanford University near Palo Alto, leaving without a degree in 1925.
He traveled to New York City where he took odd jobs while trying to write.
When he failed to publish his work, he returned to California and worked in 1928 as a tour guide and caretaker They married in January 1930 in Los Angeles, where, with friends, he attempted to make money by manufacturing plaster mannequins.
They formed a common bond based on their love of music and art, and John learned biology and Ricketts' ecological philosophy.
When Steinbeck became emotionally upset, Ricketts sometimes played music for him.
Career
Writing
Steinbeck's first novel, Cup of Gold, published in 1929, is loosely based on the life and death of privateer Henry Morgan.
It centers on Morgan's assault and sacking of the city of Panama, sometimes referred to as the 'Cup of Gold', and on the women, brighter than the sun, who were said to be found there.
Meredith and Steinbeck became close friends for the next two decades.
Later that year, it won the Pulitzer Prize for Fiction and was adapted as a film directed by John Ford, starring Henry Fonda as Tom Joad; Fonda was nominated for the best actor Academy Award.
Grapes was controversial.
Steinbeck's New Deal political views, negative portrayal of aspects of capitalism, and sympathy for the plight of workers, led to a backlash against the author, especially close to home.
Claiming the book was both obscene and misrepresented conditions in the county, the Kern County Board of Supervisors banned the book from the county's publicly funded schools and libraries in August 1939.
This ban lasted until January 1941.
Of the controversy, Steinbeck wrote, "The vilification of me out here from the large landowners and bankers is pretty bad.
The latest is a rumor started by them that the Okies hate me and have threatened to kill me for lying about them.
I'm frightened at the rolling might of this damned thing.
It is completely out of hand; I mean a kind of hysteria about the book is growing that is not healthy."
The film versions of The Grapes of Wrath and Of Mice and Men (by two different movie studios) were in production simultaneously, allowing Steinbeck to spend a full day on the set of The Grapes of Wrath and the next day on the set of Of Mice and Men.
Ed Ricketts
In the 1930s and 1940s, Ed Ricketts strongly influenced Steinbeck's writing.
Steinbeck frequently took small trips with Ricketts along the California coast to give himself time off from his writing However, in 1951, Steinbeck republished the narrative portion of the book as The Log from the Sea of Cortez, under his name only (though Ricketts had written some of it).
This work remains in print today.
Although Carol accompanied Steinbeck on the trip, their marriage was beginning to suffer, and ended a year later, in 1941, even as Steinbeck worked on the manuscript for the book.
With his second wife Steinbeck had two sons, Thomas ("Thom") Myles Steinbeck (1944-2016) and John Steinbeck IV (1946-1991).
Ricketts was Steinbeck's model for the character of "Doc" in Cannery Row (1945) and Sweet Thursday (1954), "Friend Ed" in Burning Bright, and characters in In Dubious Battle (1936) and The Grapes of Wrath (1939).
Ecological themes recur in Steinbeck's novels of the period.
Steinbeck's close relations with Ricketts ended in 1941 when Steinbeck moved away from Pacific Grove and divorced his wife Carol.
In 1943, Steinbeck served as a World War II war correspondent for the New York Herald Tribune and worked with the Office of Strategic Services (predecessor of the CIA).
It was at that time he became friends with Will Lang, Jr. of Time/Life magazine.
During the war, Steinbeck accompanied the commando raids of Douglas Fairbanks, Jr.'s Beach Jumpers program, which launched small-unit diversion operations against German-held islands in the Mediterranean.
At one point, he accompanied Fairbanks on an invasion of an island off the coast of Italy and helped capture Italian and German prisoners, using a Tommy Gun.
Some of his writings from this period were incorporated in the documentary Once There Was a War (1958).
Steinbeck returned from the war with a number of wounds from shrapnel and some psychological trauma.
He treated himself, as ever, by writing.
He wrote Alfred Hitchcock's movie, Lifeboat (1944), and the film, A Medal for Benny (1945), with screenwriter Jack Wagner about paisanos from Tortilla Flat going to war.
He later requested that his name be removed from the credits of Lifeboat, because he believed the final version of the film had racist undertones.
In 1944, suffering from homesickness for his Pacific Grove/Monterey life of the 1930s, he wrote Cannery Row (1945), which became so famous that in 1958 Ocean View Avenue in Monterey, the setting of the book, was renamed Cannery Row.
After the war, he wrote The Pearl (1947), knowing it would be filmed eventually.
The story first appeared in the December 1945 issue of Woman's Home Companion magazine as "The Pearl of the World."
It was illustrated by John Alan Maxwell.
The novel is an imaginative telling of a story which Steinbeck had heard in La Paz in 1940, as related in The Log From the Sea of Cortez, which he described in as being "so much like a parable that it almost can't be".
Steinbeck traveled to Cuernavaca, Mexico for the filming with Wagner who helped with the script; on this trip he would be inspired by the story of Emiliano Zapata, and subsequently wrote a film script (Viva Zapata!) directed by Elia Kazan and starring Marlon Brando and Anthony Quinn.
In 1947, Steinbeck made the first of many trips to the Soviet Union, this one with photographer Robert Capa.
They visited Moscow, Kiev, Tbilisi, Batumi and Stalingrad, some of the first Americans to visit many parts of the USSR since the communist revolution.
Steinbeck's 1948 book about their experiences, A Russian Journal, was illustrated with Capa's photos.
In 1948, the year the book was published, Steinbeck was elected to the American Academy of Arts and Letters.
In 1952 Steinbeck's longest novel, East of Eden, was published.
According to his third wife, Elaine, he considered it his magnum opus, his greatest novel.
In 1952, John Steinbeck appeared as the on-screen narrator of 20th Century Fox's film, O. Henry's Full House.
Although Steinbeck later admitted he was uncomfortable before the camera, he provided interesting introductions to several filmed adaptations of short stories by the legendary writer O. Henry.
About the same time, Steinbeck recorded readings of several of his short stories for Columbia Records; the recordings provide a record of Steinbeck's deep, resonant voice.
Following the success of Viva Zapata!, Steinbeck collaborated with Kazan on East of Eden, James Dean's film debut.
Travels with Charley: In Search of America is a travelogue of his 1960 road trip with his poodle Charley.
Steinbeck bemoans his lost youth and roots, while dispensing both criticism and praise for America.
According to Steinbeck's son Thom, Steinbeck made the journey because he knew he was dying and wanted to see the country one last time.
Steinbeck's last novel, The Winter of Our Discontent (1961), examines moral decline in America.
The protagonist Ethan grows discontented with his own moral decline and that of those around him.
In the Nobel Prize presentation speech next year, however, the Swedish Academy cited it most favorably: "Here he attained the same standard which he set in The Grapes of Wrath.
Again he holds his position as an independent expounder of the truth with an unbiased instinct for what is genuinely American, be it good or bad."
The reaction of American literary critics was also harsh.
The New York Times asked why the Nobel committee gave the award to an author whose "limited talent is, in his best books, watered down by tenth-rate philosophising", noting that "The international character of the award and the weight attached to it raise questions about the mechanics of selection and how close the Nobel committee is to the main currents of American writing.
We think it interesting that the laurel was not awarded to a writer ... whose significance, influence and sheer body of work had already made a more profound impression on the literature of our age".
Fifty years later, in 2012, the Nobel Prize opened its archives and it was revealed that Steinbeck was a "compromise choice" among a shortlist consisting of Steinbeck, British authors Robert Graves and Lawrence Durrell, French dramatist Jean Anouilh and Danish author Karen Blixen.
At his own first Nobel Prize press conference he was asked his favorite authors and works and replied: "Hemingway's short stories and nearly everything Faulkner wrote."
In 1967, at the behest of Newsday magazine, Steinbeck went to Vietnam to report on the war.
He thought of the Vietnam War as a heroic venture and was considered a hawk for his position on the war.
His sons served in Vietnam before his death, and Steinbeck visited one son in the battlefield.
At one point he was allowed to man a machine-gun watch position at night at a firebase while his son and other members of his platoon slept.
Personal life
In May 1948, Steinbeck returned to California on an emergency trip to be with his friend Ed Ricketts, who had been seriously injured when a train struck his car.
Ricketts died hours before Steinbeck arrived.
Upon returning home, Steinbeck was confronted by Gwyn, who asked for a divorce, which became final in August.
Steinbeck spent the year after Ricketts' death in deep depression.
In June 1949, Steinbeck met stage-manager Elaine Scott at a restaurant in Carmel, California.
Steinbeck and Scott eventually began a relationship and in December 1950 Steinbeck and Scott married, within a week of the finalizing of Scott's own divorce from actor Zachary Scott.
This third marriage for Steinbeck lasted until his death in 1968.
In 1966, Steinbeck traveled to Tel Aviv to visit the site of Mount Hope, a farm community established in Israel by his grandfather, whose brother, Friedrich Großsteinbeck, was murdered by Arab marauders in 1858 in what became known as the Outrages at Jaffa.
Death and legacy
John Steinbeck died in New York City on December 20, 1968, of heart disease and congestive heart failure.
He was 66, and had been a lifelong smoker.
An autopsy showed nearly complete occlusion of the main coronary arteries.
at the Hamilton family gravesite in Salinas, with those of his parents and maternal grandparents.
His third wife, Elaine, was buried in the plot in 2004.
He had written to his doctor that he felt deeply "in his flesh" that he would not survive his physical death, and that the biological end of his life was the final end to it.
Contrariwise, Steinbeck's works have been frequently banned in the United States.
The Grapes of Wrath was banned by school boards: in August 1939, Kern County Board of Supervisors banned the book from the county's publicly funded schools and libraries.
In 2003, a school board in Mississippi banned it on the grounds of profanity.
According to the American Library Association Steinbeck was one of the ten most frequently banned authors from 1990 to 2004, with Of Mice and Men ranking sixth out of 100 such books in the United States.
Literary influences
Steinbeck grew up in California's Salinas Valley, a culturally diverse place with a rich migratory and immigrant history.
This upbringing imparted a regionalistic flavor to his writing, giving many of his works a distinct sense of place.
The National Steinbeck Center, two blocks away at 1 Main Street is the only museum in the U.S. dedicated to a single author.
Dana Gioia told an audience at the center, "This is really the best modern literary shrine in the country, and I've seen them all."
Its "Steinbeckiana" includes "Rocinante", the camper-truck in which Steinbeck made the cross-country trip described in Travels with Charley.
His father's cottage on Eleventh Street in Pacific Grove, where Steinbeck wrote some of his earliest books, also survives.
Steinbeck was inducted in to the DeMolay International Hall of Fame in 1995.
On December 5, 2007, California Governor Arnold Schwarzenegger and First Lady Maria Shriver inducted Steinbeck into the California Hall of Fame, located at the California Museum for History, Women and the Arts.
His son, author Thomas Steinbeck, accepted the award on his behalf.
To commemorate the 112th anniversary of Mr. Steinbeck's birthday on February 27, 2014, Google displayed an interactive doodle utilizing animation which included illustrations portraying scenes and quotes from several novels by the author.
Steinbeck and his friend Ed Ricketts appear as a fictionalized characters in the 2016 novel, Monterey Bay about the founding of the Monterey Bay Aquarium, by Lindsay Hatton (Penguin Press).
Religious views
Steinbeck was affiliated to the St. Paul's Episcopal Church and he stayed attached throughout his life to Episcopalianism.
Especially in his works of fiction, Steinbeck was highly conscious of religion and incorporated it into his style and themes.
The shaping of his characters often drew on the Bible and the theology of Anglicanism, combining elements of Roman Catholicism and Protestantism.
Steinbeck distanced himself from religious views when he left Salinas for Stanford.
However, the work he produced still reflected the language of his childhood at Salinas, and his beliefs remained a powerful influence within his fiction and non-fiction work.
William Ray considered his Episcopal views are prominently displayed in The Grapes of Wrath, in which themes of conversion and self-sacrifice play a major part in the characters Casy and Tom who achieve spiritual transcendence through conversion.
Political views
Steinbeck's contacts with leftist authors, journalists, and labor union figures may have influenced his writing.
He joined the League of American Writers, a Communist organization, in 1935.
Steinbeck was mentored by radical writers Lincoln Steffens and his wife Ella Winter.
Through Francis Whitaker, a member of the Communist Party USA's John Reed Club for writers, Steinbeck met with strike organizers from the Cannery and Agricultural Workers' Industrial Union.
In 1939, he signed a letter with some other writers in support of the Soviet invasion of Finland and the Soviet-established puppet government.
Documents released by the Central Intelligence Agency in 2012 indicate that Steinbeck offered his services to the Agency in 1952, while planning a European tour, and the Director of Central Intelligence, Walter Bedell Smith, was eager to take him up on the offer.
What work, if any, Steinbeck may have performed for the CIA during the Cold War is unknown.
Steinbeck was a close associate of playwright Arthur Miller.
In June 1957, Steinbeck took a personal and professional risk by supporting him when Miller refused to name names in the House Un-American Activities Committee trials.
In 1967, when he was sent to Vietnam to report on the war, his sympathetic portrayal of the United States Army led the New York Post to denounce him for betraying his liberal past.
Steinbeck's biographer, Jay Parini, says Steinbeck's friendship with President Lyndon B. Johnson influenced his views on Vietnam.
Steinbeck may also have been concerned about the safety of his son serving in Vietnam.
Government harassment
Steinbeck complained publicly about government harassment.
Thomas Steinbeck, the author's eldest son, said that J. Edgar Hoover, director of the FBI at the time, could find no basis for prosecuting Steinbeck and therefore used his power to encourage the U.S. Internal Revenue Service to audit Steinbeck's taxes every single year of his life, just to annoy him.
According to Thomas, a true artist is one who "without a thought for self, stands up against the stones of condemnation, and speaks for those who are given no real voice in the halls of justice, or the halls of government.
By doing so, these people will naturally become the enemies of the political status quo."
In a 1942 letter to United States Attorney General Francis Biddle, John Steinbeck wrote: "Do you suppose you could ask Edgar's boys to stop stepping on my heels?
They think I am an enemy alien.
It is getting tiresome."
The FBI denied that Steinbeck was under investigation.
Major works
In Dubious Battle
In 1936, Steinbeck published the first of what came to be known as his Dustbowl trilogy, which included Of Mice and Men and The Grapes of Wrath.
This first novel tells the story of a fruit pickers' strike in California which is both aided and damaged by the help of "the Party," generally taken to be the Communist Party, although this is never spelled out in the book.
Of Mice and Men
Of Mice and Men is a tragedy that was written as a play in 1937.
The story is about two traveling ranch workers, George and Lennie, trying to earn enough money to buy their own farm/ranch.
As it is set in 1930s America, it provides an insight into The Great Depression, encompassing themes of racism, loneliness, prejudice against the mentally ill, and the struggle for personal independence.
Along with The Grapes of Wrath, East of Eden, and The Pearl, Of Mice and Men is one of Steinbeck's best known works.
It was made into a movie three times, in 1939 starring Burgess Meredith, Lon Chaney Jr., and Betty Field, in 1982 starring Randy Quaid, Robert Blake and Ted Neeley, and in 1992 starring Gary Sinise and John Malkovich.
The Grapes of Wrath
The Grapes of Wrath is set in the Great Depression and describes a family of sharecroppers, the Joads, who were driven from their land due to the dust storms of the Dust Bowl.
The title is a reference to the Battle Hymn of the Republic.
Some critics found it too sympathetic to the workers' plight and too critical of capitalism, but it found a large audience of its own.
It won both the National Book Award and Pulitzer Prize for fiction (novels) and was adapted as a film starring Henry Fonda and Jane Darwell and directed by John Ford.
East of Eden
Steinbeck deals with the nature of good and evil in this Salinas Valley saga.
The story follows two families: the Hamiltons - based on Steinbeck's own maternal ancestry - and the Trasks, reprising stories about the Biblical Adam and his progeny.
The book was published in 1952.
It was made into a 1955 movie directed by Elia Kazan and starring James Dean.
Travels with Charley
In 1960, Steinbeck bought a pickup truck and had it modified with a custom-built camper top - which was rare at the time - and drove across the United States with his faithful 'blue' standard poodle, Charley.
Steinbeck nicknamed his truck Rocinante after Don Quixote's "noble steed".
In this sometimes comical, sometimes melancholic book, Steinbeck describes what he sees from Maine to Montana to California, and from there to Texas and Louisiana and back to his home on Long Island.
The restored camper truck is on exhibit in the National Steinbeck Center in Salinas.
Bibliography
Filmography
* 1939-Of Mice and Men-directed by Lewis Milestone, featuring Burgess Meredith, Lon Chaney, Jr., and Betty Field
* 1940-The Grapes of Wrath-directed by John Ford, featuring Henry Fonda, Jane Darwell and John Carradine
* 1941-The Forgotten Village-directed by Alexander Hammid and Herbert Kline, narrated by Burgess Meredith, music by Hanns Eisler
* 1942-Tortilla Flat-directed by Victor Fleming, featuring Spencer Tracy, Hedy Lamarr and John Garfield
* 1943-The Moon is Down-directed by Irving Pichel, featuring Lee J. Cobb and Sir Cedric Hardwicke
* 1944-Lifeboat-directed by Alfred Hitchcock, featuring Tallulah Bankhead, Hume Cronyn, and John Hodiak
* 1944-A Medal for Benny-directed by Irving Pichel, featuring Dorothy Lamour and Arturo de Cordova
* 1947-La Perla (The Pearl, Mexico)-directed by Emilio Fernández, featuring Pedro Armendáriz and María Elena Marqués
* 1949-The Red Pony-directed by Lewis Milestone, featuring Myrna Loy, Robert Mitchum, and Louis Calhern
* 1952-Viva Zapata!-directed by Elia Kazan, featuring Marlon Brando, Anthony Quinn and Jean Peters
* 1955-East of Eden-directed by Elia Kazan, featuring James Dean, Julie Harris, Jo Van Fleet, and Raymond Massey
* 1957-The Wayward Bus-directed by Victor Vicas, featuring Rick Jason, Jayne Mansfield, and Joan Collins
* 1961-Flight-featuring Efrain Ramírez and Arnelia Cortez
* 1982-Cannery Row-directed by David S. Ward, featuring Nick Nolte and Debra Winger
* 1992-Of Mice and Men-directed by Gary Sinise and starring John Malkovich and Gary Sinise
* 2016-In Dubious Battle-directed by James Franco and featuring Franco, Nat Wolff and Selena Gomez
