Ketchup, also known as catsup, ketsup, red sauce, and tomato sauce, is a sauce used as a condiment.
Originally, recipes used egg whites, mushrooms, oysters, grapes, mussels, or walnuts, among other ingredients, but now the unmodified term usually refers to tomato ketchup.
Ketchup is a sweet and tangy sauce now made from tomatoes, sugar, and vinegar, withseasonings and spices.
The spices and flavors vary, but commonly include onions, allspice, coriander, cloves, cumin, garlic, and mustard, and sometimes include celery, cinnamon, or ginger.
The market leader in the United States (60% market share) and United Kingdom (82%) is Heinz.
Hunt's has the second biggest share of the US market with less than 20%.
In much of the UK, Australia, and New Zealand, ketchup is also known as "tomato sauce" (a term that means a fresher pasta sauce elsewhere in the world) or "red sauce" (especially in Wales).
Tomato ketchup is most often used as a condiment to dishes that are usually served hot and may be fried or greasy: french fries, hamburgers, hot dogs, chicken tenders, tater tots, hot sandwiches, meat pies, cooked eggs, and grilled or fried meat.
Ketchup is sometimes used as the basis for, or as one ingredient in, other sauces and dressings, and the flavor may be replicated as an additive flavoring for snacks, such as potato chips.
History
Pickled fish and spices
In the 17th century, the Chinese mixed pickled fish and spices and called it (in the Amoy dialect)
kôe-chiap or kê-chiap (鮭汁, Mandarin Chinese guī zhī, Cantonese gwai1 zap1) meaning the brine of pickled fish (鮭, salmon; 汁, juice) or shellfish.
English settlers took ketchup with them to the American colonies.
which was well acclaimed in North America.
The spelling "catchup" may have also been used in the past.
Mushroom ketchup
In the United Kingdom, preparations of ketchup were historically and originally prepared with mushrooms as a primary ingredient, rather than tomatoes.
In the United States, mushroom ketchup dates back to at least 1770, and was prepared by British colonists in "English speaking colonies in North America".
In contemporary times, mushroom ketchup is available in the UK, although it is not a commonly used condiment.
Tomato ketchup
Many variations of ketchup were created, but the tomato-based version did not appear until about a century after other types.
An early recipe for "Tomata Catsup" from 1817 still has the anchovies that betray its fish-sauce ancestry:
As the century progressed, tomato ketchup began its ascent in popularity in the United States.
Ketchup was popular long before fresh tomatoes were.
People were less hesitant to eat tomatoes as part of a highly processed product that had been cooked and infused with vinegar and spices.
By 1837, he had produced and distributed the condiment nationally.
Shortly thereafter, other companies followed suit.
F. & J. Heinz launched their tomato ketchup in 1876.
Heinz tomato ketchup was advertised: "Blessed relief for Mother and the other women in the household!", a slogan which alluded to the lengthy process required to produce tomato ketchup in the home.
With industrial ketchup production and a need for better preservation there was a great increase of sugar in ketchup, leading to our modern sweet and sour formula.
The Webster's Dictionary of 1913 defined "catchup" as: "table sauce made from mushrooms, tomatoes, walnuts, etc. Also written as ketchup."
Modern ketchup emerged in the early years of the 20th century, out of a debate over the use of sodium benzoate as a preservative in condiments.
Harvey W. Wiley, the "father" of the Food and Drug Administration in the US, challenged the safety of benzoate which was banned in the 1906 Pure Food and Drug Act.
In response, entrepreneurs including Henry J. Heinz, pursued an alternative recipe that eliminated the need for that preservative.
Prior to Heinz (and his fellow innovators), commercial tomato ketchups of that time were watery and thin, in part due to the use of unripe tomatoes, which were low in pectin.
They had less vinegar than modern ketchups; by pickling ripe tomatoes, the need for benzoate was eliminated without spoilage or degradation in flavor.
But the changes driven by the desire to eliminate benzoate also produced changes that some experts (such as Andrew F. Smith) believe were key to the establishment of tomato ketchup as the dominant American condiment.
Later innovations
In fast-food outlets, ketchup is often dispensed in small sachets or tubs.
Diners tear the side or top and squeeze the ketchup out of the ketchup packets, or peel the foil lid off the tub for dipping.
In 2011, Heinz began offering a new measured-portion package, called the "Dip and Squeeze" packet, which can be opened in either way, giving both options.
Some fast food outlets previously dispensed ketchup from hand-operated pumps into paper cups.
This method has made a comeback in the first decade of the 21st century, as cost and environmental concerns over the increasing use of individual plastic ketchup tubs were taken into account.
In Oct. 2000, Heinz introduced colored ketchup products called EZ Squirt, which eventually included green (2000), purple (2001), mystery (pink, orange, or teal, 2002), and blue (2003).
These products were made by adding food coloring to the traditional ketchup.
these products were discontinued.
Terminology
The term used for the sauce varies.
Ketchup is the dominant term in American English, and Canadian English, although catsup is commonly used in some southern US states and Mexico.
Tomato sauce is more common in English-speaking countries outside North America, including Australia and New Zealand.
However, in Canada and the United States, tomato sauce is not a synonym for ketchup but a sauce made from tomato paste and commonly eaten with pasta.
Red sauce is the term used in Welsh English, Scottish English and some parts of England, such as the Black Country, and in South London, contrasting with brown sauce.
In Canadian and American English, "red sauce" refers to various tomato-based sauces commonly paired with pasta dishes, and is not a synonym for ketchup.
Etymology
The etymology of the word ketchup is unclear, with multiple competing theories.
Chinese theory
One theory is that the word came to English from the Cantonese "keh jap" (, as it cannot account for historical terms like "mushroom ketchup" and "walnut ketchup".
An alternative theory is that the word derives from one of two words from Hokkien of the Fujian region of coastal southern China: " (London; Trudner) from 1873, defined as "brine of pickled fish or shell-fish".
Malay theory
Ketchup may have above.
In Indonesian cuisine, which is similar to Malay, the term kecap refers to fermented savory sauces.
Two main types are well known in their cuisine: kecap asin which translates to 'salty kecap' in Indonesian (a salty soy sauce) and kecap manis or "sweet kecap" in Indonesian.
Kecap manis is a sweet soy sauce that is a mixture of soy sauce with brown sugar, molasses, garlic, ginger, anise, coriander and a bay leaf reduced over medium heat until rather syrupy.
A third type, kecap ikan, meaning "fish kecap" is fish sauce similar to the Thai nam pla or the Philippine patis.
It is not, however, soy-based.
European-Arabic theory
American anthropologist, E.N. Anderson, relies on Elizabeth David to claim that ketchup is a cognate of the French escaveche, meaning "food in sauce", but gives no further authority.
The word also exists in Spanish and Portuguese forms as escabeche, "a sauce for pickling", which culinary historian Karen Hess traced back to Arabic Kabees, or "pickling with vinegar".
The term was anglicized to caveach, a word first attested in the late 17th century, at the same time as ketchup.
:: The first published recipe: it included mushrooms, anchovies and horseradish.
And, for our home-bred British cheer, Botargo, catsup, and caveer.
* 1748, Sarah Harrison, The Housekeeper's Pocket-Book and Compleat Family Cook.
i. (ed. 4) 2,
** I therefore advise you to lay in a Store of Spices, ... neither ought you to be without ...
Kitchup, or Mushroom Juice.
** Buy in gross ...
Ketchup, Soy, Chili~vinegar, and Harvey.
** One ... application of mushrooms is ... converting them into the sauce called Catsup.
** Some lamb chops (breaded, with plenty of ketchup).
* 1845, Eliza Acton, Modern Cookery v. (1850) 136 (L.)
** He found in mothery catsup a number of yellowish globular bodies.
** One important use to which several ... fungi can be applied, is the manufacture of ketchup.
Composition
Heinz tomato ketchup's ingredients are: tomato concentrate from red ripe tomatoes, distilled vinegar, high fructose corn syrup, corn syrup, salt, spice, onion powder, and natural flavoring.
Tomato concentrate from red ripe tomatoes is the first ingredient on the list, which means it has the highest percentage of weight within the final product.
Tomatoes have a complex composition of sugars, starch, pectin, ascorbic acids, organic acids, amino acids, steroids, carotenoids, lipids, free fatty acids, and volatiles.
The second ingredient listed is distilled vinegar, which is eighty percent pure water and twenty percent acetic acid.
Next is high fructose corn syrup, the sugars of which are made up of 42% fructose, 53% glucose, and 5% other polysaccharides and sugars.
The next ingredient is corn syrup, the sugar of which is 100% glucose.
Processing
Fresh tomatoes received at a tomato processing plant can be turned into a variety of different products, one of which includes ketchup.
The process begins by washing the tomatoes to remove any outer dirt and foreign matter from the skin before processing.
Upon inspection, damaged, spoiled or unwanted tomatoes will be sorted out manually.
Tomatoes will usually be conveyed by water throughout the preliminary stages to avoid bruising.
After being sorted, washed and chopped up, the tomatoes are put into large steel vats for preservation/precooking and also to destroy any bacteria that could be harmful to the rest of the processing period.
Also for the consumer after production.
The juice will be extracted out by a juice extraction system.
The outer skin, seed, stem, and fiber of fruits would be separated from the liquid in a process known as pulping.
Once separated, the juice and the pulp from the tomato get filtered and processed into ketchup.
A smoother ketchup consistency is achieved through more filtering and screenings, weeding out any excess pulp.
Ketchup processing includes adding additional ingredients, cooking, more screening and filtering, air-removal, packaging and cooling.
After juice filtration, additional ingredients are added to the mixture to achieve the desired taste and consistency.
Some of the main ingredients used to create ketchup include sweeteners, vinegar, salt and spices, and flavouring.
These additions are usually integrated later on in the process except for some spices added in at the beginning.
Throughout the entire process, the temperature must be consistently monitored to make sure all the ingredients are being added and appropriately absorbed.
Air is then removed to prevent oxidation, maintain proper colouring and inhibit the growth of any unwanted bacteria.
Before being packaged, the ketchup is heated to approx.190 °F (88 °C) to prevent contamination.
After packaging, the bottles are immediately sealed to retain the freshness and preserve the shelf-life of the product.
The final step is cooling the product via cold air or water to maintain its flavour.
Different manufacturers will label their products accordingly with all the necessary nutritional and other legal information as required.
Nutrition
The following table compares the nutritional value of ketchup with raw ripe tomatoes and salsa, based on information from the USDA Food Nutrient Database.
Viscosity
Commercial tomato ketchup has an additive, usually xanthan gum, which gives the condiment a pseudoplastic or "shear thinning" property - more commonly known as thixotropic.
This increases the viscosity of the ketchup considerably with a relatively small amount added-usually 0.5%-which can make it difficult to pour from a container.
However, the shear thinning property of the gum ensures that when a force is applied to the ketchup it will lower the viscosity enabling the sauce to flow.
A common method to getting ketchup out of the bottle involves inverting the bottle and shaking it or hitting the bottom with the heel of the hand, which causes the ketchup to flow rapidly.
A technique involves inverting the bottle and forcefully tapping its upper neck with two fingers (index and middle finger together).
Specifically, with a Heinz ketchup glass bottle, one taps the 57 circle on the neck.
This helps the ketchup flow by applying the correct shearing force.
These techniques work because of how pseudoplastic fluids behave: their viscosity (resistance to flow) decreases with increasing shear rate.
The faster the ketchup is sheared (by shaking or tapping the bottle), the more fluid it becomes.
After the shear is removed the ketchup thickens to its original viscosity.
Ketchup is a non-Newtonian fluid, meaning that its viscosity changes under stress and is not constant.
It is a shear thinning fluid which means its viscosity decreases with increased shear stress.
The equation used to designate a Non-Newtonian fluid is as follows: \eta=\tau/\dot.
This equation represents apparent viscosity where apparent viscosity is the shear stress divided by shear rate.
Viscosity is dependent on stress.
This is apparent when you shake a bottle of tomato sauce/ketchup
so it becomes liquid enough to squirt out.
Its viscosity decreased with stress.
The molecular composition of ketchup is what creates ketchup's pseudoplastic characteristics.
Small polysaccharides, sugars, acids, and water make up the majority of the metastable ketchup product, and these small structures are able to move more easily throughout a matrix because of their low mass.
While exposed to shear stress, the molecules within the suspension are able to respond quickly and create an alignment within the product.
The bonds between the molecules are mostly hydrogen bonds, ionic interactions, and electrostatic interactions, all of which can be broken when subject to stress.
Hydrogen bonds are constantly rearranging within a product due to their need to be in the lowest energy state, which further confirms that the bonds between the molecules will be easily disrupted.
This alignment only lasts for as long as shear stress is applied.
The molecules return to their original disorganized state once the shear stress dissipates.
Separation
Ketchup is one of the many products that is leachable; meaning that the water within the product migrates together as the larger molecules within the product sediment, ultimately causing water to separate out.
This forms a layer of water on top of the ketchup due to the molecular instability within the product.
The water bound to the polysaccharide moves more slowly within the matrix, which is unfavorable with respect to entropy.
Pectin is most stable at a pH of 3.5, so the more basic pH within ketchup will protonate the hydroxyl side chains and therefore create a less viscous gel.
Acetic acid within vinegar also has hydroxyl groups that will have a dispersed amount of negative and neutral charges along each molecule.
The acetic acid and pectin will display repulsive interactions between the negatively charged oxygens on each molecule.
The hydroxyls on each molecule will be able to form hydrogen bonds with the water in the product.
The addition of salt will reduce the repulsive interactions between the negatively charged side chains of acetic acid and pectin within solution because they will create bonds with the dissociated sodium and chloride ions.
The hydrogen bonds and electrostatic interactions will encourage leaching because the formation of bonds associated with the need for molecules to be in the lowest energy state are not always bonds that happen between different molecules and instead are formed between like molecules, causing aggregation.
A way for ketchup manufacturing companies to avoid leaching of their products would be to add a hydrocolloid.
Xanthan gum is able to stabilize ketchup by covalently binding to water.
This strong bond keeps water from separating out of the ketchup and creating a layer at the surface.
