Duolingo ( ) is a platform that includes a language-learning website and app, as well as a digital language proficiency assessment exam.
The app and the website are free, although Duolingo also offers a premium service for a fee.
the language-learning website and app offer 90 different language courses in 22 languages.
The app has over 300 million registered users across the world.
History
The project was started at the end of 2009 in Pittsburgh by Carnegie Mellon University professor Luis von Ahn (creator of reCAPTCHA) and his graduate student Severin Hacker, and then developed along with Antonio Navas, Vicki Cheung, Marcel Uekermann, Brendan Meeder, Hector Villafuerte, and Jose Fuentes.
Inspiration for Duolingo came from two places.
Luis Von Ahn wanted to create another program that served two purposes in one, what he calls a "twofer".
Duolingo originally did this by teaching its users a foreign language while having them translate simple phrases in documents, though the translation feature has since been removed.
Von Ahn was born in Guatemala and saw how expensive it was for people in his community to learn English.
Severin Hacker (born in Zug, Switzerland), co-founder of Duolingo, and Von Ahn believe that "free education will really change the world" and wanted to supply people an outlet to do so.
The project was originally sponsored by Luis von Ahn's MacArthur fellowship and a National Science Foundation grant.
Additional funding was later received in the form of investments from Union Square Ventures and actor Ashton Kutcher's firm, A-Grade Investments.
Duolingo started its private beta on 30 November 2011, and accumulated a waiting list of more than 300,000 users.
On 19 June 2012, Duolingo launched for the general public.
Owing to popular interest, Duolingo has received many investments including a $20 million Series C round of investment led by Kleiner Caufield & Byers and a $45 million Series D round of investment led by Google Capital.
As of 2019, Duolingo has 170 staff members, and operates from an office in the Pittsburgh neighborhood of East Liberty.
On 13 November 2012, Duolingo released their iOS app through the iTunes App Store.
The application is a free download and is compatible with most iPhone, iPod and iPad devices.
On 29 May 2013, Duolingo released their Android app, which was downloaded about a million times in the first three weeks and quickly became the #1 education app in the Google Play store.
As of 2017, the company had a total funding of US$108.3 million.
Duolingo received a fifth-round $25 million in July 2017 from Drive Capital, with the funds directed toward creating initiatives such as TinyCards and Duolingo Labs.
Duolingo reached a revenue of $13 million in 2017 and $36 million in 2018.
which users can remove by paying a subscription fee.
It originally employed a crowd sourced business model, where the content came from organizations (such as CNN and BuzzFeed) that paid Duolingo to translate it.
Duolingo is funded by Union Square Venture Partners ($3.3 million in 2011), New Enterprise Associates ($15 million), Kleiner Perkins Caufield & Byers ($20 million), Google Capital ($45 million), Ashton Kutcher's A-Grade Investments, and Tim Ferriss.
Language courses
Courses for English speakers
, 34 courses are available to the public in English, three of which are constructed languages, and those three include two fictional languages.
In this list, the courses are ordered by number of active learners.
;Complete
;Beta
;Alpha
, four courses for English speakers are in development (ordered by progression percentage towards completion according to the Weekly Incubator Update)
Courses unavailable in English
Duolingo offers language courses for speakers of languages other than English, but all available languages offer at least English as a course.
The Catalan and Guarani courses are exclusive to Spanish speakers.
Courses available in other languages
As of 28 August 2019, the following languages are available to speakers of languages other than English:
* Arabic: English, French, German, Swedish, Spanish (#)
* Chinese: English, Spanish, French, German (#), Italian, Japanese, Korean
* French: English, Spanish, Italian, German, Portuguese
* Portuguese: English, Spanish, French, German, Italian, Esperanto (β)
* Russian: English, German, French, Spanish, Swedish (#)
Spanish: English, French, Italian, Portuguese, German, Catalan, Guarani, Esperanto, Russian, Swedish (#)
(#) = course still in development
(β) = Course still in beta version
List of courses by number of learners
As of 16 September 2019:
List of Courses being created
As of October 2019, 17 courses are currently being developed on Duolingo
Features
Duolingo mimics the structure of video games in several ways in order to engage its users.
There is a reward system in which users acquire "lingots", an in-game currency that can be spent on features such as character customizations or bonus levels (both available on the mobile app only).
There are public leaderboards in which people can compete against their friends or see how they stack up against the rest of the world.
The level system that Duolingo uses is XP (experience points), a numerical system that represents a user's skill level.
Badges in Duolingo represent achievements that are earned from completing specific objectives or challenges.
Duolingo Leaderboards
Duolingo Clubs was launched on 20 December 2016, with the intention of promoting competitiveness and relations between users, adding more "fun" to the course, which increases learning motivation.
In Duolingo Clubs there is a weekly ranking of the experience acquired in the lessons, there are badges (achievements) to acquire, among other implements.
Duolingo Clubs are available on the mobile versions of iOS, Android and Windows Phone.
Although it has a very similar system, it is not completely identical to the website.
Duolingo Clubs (as of May 2019) been replaced by Duolingo Leaderboards, of which there are 10: Bronze, Silver, Gold, Sapphire, Ruby, Emerald, Amethyst, Pearl, Obsidian and Diamond in that order.
To get to the next league you have to place in the top 10 out of 50 in a weekly XP race.
Use in schools
Duolingo provides "Duolingo for Schools" with features designed to allow teachers to track their students.
In 2012, an effectiveness study concluded that Duolingo usage for Spanish study was more effective than classroom language learning alone, but that it was less effective for advanced language learners.
One proposed reason for this is that the direct-translation method that Duolingo primarily uses is more applicable to simple words and phrases than to complex ones; simpler ones can be translated in a more exact manner from one language to another and thus are more conducive to Duolingo's direct-translation method.
Infrastructure
Duolingo uses many services in the Amazon Web Services suite of products, including Amazon DynamoDB, Amazon Virtual Private Cloud, nearly 200 virtual instances in Amazon Elastic Compute Cloud (EC2), Amazon Simple Storage Service (S3) and Amazon Relational Database Service (RDS).
The server backend is written in the programming language Python.
A component called the Session Generator was rewritten in Scala by 2017.
Acknowledging the meme, Duolingo released a video on April 1 2019 as an April Fools' Day joke; the video depicts a fictitious new premium feature called "Duolingo Push".
According to the video, users of "Duolingo Push" will receive reminders to use the app in person by Duo himself, who stares at users and follows them around until they practise (in the video, Duo is depicted by a person in a large mascot costume.)
Recognition and awards
In 2013, Apple chose Duolingo as its iPhone App of the Year, the first time this honor had been awarded to an educational application.
Also, Duolingo won Best Education Startup at the 2014 Crunchies, and was the most downloaded app in the Education category in Google Play in 2013 and 2014.
In 2015, Duolingo was announced the 2015 award winner in Play & Learning category by Design to Improve Life.
In 2018, Duolingo was named to Fast Company's list of the Most Innovative Companies to CNBC's Disruptor 50 list and one of TIME Magazine's 50 Genius Companies.
In 2019, Duolingo was named one of Forbes's "Next Billion-Dollar Startups 2019".
Awards for the company
The company has also been nominated for several awards.
It won Inc. magazine's Best Workplaces 2018, Entrepreneur magazine's Top Company Culture List 2018, Fast Company's Most Innovative Companies award in 2013, 2017 and 2018, and appeared in CNBC's "Disruptor 50" list in 2019.
