Janis Lyn Joplin (January 19, 1943 - October 4, 1970) was an American rock, soul, and blues singer-songwriter, and one of the most successful and widely known rock stars of her era.
After releasing three albums, she died of a heroin overdose at the age of 27.
A fourth album, Pearl, was released in January 1971, just over three months after her death.
It reached number one on the Billboard charts.
In 1967, Joplin rose to fame following an appearance at Monterey Pop Festival, where she was the lead singer of the then little-known San Francisco psychedelic rock band Big Brother and the Holding Company.
After releasing two albums with the band, she left Big Brother to continue as a solo artist with her own backing groups, first the Kozmic Blues Band and then the Full Tilt Boogie Band.
She appeared at the Woodstock festival and the Festival Express train tour.
Five singles by Joplin reached the Billboard Hot 100, including a cover of the Kris Kristofferson song "Me and Bobby McGee", which reached number 1 in March 1971.
Her most popular songs include her cover versions of "Piece of My Heart", "Cry Baby", "Down on Me", "Ball and Chain", and "Summertime"; and her original song "Mercedes Benz", her final recording.
Joplin, a mezzo-soprano highly respected for her charismatic performing ability, was posthumously inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame in 1995.
Audiences and critics alike referred to her stage presence as "electric".
Rolling Stone ranked Joplin number 46 on its 2004 list of the 100 Greatest Artists of All Time and number 28 on its 2008 list of 100 Greatest Singers of All Time.
She remains one of the top-selling musicians in the United States, with Recording Industry Association of America certifications of 15.5 million albums sold.
Early life
1943-1961: Early years
Janis Lyn Joplin was born in Port Arthur, Texas, on , to Dorothy Bonita East (1913-1998), a registrar at a business college, and her husband, Seth Ward Joplin (1910-1987), an engineer at Texaco.
She had two younger siblings, Michael and Laura.
The family belonged to the Churches of Christ denomination.
Her parents felt that Janis needed more attention than their other children.
As a teenager, Joplin befriended a group of outcasts, one of whom had albums by blues artists Bessie Smith, Ma Rainey, and Lead Belly, whom Joplin later credited with influencing her decision to become a singer.
She began singing blues and folk music with friends at Thomas Jefferson High School.
Former Oklahoma State University and Dallas Cowboys Head Coach Jimmy Johnson was a high school classmate of Joplin.
Joplin stated that she was ostracized and bullied in high school.
Joplin graduated from high school in 1960 and attended Lamar State College of Technology in Beaumont, Texas, during the summer The campus newspaper, The Daily Texan, ran a profile of her in the issue dated July 27, 1962, headlined "She Dares to Be Different."
According to Freak Brothers cartoonist Gilbert Shelton, who befriended her, she used to sell The Texas Ranger, which contained some of Shelton's early comic books, on the campus.
Career
1962-1965: Early recordings
Joplin cultivated a rebellious manner and styled herself partly after her female blues heroines and partly after the Beat poets.
Her first song, "What Good Can Drinkin' Do", was recorded on tape in December 1962 at the home of a fellow University of Texas student.
She left Texas in January 1963 ("Just to get away," she said, "because my head was in a much different place"), hitchhiking with her friend Chet Helms to North Beach, San Francisco.
Still in San Francisco in 1964, Joplin and future Jefferson Airplane guitarist Jorma Kaukonen recorded a number of blues standards, which incidentally featured Kaukonen's wife Margareta using a typewriter in the background.
This session included seven tracks: "Typewriter Talk", "Trouble in Mind", "Kansas City Blues", "Hesitation Blues", "Nobody Knows You When You're Down and Out", "Daddy, Daddy, Daddy", and "Long Black Train Blues", and was released long after Joplin's death as the bootleg album The Typewriter Tape.
In 1963, Joplin was arrested in San Francisco for shoplifting.
During the two years that followed, her drug use increased and she acquired a reputation as a "speed freak" and occasional heroin user.
She also used other psychoactive drugs and was a heavy drinker throughout her career; her favorite alcoholic beverage was Southern Comfort.
In May 1965, Joplin's friends in San Francisco, noticing the detrimental effects on her from regularly injecting methamphetamine before they began their long drive to San Francisco.
Joplin joined Big Brother on June 4, 1966.
Her first public performance with them was at the Avalon Ballroom in San Francisco.
In June, Joplin was photographed at an outdoor concert in San Francisco that celebrated the summer solstice.
The image, which was later published in two books by David Dalton, shows her before she relapsed into drugs.
Due to persistent persuading by keyboardist and close friend Stephen Ryder, Joplin avoided drugs for several weeks, enjoining bandmate Dave Getz to promise that using needles would not be allowed in their rehearsal space, her apartment, or in the homes of her bandmates whom she visited.
The band went to Chicago for a four-week engagement in August 1966, then found themselves stranded after the promoter ran out of money when their concerts did not attract the expected audience levels, and he was unable to pay them.
In the circumstances the band signed to Bob Shad's record label Mainstream Records; recordings for the label took place in Chicago in September, but these were not satisfactory, and the band returned to San Francisco, continuing to perform live, including at the Love Pageant Rally.
The band recorded two tracks, "Blindman" and "All Is Loneliness", in Los Angeles, and these were released by Mainstream as a single which did not sell well.
One of Joplin's earliest major performances in 1967 was at the Mantra-Rock Dance, a musical event held on January 29 at the Avalon Ballroom by the San Francisco Hare Krishna temple.
Janis Joplin and Big Brother performed there along with the Hare Krishna founder Bhaktivedanta Swami, Allen Ginsberg, Moby Grape, and Grateful Dead, donating proceeds to the Krishna temple.
In early 1967, Joplin met Country Joe McDonald of the group Country Joe and the Fish.
The pair lived together as a couple for a few months.
They were created for her by San Francisco clothing designer Colin Rose.
An explanation has come from Big Brother's road manager John Byrne Cooke, who remembers that Pennebaker discreetly filmed the audience (including Elliot) during Big Brother's Saturday performance when he was not allowed to point a camera at the band.
The prohibition of Pennebaker from filming on Saturday afternoon came from Big Brother's manager Julius Karpen.
the group began its first East Coast tour in Philadelphia, and the following day gave their first performance in New York City at the Anderson Theater.
the album launched Joplin as a star.
Cheap Thrills reached number one on the Billboard 200 album chart eight weeks after its release, remaining for eight (nonconsecutive) weeks.
The band made another East Coast tour during July-August 1968, performing at the Columbia Records convention in Puerto Rico and the Newport Folk Festival.
After returning to San Francisco for two hometown shows at the Palace of Fine Arts Festival on August 31 and September 1, Joplin announced that she would be leaving Big Brother.
On September 14, 1968, culminating a three-night engagement together at Fillmore West, fans thronged to a concert that Bill Graham publicized as the last official concert of Janis Joplin with Big Brother and the Holding Company.
The opening acts on this night were Chicago (then still called Chicago Transit Authority) and Santana.
Despite Graham's announcement that the Fillmore West gig was Big Brother's last concert with Joplin, the band-with Joplin still as lead vocalist-toured the U.S. that fall.
Reflecting Joplin's crossover appeal, two October 1968 performances at a roller rink in Alexandria, Virginia, were reviewed by John Segraves of the conservative Washington Evening Star at a time when the Washington metropolitan area's hard rock scene was in its infancy.
An opera buff at the time, he wrote, "Miss Joplin, in her early 20s, has been for the last year or two the vocalist with Big Brother and the Holding Company, a rock quintet of superior electric expertise.
Shortly she will be merely Janis Joplin, a vocalist singing folk rock on her first album as a single.
Whatever she does and whatever she sings she'll do it well because her vocal talents are boundless.
This is the way she came across in a huge, high-ceilinged roller skating rink without any acoustics but, thankfully a good enough sound system behind her.
In a proper room, I would imagine there would be no adjectives to describe her."
and at the Worcester Polytechnic Institute.
shows Joplin arriving in Frankfurt by plane and waiting inside a bus next to the Frankfurt venue, while an American female fan who is visiting Germany expresses enthusiasm to the camera (no security was used in Frankfurt, so by the end of the concert, the stage was so packed with people the band members could not see each other).
Janis also includes interviews with Joplin in Stockholm and from her visit to London, for her gig at Royal Albert Hall.
The London interview was dubbed with a voiceover in the German language for broadcast on German television.
On the episode of The Dick Cavett Show that was telecast in the United States on the night of July 18, 1969, Joplin and her band performed "Try (Just a Little Bit Harder)" as well as "To Love Somebody".
As Dick Cavett interviewed Joplin, she admitted that she had a terrible time touring in Europe, claiming that audiences there are very uptight and don't "get down".
Released in September 1969, the Kozmic Blues album was certified gold later that year but did not match the success of Cheap Thrills.
Bernstein's review said that Joplin "has finally assembled a group of first-rate musicians with whom she is totally at ease and whose abilities complement the incredible range of her voice."
When Joplin and her back-up band performed at Vets Memorial Auditorium in Columbus, Ohio, on Sunday night, May 11, 1969, Columbus Dispatch reviewer John Huddy wrote:
Frequently suggestive with a series of limited but obvious moves, Miss Joplin wears hip-hugging silk bellbottoms and alternates between a wail and a teeth-rattling scream.
Like Elvis in his pelvis-moving days or Wayne Cochran with his towering hairdo, Janis is a curiosity as well as a musical attraction.
She cultivates a Madame of Rock image, lounging against an organ, exchanging profanities with bandsmen, cackling coarsely at private jokes, even taking a belt or two while onstage.
She also has something to say in her songs, about the raw and rudimentary dimensions of sex, love, and life.
She gets her point across, splitting a few eardrums in the process.
Opening the Joplin concert were Teegarden and Van Winkle, an organ-drums duo ...
Before her concert, Miss Joplin walked into the lobby and watched customers (sic) arrive.
She was not recognized.
Columbia Records released "Kozmic Blues" as a single, which peaked at number 41 on the Billboard Hot 100, and a live rendition of "Raise Your Hand" was released in Germany and became a top ten hit there.
Containing other hits like "Try (Just a Little Bit Harder)", "To Love Somebody", and "Little Girl Blue", I Got Dem Ol' Kozmic Blues Again Mama! reached number five on the Billboard 200 soon after its release.
Joplin appeared at Woodstock starting at approximately 2:00 a.m., on Sunday, August 17, 1969.
Joplin informed her band that they would be performing at the concert as if it were just another gig.
On Saturday afternoon, when she and the band were flown by helicopter with the pregnant Joan Baez and Baez's mother from a nearby motel to the festival site and Joplin saw the enormous crowd, she instantly became extremely nervous and giddy.
Upon landing and getting off the helicopter, Joplin was approached by reporters asking her questions.
She referred them to her friend and sometime lover Peggy Caserta as she was too excited to speak.
Initially, Joplin was eager to get on the stage and perform but was repeatedly delayed as bands were contractually obliged to perform ahead of Joplin.
Faced with a ten-hour wait after arriving at the backstage area, Joplin shot heroin and drank alcohol
Janis remained at Woodstock for the remainder of the festival.
Starting at approximately 3:00 a.m. on Monday, August 18, Joplin was among many Woodstock performers who stood in a circle behind Crosby, Stills & Nash during their performance, which was the first time anyone at Woodstock ever had heard the group perform.
This information was published by David Crosby in 1988.
Still photographs in color show Joplin backstage with Grace Slick the day after Joplin's performance, wherein Joplin appears to be very happy.
Joplin was ultimately unhappy with her performance, however, and blamed Caserta.
Her singing was not included (by her own insistence) in the 1970 documentary film or the soundtrack for , 37 seconds of footage of Joplin and Caserta walking toward Joplin's dressing room tent.
In addition to Woodstock, Joplin also had problems at Madison Square Garden, in 1969.
Biographer Myra Friedman said she witnessed a duet Joplin sang with Tina Turner during the Rolling Stones concert at the Garden on Thanksgiving Day.
Friedman said Joplin was "so drunk, so stoned, so out of control, that she could have been an institutionalized psychotic rent by mania."
In February 1970, Joplin traveled to Brazil, where she stopped her drug and alcohol use.
She was accompanied on vacation there by her friend Linda Gravenites, who had designed the singer's stage costumes from 1967 to 1969.
In Brazil, Joplin was romanced by a fellow American tourist named David (George) Niehaus, who was traveling around the world.
A Joplin biography written by her sister Laura said, "David was an upper-middle-class Cincinnati kid who had studied communications at Notre Dame. ... and had joined the Peace Corps after college and worked in a small village in Turkey. ...
He tried law school, but when he met Janis he was taking time off."
Around this time, she formed her new band, the Full Tilt Boogie Band.
(during the year she had spent at the University of Texas at Austin, Joplin had been voted "Ugliest Man on Campus" by frat boys).
In the subsequent Cavett Show broadcast, on August 3, 1970, and featuring Gloria Swanson, Joplin discussed her upcoming performance at the Festival for Peace to be held at Shea Stadium in Queens, New York, three days later.
On August 7, 1970, a tombstone-jointly paid for by Joplin and Juanita Green, who as a child had done housework for Bessie Smith-was erected at Smith's previously unmarked grave.
The following day, the Associated Press circulated this news, and the August 9 edition of The New York Times carried it.
The lead paragraph of the AP story said Joplin and Green had "shared the cost of a stone for the 'Empress of the Blues,'" but, according to publicist/biographer Myra Friedman, the two women never met.
According to Myra Friedman's account, Joplin held a press conference in Port Arthur during her reunion visit.
When asked by a reporter if she ever entertained at Thomas Jefferson High School when she was a student there, Joplin replied, "Only when I walked down the aisles."
The opening track, "Move Over", was written by Joplin, reflecting the way that she felt men treated women in relationships.
Also included was the social commentary of "Mercedes Benz", presented in an a cappella arrangement; the track on the album features the first and only take that Joplin recorded.
A cover of Nick Gravenites's "Buried Alive in the Blues", to which Joplin had been scheduled to add her vocals on the day she was found dead, was included as an instrumental.
Joplin checked into the Landmark Motor Hotel in Hollywood on August 24, 1970, near Sunset Sound Recorders, Friedman wrote that the only Full Tilt Boogie member who rode as her passenger, Ken Pearson, often hesitated to join her, Then Full Tilt Boogie recorded the instrumental track for "Buried Alive in the Blues".
on October 9.
Joplin, Pearson, and Pierson chose the Dale Evans composition "Happy Trails" as part of the greeting.
Lennon told Dick Cavett on-camera the following year that Joplin's recorded birthday wishes arrived at his home after her death.
David (George) Niehaus, Kris Kristofferson,
She also had relationships with women.
During her first stint in San Francisco in 1963, Joplin met and briefly lived with Jae Whitaker, an African American woman whom she had met while playing pool at the bar Gino & Carlo in North Beach.
Whitaker broke off their relationship because of Joplin's hard drug use and sexual relationships with other people.
Whitaker was first identified by name in connection with Joplin in 1999, when Alice Echols' biography Scars of Sweet Paradise was published.
an aspiring hard rock drummer who wanted to meet Joplin.
Given the near-infinite potentials of infancy, it is really impossible to make generalizations about what lies behind sexual practices.
This, however, is probable: to become clearly homosexual, to make the choice that one honestly prefers relations with one's own sex, no matter the origins of such preference, requires a certain integration, a stability of psychic development, a tidiness of personality organization.
The ridicule and the humiliation that took place at that most delicate period in Joplin's early teens, her own inability to surmount the obstacles to regular growth, devastated her a great deal more than most people comprehended.
Janis was not heir to an ego so cohesive as to permit her an identity one way or the other.
She was, as the psychiatric social worker she saw regularly in Beaumont, Texas in 1965 and 1966 Mr. Bernard Giarritano put it in an interview with Friedman, "diffused" -- spewing, splattering, splaying all over, without a center to hold.
That had as much to do with her original use of drugs before she first met Giarritano as did the critical component of guilt and its multiplicity of sources above and beyond the contribution made by her relationships with women.
Were she so simple as the lesbians wished her to be or so free as her associates imagined!
On July 11, 1970, Full Tilt Boogie and Big Brother and the Holding Company both performed at the same concert in the San Diego Sports Arena, which was decades later renamed the Valley View Casino Center.
Joplin sang with Full Tilt Boogie and appeared briefly onstage with Big Brother without singing, according to the next day's review in the San Diego Union.
She had a conversation offstage with her old friend Richard Hundgen, the Grateful Dead's San Francisco-based road manager whom she had known since 1966, in which she said:
I hear a rumor that somebody in San Francisco is spreading stories that I'm a dyke.
You go back there and find out who it is and tell them that Janis says she's gotten it on with a couple of thousand cats in her life and a few hundred chicks and see what they can do with that!
Cooke believes Joplin had been given heroin that was much more potent than normal, as several of her dealer's other customers also overdosed that week.
Her death was ruled as accidental.
Peggy Caserta and Seth Morgan had both failed to meet Joplin the Friday immediately prior to her death, October 2 and Joplin had been expecting both of them to keep her company that night.
Legacy
Joplin's death in October 1970 at age 27 stunned her fans and shocked the music world, especially when coupled with the death just 16 days earlier of another rock icon, Jimi Hendrix, also at age 27.
Music historian Tom Moon wrote that Joplin had "a devastatingly original voice", music columnist Jon Pareles of The New York Times wrote that Joplin as an artist was "overpowering and deeply vulnerable", and author Megan Terry said that Joplin was the female version of Elvis Presley in her ability to captivate an audience.
was excerpted in many newspapers.
At the same time, Peggy Caserta's memoir, Going Down With Janis (1974), attracted a lot of attention, with its provocative title referring to her performing oral sex with Joplin while they were high on heroin, in September 1970.
The very first sentence in the book goes into more detail about that particular encounter.
Caserta’s language and description repelled many people at a time when few books or filmed interviews of Joplin or her loved ones were accessible to the public.
Peggy Caserta was described as “halfway between a groupie and a friend” on an interview that writer Ellis Auburn did with Joplin's bandmate Sam Andrew circa 1990 and published in 1992.
Joplin, along with Grace Slick of Jefferson Airplane, opened opportunities in the rock music business for future female singers.
Joplin's body art, with a wristlet and a small heart on her left breast, by the San Francisco tattoo artist Lyle Tuttle, was an early moment in the popular culture's acceptance of tattoos as art.
Another trademark was her flamboyant hair styles, which often included colored streaks, and accessories such as scarves, beads, and feathers.
When in New York City, Joplin, often in the company of actor Michael J. Pollard, frequented Limbo on St. Mark's Place.
Joplin, well known to the boutique's employees, made a practice of putting aside vintage and other one-of-a-kind garments she favored on stage and off.
The Mamas & the Papas' song "Pearl" (1971), from their People Like Us album, was a tribute.
Likewise, Leonard Cohen's song, "Chelsea Hotel #2" (1974), is about Joplin, and lyricist Robert Hunter has commented that Jerry Garcia's "Birdsong" from his first solo album, Garcia (1972), is about Joplin and the end of her suffering through death.
Mimi Farina's composition, "In the Quiet Morning", most famously covered by Joan Baez on her Come from the Shadows (1972) album, was a tribute to Joplin.
Another song by Baez, "Children of the Eighties," mentioned Joplin.
A Serge Gainsbourg-penned French language song by English singer Jane Birkin, "Ex fan des sixties" (1978), references Joplin alongside other disappeared "idols" such as Jimi Hendrix, Brian Jones, and Marc Bolan.
When Joplin was alive, Country Joe McDonald released a song called "Janis" on his band's album I-Feel-Like-I'm-Fixin'-to-Die (1967).
At the 1976 Montreux Jazz Festival, Nina Simone, whom Joplin admired greatly, commented on Joplin and referred to the documentary Janis (1975) that evidently was screened at the festival:
QTEMPLATE |You know I made thirty-five albums, they bootlegged seventy.
Oh, everybody took a chunk of me.
And yesterday I went to see Janis Joplin's film here.
And what distressed me the most, and I started to write a song about it, but I decided you weren't worthy.
Because I figured that most of you are here for the festival.
Anyway the point is it pained me to see how hard she worked.
Because she got hooked into a thing, and it wasn't on drugs.
She got hooked into a feeling and she played to corpses.
The film The Rose (1979) is loosely based on Joplin's life.
Originally planned to be titled Pearl-Joplin's nickname and the title of her last album-the film was fictionalized after her family declined to allow the producers the rights to her story.
Bette Midler earned a nomination for the Academy Award for Best Actress for her performance in the film.
In 1988, on what would have been Joplin's 45th birthday, the Janis Joplin Memorial, with an original gold, multi-image sculpture of Joplin by Douglas Clark, was dedicated during a ceremony in Port Arthur, Texas.
In 1992, the first major biography of Joplin in two decades, Love, Janis, authored by her younger sister, Laura Joplin, was published.
In an interview, Laura stated that Joplin enjoyed being on the Dick Cavett Show, that Joplin while growing up in Texas had difficulties with some people at school, but not the entire school, and that Joplin was really enthusiastic after performing at Woodstock in 1969.
In 1995, Joplin was inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame.
In 2005, she received a Grammy Lifetime Achievement Award.
In November 2009, the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame and Museum honored her as part of its annual American Music Masters Series; among the artifacts at the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame Museum exhibition are Joplin's scarf and necklaces, her 1965 Porsche 356 Cabriolet with psychedelically designed painting, and a sheet of LSD blotting paper designed by Robert Crumb, designer of the Cheap Thrills cover.
Also in 2009, Joplin was the honoree at the Rock Hall's American Music Master concert and lecture series.
In the late 1990s, the musical play Love, Janis was created and directed by Randal Myler, with input from Janis' younger sister Laura and Big Brother guitarist Sam Andrew, with an aim to take it to Off Broadway.
Opening in the summer of 2001 and scheduled for only a few weeks of performances, the show won acclaim, packed houses, and was held over several times.
In 2013, Washington's Arena Stage featured a production of A Night with Janis Joplin, starring Mary Bridget Davies.
In it, Joplin puts on a concert for the audience, while telling stories of her past inspirations including Odetta, Aretha Franklin, and others.
It went on tour in 2016.
On November 4, 2013, Joplin was awarded with the 2,510th star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame for her contributions to the music industry.
Her star is located at 6752 Hollywood Boulevard, in front of Musicians Institute.
On August 8, 2014, the U.S. Postal Service revealed a commemorative stamp honoring Janis Joplin, as part of its Music Icons Forever Stamp series during a first-day-of-issue ceremony at the Outside Lands Music Festival at Golden Gate Park.
On December 15, 2015, Amy J. Berg released her biographical documentary film, Janis: Little Girl Blue, narrated by Cat Power.
It was a New York Times Critics' Pick.
Among the memorabilia she left behind is a Gibson Hummingbird guitar.
Influence
Joplin had a profound influence on many singers.
For example, Florence Welch of Florence and the Machine spoke of Joplin's impact, in an interview for Why Music Matters that appeared in a commercial against piracy:
QTEMPLATE |I learnt about Janis from an anthology of female blues singers.
Janis was a fascinating character who bridged the gap between psychedelic blues and soul scenes.
She was so vulnerable, self-conscious and full of suffering.
She tore herself apart yet on stage she was totally different.
She was so unrestrained, so free, so raw and she wasn't afraid to wail.
Her connection with the audience was really important.
It seems to me the suffering and intensity of her performance go hand in hand.
There was always a sense of longing, of searching for something.
I think she really sums up the idea that soul is about putting your pain into something beautiful.
Stevie Nicks considers Joplin one of her idols, and has said:
QTEMPLATE |You could say that being yelled at by Janis Joplin was one of the great honors of my life.
Early in my career, Lindsey Buckingham and I were in a band called Fritz.
There were two gigs we played in San Francisco that changed everything for me - One was opening up for Jimi Hendrix, who was completely magical.
The other was the time that we opened up for Janis at the San Jose Fairgrounds, around 1970.
It was a hot summer day, and things didn't start off well because the entire show was running late.
That meant our set was running over.
We were onstage and going over pretty well, when I turned and saw a furious Janis Joplin on the side of the stage, yelling at us.
She was screaming something like, "What the fuck are you assholes doing?
Get the hell off of my stage."
Actually, she might have even been a little cruder than that - it was hard to hear.
But then Janis got up on that stage with her band, and this woman who was screaming at me only moments before suddenly became my new hero.
Janis Joplin was not what anyone would call a great beauty, but she became beautiful because she made such a powerful and deep emotional connection with the audience.
I didn't mind the feathers and the bell-bottom pants either.
Janis didn't dress like anyone else, and she definitely didn't sing like anyone else.
Janis put herself out there completely, and her voice was not only strong and soulful, it was painfully and beautifully real.
She sang in the great tradition of the rhythm & blues singers that were her heroes, but she brought her own dangerous, sexy rock & roll edge to every single song.
She really gave you a piece of her heart.
And that inspired me to find my own voice and my own style.
Pink said about Joplin: "She was so inspiring by singing blues music when it wasn't culturally acceptable for white women, and she wore her heart on her sleeve.
She was so witty and charming and intelligent, but she also battled an ugly-duckling syndrome.
I would love to play her in a movie."
In a tribute performance on her Try This Tour, Pink called Joplin "a woman who inspired me when everyone else ... didn't!"
Discography
Janis Joplin recorded four albums in her four-year career.
The first two albums were recorded with and credited to Big Brother and the Holding Company; the later two were recorded with different backing bands and released as solo albums.
Previously unreleased studio and live material, including early performances as well as Joplin's greatest hits, have been released on several posthumous compilations.
Some of Joplin's live concerts with Big Brother were professionally recorded and have been released on albums like Live at Winterland '68 and Live at the Carousel Ballroom 1968.
Full discography
Big Brother and the Holding Company
Kozmic Blues Band
Full Tilt Boogie Band
Big Brother & the Holding Company / Full Tilt Boogie
Later collections
Billboard chart
Albums
Singles discography
Filmography
* Woodstock: 3 Days of Peace & Music (Director's Cut) (1994)
* Rockin' at the Red Dog: The Dawn of Psychedelic Rock (2005)
* This is Tom Jones (2007) 1969 appearance on TV show
* Woodstock: 3 Days of Peace & Music (Director's Cut) 40th Anniversary Edition (2009)
* Janis Joplin with Big Brother: Ball and Chain (DVD) Charly (2009)
Samples
Further reading
