Marie Skłodowska Curie ( , , ; born Maria Salomea Skłodowska; 7 November 18674 July 1934) was a Polish and naturalized-French physicist and chemist who conducted pioneering research on radioactivity.
She was the first woman to win a Nobel Prize, is the only woman to win the Nobel prize twice, and is the only person to win the Nobel Prize in two different scientific fields.
She was part of the Curie family legacy of five Nobel Prizes.
She was also the first woman to become a professor at the University of Paris, and in 1995 became the first woman to be entombed on her own merits in the Panthéon in Paris.
She was born in Warsaw, in what was then the Kingdom of Poland, part of the Russian Empire.
She studied at Warsaw's clandestine Flying University and began her practical scientific training in Warsaw.
In 1891, aged 24, she followed her older sister Bronisława to study in Paris, where she earned her higher degrees and conducted her subsequent scientific work.
She shared the 1903 Nobel Prize in Physics with her husband Pierre Curie and physicist Henri Becquerel.
She won the 1911 Nobel Prize in Chemistry.
Her achievements included the development of the theory of radioactivity (a term she coined), techniques for isolating radioactive isotopes, and the discovery of two elements, polonium and radium.
Under her direction, the world's first studies were conducted into the treatment of neoplasms using radioactive isotopes.
She founded the Curie Institutes in Paris and in Warsaw, which remain major centres of medical research today.
During World War I she developed mobile radiography units to provide X-ray services to field hospitals.
While a French citizen, Marie Skłodowska Curie, who used both surnames,
Life
Early years
Maria Skłodowska was born in Warsaw, in Congress Poland in the Russian Empire, on 7 November 1867, the fifth and youngest child of well-known teachers Bronisława, née Boguska, and Władysław Skłodowski.
On both the paternal and maternal sides, the family had lost their property and fortunes through patriotic involvements in Polish national uprisings aimed at restoring Poland's independence (the most recent had been the January Uprising of 1863-65).
neither wanted a religious service.
In 1900, Curie became the first woman faculty member at the École Normale Supérieure, and her husband joined the faculty of the University of Paris.
She visited Poland in 1913 and was welcomed in Warsaw but the visit was mostly ignored by the Russian authorities.
The Institute's development was interrupted by the coming war, as most researchers were drafted into the French Army, and it fully resumed its activities in 1919.
She saw a need for field radiological centres near the front lines to assist battlefield surgeons.
In 1923 she wrote a biography of her late husband, titled Pierre Curie.
Death
Curie visited Poland for the last time in early 1934.
She was interred at the cemetery in Sceaux, alongside her husband Pierre.
Even her cookbook is highly radioactive.
* Elliott Cresson Medal (1909) for their discovery of radium and polonium was honored by a Citation for Chemical Breakthrough Award from the Division of History of Chemistry of the American Chemical Society presented to the ESPCI Paris (Ecole supérieure de physique et de chimie industrielles de la Ville de Paris) in 2015.
In 1995, she became the first woman to be entombed on her own merits in the Panthéon, Paris.
In Poland, she had received honorary doctorates from the Lwów Polytechnic (1912),Poznań University (1922), Kraków's Jagiellonian University (1924), and the Warsaw Polytechnic (1926).
Her name is included on the Monument to the X-ray and Radium Martyrs of All Nations, erected in Hamburg, Germany in 1936.
Numerous locations around the world are named after her.
In 2007, a metro station in Paris was renamed to honour both of the Curies.
Two museums are devoted to Marie Curie.
In 1967, the Maria Skłodowska-Curie Museum was established in Warsaw's "New Town", at her birthplace on ulica Freta (Freta Street).
Curie has also been portrayed by Susan Marie Frontczak in her play Manya:
The Living History of Marie Curie, a one-woman show performed in 30 US states and nine countries, by 2014.
Curie's likeness also has appeared on banknotes, stamps and coins around the world.
* Eusapia Palladino:
Spiritualist medium whose Paris séances were attended by Pierre and Marie Curie.
* Genius, a television series depicting Einstein's life
* Marie Curie Gargoyle (1988), University of Oregon
* Marie "Blanche" Wittmann, who worked for Marie Curie.
Notes
Further reading
Nonfiction
Fiction
* A 2004 novel by Per Olov Enquist featuring Maria Skłodowska-Curie, neurologist Jean-Martin Charcot, and his Salpêtrière patient "Blanche" (Marie "Blanche" Wittmann).
The English translation was published in 2006.
