The Pawnee are a Plains Indian tribe who are headquartered in Pawnee, Oklahoma.
Pawnee people are enrolled in the federally recognized Pawnee Nation of Oklahoma.
Historically, they lived in Nebraska and Kansas.
Historically, the Pawnee lived in villages of earth lodges with adjacent farmlands near the Loup, Republican, and South Platte rivers.
The Pawnee tribal economic activities throughout the year alternated between farming crops and hunting buffalo.
In the early 19th century, the Pawnee numbered more than 10,000 people and were one of the largest and most powerful tribes in the west.
Although dominating the Loup (ickariʾ) and Platte (kíckatuus) river areas for centuries, they later suffered from increasing encroachment and attrition by their numerically superior, nomadic enemies: the Sioux , Cheyenne (sáhe / sáhi), and Arapaho (sáriʾitihka) ("dog eater"); the Pawnee called these collectively as cárarat ("enemy tribe") or cahriksuupiíruʾ ("enemy").
The Pawnee were occasionally at war with the Comanche (raaríhtaʾ) and Kiowa (káʾiwa) farther south.
They had suffered many losses due to Eurasian infectious diseases brought by the expanding Europeans, and by 1860, the Pawnee population was reduced to 4,000.
It further decreased, because of disease, crop failure, and warfare, to approximately 2,400 by 1873, after which time the Pawnee were forced to move to Indian Territory in Oklahoma.
Many Pawnee warriors enlisted to serve as Indian scouts in the US Army to track and fight their tribal enemies resisting European-American expansion on the Great Plains.
Government
There are approximately 3,200 enrolled Pawnee and nearly all reside in Oklahoma.
Their tribal headquarters is in Pawnee, Oklahoma, and their tribal jurisdictional area is in parts of Noble, Payne, and Pawnee counties.
The tribal constitution establishes the government of the Pawnee Nation of Oklahoma.
This government consists of the Resaru Council, the Pawnee Business Council, and the Supreme Court.
Enrollment into the tribe requires a minimum th blood quantum.
The Resaru Council, also known as the "Chiefs Council" consists of eight members, each serving four-year terms.
Each band has two representatives on the Resaru Council selected by the members of the tribal bands, Cawi, Kitkahaki, Pitahawirata and Ckiri.
The Resaru Council has the right to review all acts of the Pawnee Business Council regarding the Pawnee Nation of Oklahoma membership and Pawnee Nation of Oklahoma claims or rights growing out of treaties between the Pawnee Nation of Oklahoma and the United States according to provision listed in the Pawnee Nation Constitution.
;2013-2017
Ralph Haymond, 2nd Chief Kitkehahki Band, 2nd Nasharo Council Chief
* Jimmy Horn, 1st Chief Chaui Band, Nasharo Council Treasurer
* Warren Pratt, Jr., 2nd Chief Skidi Band, Nasharo Council 1st Chief
* Lester Moon Eagle, 2nd Chief Pitahauirata Band, Nasharo Council Secretary
;Current
The Pawnee Business Council is the supreme governing body of the Pawnee Tribe of Oklahoma.
Subject to the limitations imposed by the Constitution and applicable Federal law, the Pawnee Business Council shall exercise all the inherent, statutory, and treaty powers of the Pawnee Nation of Oklahoma by the enactment of legislation, the transaction of business, and by otherwise speaking or acting on behalf of the Pawnee Nation of Oklahoma on all matters which the Pawnee Nation of Oklahoma is empowered to act, including the authority to hire legal counsel to represent the Pawnee Nation of Oklahoma.
;Current Pawnee Business Council:
The new Council members were voted in by the people; elections are held every two years on the first Saturday in May.
Economic development
The Pawnee operate two gaming casinos, three smoke shops, two fuel stations, and one truck stop.
While the Skidi Chaui Band of the South Bands were generally the politically leading group, although each band was autonomous.
As was typical of many Native American tribes, each band saw to its own.
In response to pressures from the Spanish, French and Americans, as well as neighboring tribes, the Pawnee began to draw closer together.
Bands
;South Bands: called Tuhaáwit ("East Village People") by the Skidi-Federation
* Cáwiiʾi (S.B. dialect), Cawií (Sk. dialect), variants: Cawi, Chaui, Chawi, (See photo above.)
As many as 30-50 people might live in each lodge, and they were usually of related families.
A village could consist of as many as 300-500 people and 10-15 households.
Each lodge was divided in two (the north and south), and each section had a head who oversaw the daily business.
Each section was further subdivided into three duplicate areas, with tasks and responsibilities related to the ages of women and girls, as described below.
The membership of the lodge was quite flexible.
The tribe went on buffalo hunts in summer and winter.
Upon their return, the inhabitants of a lodge would often move into another lodge, although they generally remained within the village.
Men's lives were more transient than those of women.
They had obligations of support for the wife (and family they married into), but could always go back to their mother and sisters for a night or two of attention.
When young couples married, they lived with the woman's family in a matrilocal pattern.
Political structure
The Pawnee are a matrilineal people.
Ancestral descent is traced through the mother, and children are considered born into the mother's clan and are part of her people.
Traditionally, a young couple moved into the bride's parents' lodge.
People work together in collaborative ways, marked by both independence and cooperation, without coercion.
Both women and men are active in political life, with independent decision-making responsibilities.
Within the lodge, each north-south section had areas marked by activities of the three classes of women:
*Mature women (usually married and mothers), who did most of the labor;
*Young single women, just learning their responsibilities; and
Among the collection of lodges, the political designations for men were essentially between:
Women tended to be responsible for decisions about resource allocation, trade, and inter-lodge social negotiations.
Men were responsible for decisions which pertained to hunting, war, and spiritual/health issues.
Women tended to remain within a single lodge, while men would typically move between lodges.
They took multiple sexual partners in serially monogamous relationships.
Agriculture
The Pawnee women were skilled horticulturalists and cooks, cultivating and processing ten varieties of corn, seven of pumpkins and squashes, and eight of beans.
Hunting
After they obtained horses, the Pawnee adapted their culture and expanded their buffalo hunting seasons.
With horses providing a greater range, the people traveled in both summer and winter westward to the Great Plains for buffalo hunting.
They often traveled or more in a season.
In summer the march began at dawn or before, but usually did not last the entire day.
Once buffalo were located, hunting did not begin until the tribal priests considered the time propitious.
The hunt began by the men stealthily advancing together toward the buffalo, but no one could kill any buffalo until the warriors of the tribe gave the signal, in order not to startle the animals before the hunters could get in position for the attack on the herd.
Anyone who broke ranks could be severely beaten.
During the chase, the hunters guided their ponies with their knees and wielded bows and arrows.
They could incapacitate buffalo with a single arrow shot into the flank between the lower ribs and the hip.
The animal would soon lie down and perhaps bleed out, or the hunters would finish it off.
An individual hunter might shoot as many as five buffalo in this way before backtracking and finishing them off.
They preferred to kill cows and young bulls, as the taste of older bulls was disagreeable.
After successful kills, the women processed the bison meat, skin and bones for various uses: the flesh was sliced into strips and dried on poles over slow fires before being stored.
Prepared in this way, it was usable for several months.
Although the Pawnee preferred buffalo, they also hunted other game, including elk, bear, panther, and skunk, for meat and skins.
The skins were used for clothing and accessories, storage bags, foot coverings, fastening ropes and ties, etc.
The people returned to their villages to harvest crops when the corn was ripe in late summer, or in the spring when the grass became green and they could plant a new cycle of crops.
Summer hunts extended from late June to about the first of September; but might end early if hunting was successful.
Sometimes the hunt was limited to what is now western Nebraska.
Winter hunts were from late October until early April and were often to the southwest into what is now western Kansas.
Religion
Like many other Native American tribes, the Pawnee had a cosmology with elements of all of nature represented in it.
They based many rituals in the four cardinal directions.
Pawnee priests conducted ceremonies based on the sacred bundles that included various materials, such as an ear of sacred corn, with great symbolic value.
These were used in many religious ceremonies to maintain the balance of nature and the Pawnee relationship with the gods and spirits.
In the 1890s, already in Oklahoma, the people participated in the Ghost Dance movement.
The Pawnee believed that the Morning Star and Evening Star gave birth to the first Pawnee woman.
The first Pawnee man was the offspring of the union of the Moon and the Sun.
As they believed they were descendants of the stars, cosmology had a central role in daily and spiritual life.
They planted their crops according to the position of the stars, which related to the appropriate time of season for planting.
Like many tribal bands, they sacrificed maize and other crops to the stars.
Morning Star ritual
The Skidi Pawnees in Village Across a Hill practiced human sacrifice, specifically of captive girls, in the "Morning Star ritual".
They continued this practice regularly through the 1810s and possibly after 1838 - the last reported sacrifice.
They believed the longstanding rite ensured the fertility of the soil and success of the crops, as well as renewal of all life in spring and triumphs on the battlefields.
rose ringed with red, the priest knew it was the signal for the sacrifice.
He directed the men to carry out the rest of the ritual, including the construction of a scaffold outside the village.
It was made of sacred woods and leathers from different animals, each of which had important symbolism.
It was erected over a pit with elements corresponding to the four cardinal directions.
All the elements of the ritual related to symbolic meaning and belief, and were necessary for the renewal of life.
The preparations took four days.
Slowly, a Skidi faction that opposed the old rite developed.
Two Skidi leaders, Knife Chief and his young relative Petalesharo, spearheaded the reformist movement.
Knife Chief ransomed at least two captives before a sacrifice.
Petalesharo cut loose a Comanche captive from the scaffold in 1817 and carried her to safety.
Indian agent John Dougherty and a number of influential Pawnees tried in vain to save the life of a captive Cheyenne girl on 11 April 1827.
History
Before metal or horses
The ancestors of the Pawnees were speakers of Caddoan languages, who had developed a semi-sedentary neolithic lifestyle in valley-bottom lands on the Great Plains.
Unlike other groups of the Great Plains, they had a stratified society with priests and hereditary chiefs.
Their religion included cannibalism and human sacrifice.
At first contact, they were distributed widely through modern Oklahoma and Kansas, and they reached modern Nebraska about 1750.
Their unfortified villages of well-scattered grass lodges and earth lodges reflected an assumption that large raiding parties would not arrive without warning; their inhabitants could not rapidly co-ordinate defense against a large party of enemies.
Coronado spent twenty-five days among the Quivirans trying to learn of richer kingdoms just over the horizon.
He found nothing but straw-thatched villages of up to two hundred houses and fields containing corn, beans, and squash.
A copper pendant was the only evidence of wealth he discovered.
The Quivirans were almost certainly Caddoans, and they built grass lodges as only the Wichita were still doing by 1898.
By 1757 Louis Antoine de Bougainville considered that the Panis nation "plays ... the same role in America that the Negroes do in Europe."
The historian Marcel Trudel documented that close to 2,000 "panis" slaves lived in Canada until the abolition of slavery in the colony in 1833.
Villasur, forty-five other Spaniards and eleven Pueblos were killed, and the survivors fled.
The Pawnee won a "hard fought" defensive battle around 1830, when they defeated the whole Cheyenne tribe.
A Pitahawirata Pawnee captured one of the most sacred tribal bundles of the Cheyenne, the Sacred Arrows, and Skidi Chief Big Eagle secured it quickly.
The Pawnees in the village of Chief Blue Coat suffered a severe defeat on 27 June 1843.
A force of Lakotas attacked the village, killed more than 65 inhabitants and burned 20 earth lodges.
In 1852, a combined Indian force of Cheyennes and invited Kiowa and Kiowa Apaches attacked a Pawnee camp in Kansas during the summer hunt.
The killing of this notable Cheyenne affected the Cheyennes to the point, that they carried their Sacred Arrows against the Pawnee the following summer in an all-out war.
Warriors enlisted as Pawnee Scouts in the latter half of the 19th century in the United States Army.
Like other groups of Native American scouts, Pawnee warriors were recruited in large numbers to fight on the Northern and Southern Plains in various conflicts against hostile Native Americans.
Because the Pawnee people were old enemies of the Sioux, Cheyenne, Arapaho, Comanche and Kiowa tribes, they served with the army for fourteen years between 1864 and 1877, earning a reputation as being a well-trained unit, especially in tracking and reconnaissance.
The Pawnee Scouts took part with distinction in the Battle of the Tongue River during the Powder River Expedition (1865) against Lakota, Cheyenne and Arapaho and in the Battle of Summit Springs.
They also fought with the US in the Great Sioux War of 1876.
On the Southern Plains they fought against their old enemies, the Comanches and Kiowa, in the Comanche Campaign.
Relocation and reservation
As noted above, the Pawnee were subjected to continual raids by Lakota from the north and west.
On one such raid, 5 August 1873, a Sioux war party of over 1,000 warriors ambushed a Pawnee hunting party of 350 men, women, and children.
The Pawnee had gained permission to leave the reservation and hunt buffalo.
About 70 Pawnee were killed in this attack, which occurred in a canyon in present-day Hitchcock County.
The site is known as Massacre Canyon.
Because of the ongoing hostilities with the Sioux and encroachment from American settlers to the south and east, the Pawnee decided to leave their Nebraska reservation in the 1870s and settle on a new reservation in Indian Territory, located in what is today Oklahoma.
In 1874, the Pawnee requested relocation to Indian Territory (Oklahoma), but the stress of the move, diseases and poor conditions on their reservation reduced their numbers even more.
During this time, outlaws often smuggled whiskey to the Pawnee.
The teenaged female bandits Little Britches and Cattle Annie were imprisoned for this crime.
In 1875 most members of the nation moved to Indian Territory, a large area reserved to receive tribes displaced from east of the Mississippi River and elsewhere.
The warriors resisted the loss of their freedom and culture, but gradually adapted to reservations.
On 23 November 1892, the Pawnee in Oklahoma were forced by the US federal government to sign an agreement with the Cherokee Commission to accept individual allotments of land in a breakup of their communal holding.
By 1900, the Pawnee population was recorded by the US Census as 633.
Since then the tribe has begun to recover in numbers.
Bills such as the Indian Self-Determination and Education Assistance Act of 1975 have allowed the Pawnee Nation to regain some of its self-government.
The Pawnee continue to practice cultural traditions, meeting twice a year for the intertribal gathering with their kinsmen the Wichita Indians.
They have an annual four-day Pawnee Homecoming for Pawnee veterans in July.
Many Pawnee also return to their traditional lands to visit relatives and take part in scheduled powwows.
Notable Pawnee
* Brett Chapman, attorney and Native American rights advocate
*John EchoHawk, lawyer and founder of the Native American Rights Fund, older cousin of Walter Echo-Hawk (below)
*Larry Echo Hawk, Bureau of Indian Affairs Director He was elected Attorney General of Idaho (1991-1995).
*Moses J. "Chief" Yellow Horse, Major League Baseball player
*Old-Lady-Grieves-the-Enemy, 19th century female warrior
*Petalesharo, Skidi Pawnee chief who in 1817 rescued an Ietan Comanche girl from Pawnee ritual human sacrifice
*Anna Lee Walters (b. 1946), Otoe-Missouria-Pawnee author and educator
*Wicked Chief, visited President James Monroe in 1822 with a delegation of Native American dignitaries
