Theodore Robert Bundy (born Theodore Robert Cowell; November 24, 1946 - January 24, 1989) was an American serial killer who kidnapped, raped, and murdered numerous young women and girls during the 1970s and possibly earlier.
After more than a decade of denials, before his execution in 1989 he confessed to 30 homicides that he committed in seven states between 1974 and 1978.
The true number of victims is unknown and possibly higher.
Bundy was regarded as handsome and charismatic, traits that he may have exploited to win the trust of victims and society.
He would typically approach his victims in public places, feigning injury or disability, or impersonating an authority figure, before overpowering, raping and killing them in secluded locations.
He sometimes revisited his secondary crime scenes, grooming and performing sexual acts with the decomposing corpses until putrefaction and destruction by wild animals made any further interactions impossible.
He decapitated at least 12 victims and kept some of the severed heads as mementos in his apartment.
On a few occasions, he broke into dwellings at night and bludgeoned his victims as they slept.
In 1975, Bundy was jailed for the first time when he was incarcerated in Utah for aggravated kidnapping and attempted criminal assault.
He then became a suspect in a progressively longer list of unsolved homicides in several states.
Facing murder charges in Colorado, he engineered two dramatic escapes and committed further assaults in Florida, including three murders, before his ultimate recapture in 1978.
For the Florida homicides, he received three death sentences in two separate trials.
Bundy was executed in the electric chair at Florida State Prison in Raiford, Florida on January 24, 1989.
Biographer Ann Rule, who had previously worked with Bundy, described him as "a sadistic sociopath who took pleasure from another human's pain and the control he had over his victims, to the point of death, and even after."
He once called himself "the most cold-hearted son of a bitch you'll ever meet."
in Burlington, Vermont.
His father's identity was never been confirmed.
His birth certificate is said to assign paternity to a salesman and Air Force veteran named Lloyd Marshall, though other accounts state this father is listed as "Unknown".
Louise claimed she had been seduced by an old money war veteran named Jack Worthington, and the King County Sheriff's Office has him listed as the father in their files.
Some family members have expressed suspicions that Bundy might have been fathered by Louise's own violent, abusive father, Samuel Cowell, but no material evidence has ever been cited to support this.
For the first three years of his life, Bundy lived in the Philadelphia home of his maternal grandparents, Samuel (1898-1983) and Eleanor Cowell (1895-1971), who raised him as their son to avoid the social stigma that accompanied birth outside of wedlock.
Family, friends, and even young Ted were told that his grandparents were his parents and that his mother was his older sister.
He eventually discovered the truth, although he had varied recollections of the circumstances.
He told a girlfriend that a cousin showed him a copy of his birth certificate after calling him a "bastard," but he told biographers Stephen Michaud and Hugh Aynesworth that he found the certificate himself.
Biographer and true crime writer Ann Rule, who knew Bundy personally, believed that he did not find out until 1969, when he located his original birth record in Vermont.
Bundy expressed a lifelong resentment toward his mother for never talking to him about his real father, and for leaving him to discover his true parentage for himself.
In some interviews, Bundy spoke warmly of his grandparents and told Rule that he "identified with," "respected," and "clung to" his grandfather.
In 1987, however, he and other family members told attorneys that Samuel Cowell was a tyrannical bully and a bigot who hated blacks, Italians, Catholics, and Jews, beat his wife and the family dog, and swung neighborhood cats by their tails.
He once threw Louise's younger sister Julia down a flight of stairs for oversleeping.
He sometimes spoke aloud to unseen presences, and at least once flew into a violent rage when the question of Bundy's paternity was raised.
Bundy described his grandmother as a timid and obedient woman who periodically underwent electroconvulsive therapy for depression and feared to leave their house toward the end of her life.
Bundy occasionally exhibited disturbing behavior, even at that early age.
Julia recalled awakening one day from a nap to find herself surrounded by knives from the Cowell kitchen; her three-year-old nephew was standing by the bed, smiling.
In 1950, Louise changed her surname from Cowell to Nelson, and at the urging of multiple family members, she left Philadelphia with her son to live with cousins Alan and Jane Scott in Tacoma, Washington.
In 1951 Louise met Johnny Culpepper Bundy (1921-2007), a hospital cook, at an adult singles night at Tacoma's First Methodist Church.
They married later that year and Johnny Bundy formally adopted Ted.
Johnny and Louise conceived four children of their own, and although Johnny tried to include his adoptive son in camping trips and other family activities, Ted remained distant.
He later complained to his girlfriend that Johnny wasn't his real father, "wasn't very bright," and "didn't make much money."
Bundy had different recollections of Tacoma when he spoke to his biographers.
When he talked to Michaud and Aynesworth, he described how he roamed his neighborhood, picking through trash barrels in search of pictures of naked women.
When he spoke to Polly Nelson, he explained how he perused detective magazines, crime novels, and true crime documentaries for stories that involved sexual violence, particularly when the stories were illustrated with pictures of dead or maimed bodies.
In a letter to Rule, he asserted that he "never, ever read fact-detective magazines, and shuddered at the thought" that anyone would.
In his conversation with Michaud, he described how he would consume large quantities of alcohol and "canvass the community" late at night in search of undraped windows where he could observe women undressing, or "whatever else could be seen."
Bundy also varied the accounts of his social life.
He told Michaud and Aynesworth that he "chose to be alone" as an adolescent because he was unable to understand interpersonal relationships.
He claimed that he had no natural sense of how to develop friendships.
"I didn't know what made people want to be friends," he said.
"I didn't know what underlay social interactions."
Classmates from Woodrow Wilson High School told Rule, however, that Bundy was "well known and well liked" there, "a medium-sized fish in a large pond."
Downhill skiing was Bundy's only significant athletic avocation; he enthusiastically pursued the activity by using stolen equipment and forged lift tickets.
During high school, he was arrested at least twice on suspicion of burglary and auto theft.
When he reached age 18, the details of the incidents were expunged from his record, which is customary in Washington.
University years
After graduating from high school in 1965, Bundy spent a year at the University of Puget Sound (UPS) before he transferred to the University of Washington (UW) in 1966 to study Chinese.
In 1967, he became romantically involved with a UW classmate who is identified by several pseudonyms in Bundy biographies, most commonly "Stephanie Brooks."
In August of that year, Bundy attended the 1968 Republican National Convention in Miami as a Rockefeller delegate.
Shortly thereafter Brooks ended their relationship and returned to her family home in California, frustrated by what she described as Bundy's immaturity and lack of ambition.
Psychiatrist Dorothy Lewis would later pinpoint this crisis as "probably the pivotal time in his development".
Devastated by Brooks' rejection, Bundy traveled to Colorado and then farther east, visiting relatives in Arkansas and Philadelphia and enrolling for one semester at Temple University.
It was at this time in early 1969, Rule believes, that Bundy visited the office of birth records in Burlington and confirmed his true parentage.
Bundy was back in Washington by the fall of 1969 when he met Elizabeth Kloepfer (identified in Bundy literature as Meg Anders, Beth Archer, or Liz Kendall), a divorcée from Ogden, Utah who worked as a secretary at the University of Washington School of Medicine.
Their stormy relationship would continue well past his initial incarceration in Utah in 1976.
In mid-1970, Bundy, now focused and goal-oriented, re-enrolled at UW, this time as a psychology major.
He became an honor student and was well regarded by his professors.
In 1971, he took a job at Seattle's Suicide Hotline Crisis Center, where he met and worked alongside Ann Rule, a former Seattle police officer and aspiring crime writer, who would later write one of the definitive Bundy biographies, The Stranger Beside Me.
Rule saw nothing disturbing in Bundy's personality at the time, and described him as "kind, solicitous, and empathetic".
After graduating from UW in 1972, Bundy joined Governor Daniel J. Evans' re-election campaign.
Posing as a college student, he shadowed Evans' opponent, former governor Albert Rosellini, and recorded his stump speeches for analysis by Evans' team.
After Evans was re-elected, Bundy was hired as an assistant to Ross Davis, Chairman of the Washington State Republican Party.
Davis thought well of Bundy and described him as "smart, aggressive ... and a believer in the system".
In early 1973, despite mediocre Law School Admission Test scores, Bundy was accepted into the law schools of UPS and the University of Utah on the strength of letters of recommendation from Evans, Davis, and several UW psychology professors.
During a trip to California on Republican Party business in the summer of 1973, Bundy rekindled his relationship with Brooks, who marveled at his transformation into a serious, dedicated professional who was seemingly on the cusp of a legal and political career.
He continued to date Kloepfer as well; neither woman was aware of the other's existence.
In the fall of 1973, Bundy matriculated at UPS Law School, and continued courting Brooks, who flew to Seattle several times to stay with him.
They discussed marriage; at one point he introduced her to Davis as his fiancée.
In January 1974, however, he abruptly broke off all contact; her phone calls and letters went unreturned.
Finally reaching him by phone a month later, Brooks demanded to know why Bundy had unilaterally ended their relationship without explanation.
In a flat, calm voice, he replied, "Stephanie, I have no idea what you mean" and hung up.
She never heard from him again.
He later explained, "I just wanted to prove to myself that I could have married her"; but Brooks concluded in retrospect that he had deliberately planned the entire courtship and rejection in advance as vengeance for the breakup she initiated in 1968.
By then, Bundy had begun skipping classes at law school; by April, he had stopped attending entirely, as young women began to disappear in the Pacific Northwest.
First two series of murders
Washington, Oregon
There is no consensus on when or where Bundy began killing women.
He told different stories to different people and refused to divulge the specifics of his earliest crimes, even as he confessed in graphic detail to dozens of later murders in the days preceding his execution.
He told Nelson that he attempted his first kidnapping in 1969 in Ocean City, New Jersey, but did not kill anyone until sometime in 1971 in Seattle.
He told psychologist Art Norman that he killed two women in Atlantic City in 1969 while visiting family in Philadelphia.
and later at the Department of Emergency Services (DES), a state government agency involved in the search for the missing women.
At DES he met and dated Carole Ann Boone, a twice-divorced mother of two who, six years later, would play an important role in the final phase of his life.
Five female witnesses described an attractive young man wearing a white tennis outfit with his left arm in a sling, speaking with a light accent, perhaps Canadian or British.
Introducing himself as "Ted," he asked their help in unloading a sailboat from his tan or bronze-colored Volkswagen Beetle.
Four refused; one accompanied him as far as his car, saw that there was no sailboat, and fled.
Three additional witnesses saw him approach Janice Anne Ott, 23, a probation case worker at the King County Juvenile Court, with the sailboat story, and watched her leave the beach in his company.
About four hours later, Denise Marie Naslund, a 19-year-old woman who was studying to become a computer programmer, left a picnic to go to the restroom and never returned.
Bundy told Stephen Michaud that Ott was still alive when he returned with Naslund-and that he forced one to watch as he murdered the other-but he later denied it in an interview with Lewis on the eve of his execution.
King County police, finally armed with a detailed description of their suspect and his car, posted fliers throughout the Seattle area.
A composite sketch was printed in regional newspapers and broadcast on local television stations.
Elizabeth Kloepfer, Ann Rule, a DES employee, and a UW psychology professor all recognized the profile, the sketch, and the car, and reported Bundy as a possible suspect; but detectives-who were receiving up to 200 tips per day-thought it unlikely that a clean-cut law student with no adult criminal record could be the perpetrator.
On September 6, two grouse hunters stumbled across the skeletal remains of Ott and Naslund near a service road in Issaquah, east of Lake Sammamish State Park.
less than a mile from the Midvale restaurant where Melissa Smith was last seen.
He identified himself as "Officer Roseland" of the Murray Police Department and told DaRonch that someone had attempted to break into her car.
He asked her to accompany him to the station to file a complaint.
When DaRonch pointed out to Bundy that he was driving on a road that did not lead to the police station, he immediately pulled to the shoulder and attempted to handcuff her.
During their struggle, he inadvertently fastened both handcuffs to the same wrist, and DaRonch was able to open the car door and escape.
Later that evening, Debra Jean Kent, a 17-year-old student at Viewmont High School in Bountiful, north of Murray, disappeared after leaving a theater production at the school to pick up her brother.
He would later be excommunicated by the LDS Church following his 1976 kidnapping conviction.
Hayward had observed Bundy cruising a residential area in the pre-dawn hours; Bundy fled the area at high speed after seeing the patrol car.), but more than enough evidence to charge him with aggravated kidnapping and attempted criminal assault in the DaRonch case.
He was freed on $15,000 bail, paid by his parents, and spent most of the time between indictment and trial in Seattle, living in Kloepfer's house.
Seattle police had insufficient evidence to charge him in the Pacific Northwest murders, but kept him under close surveillance.
"When Ted and I stepped out on the porch to go somewhere," Kloepfer wrote, "so many unmarked police cars started up that it sounded like the beginning of the Indy 500."
In November, the three principal Bundy investigators-Jerry Thompson from Utah, Robert Keppel from Washington, and Michael Fisher from Colorado-met in Aspen, Colorado and exchanged information with 30 detectives and prosecutors from five states.
While officials left the meeting (later known as the Aspen Summit) convinced that Bundy was the murderer they sought, they agreed that more hard evidence would be needed before he could be charged with any of the murders.
In February 1976, Bundy stood trial for the DaRonch kidnapping.
On the advice of his attorney, John O'Connell, Bundy waived his right to a jury due to the negative publicity surrounding the case.
After a four-day bench trial and a weekend of deliberation, Judge Stewart Hanson Jr. found him guilty of kidnapping and assault.
In June he was sentenced to one-to-15 years in the Utah State Prison.
In October, he was found hiding in bushes in the prison yard carrying an "escape kit"-road maps, airline schedules, and a social security card-and spent several weeks in solitary confinement.
Later that month, Colorado authorities charged him with Caryn Campbell's murder.
After a period of resistance, he waived extradition proceedings and was transferred to Aspen in January 1977.
Escapes
On June 7, 1977, Bundy was transported from the Garfield County jail in Glenwood Springs to Pitkin County Courthouse in Aspen for a preliminary hearing.
He had elected to serve as his own attorney, and as such, was excused by the judge from wearing handcuffs or leg shackles.
During a recess, he asked to visit the courthouse's law library to research his case.
While shielded from his guards' view behind a bookcase, he opened a window and jumped to the ground from the second story, injuring his right ankle as he landed.
After shedding an outer layer of clothing he walked through Aspen as roadblocks were being set up on its outskirts, then hiked southward onto Aspen Mountain.
Near its summit he broke into a hunting cabin and stole food, clothing, and a rifle.
The following day he left the cabin and continued south toward the town of Crested Butte, but became lost in the forest.
For two days he wandered aimlessly on the mountain, missing two trails that led downward to his intended destination.
On June 10, he broke into a camping trailer on Maroon Lake, south of Aspen, taking food and a ski parka; but instead of continuing southward, he walked back north toward Aspen, eluding roadblocks and search parties along the way.
Three days later, he stole a car at the edge of Aspen Golf Course.
Cold, sleep-deprived, and in constant pain from his sprained ankle, he drove back into Aspen, where two police officers noticed his car weaving in and out of its lane and pulled him over.
He had been a fugitive for six days.
In the car were maps of the mountain area around Aspen that prosecutors were using to demonstrate the location of Caryn Campbell's body (as his own attorney, Bundy had rights of discovery), indicating that his escape was not a spontaneous act, but had been planned.
Back in jail in Glenwood Springs, Bundy ignored the advice of friends and legal advisors to stay put.
The case against him, already weak at best, was deteriorating steadily as pretrial motions consistently resolved in his favor and significant bits of evidence were ruled inadmissible.
"A more rational defendant might have realized that he stood a good chance of acquittal, and that beating the murder charge in Colorado would probably have dissuaded other prosecutors... with as little as a year and a half to serve on the DaRonch conviction, had Ted persevered, he could have been a free man."
Instead, Bundy assembled a new escape plan.
He acquired a detailed floor plan of the jail and a hacksaw blade from other inmates, and accumulated $500 in cash, smuggled in over a six-month period, he later said, by visitors-Carole Ann Boone in particular.
During the evenings, while other prisoners were showering, he sawed a hole about one foot (0.30 m) square between the steel reinforcing bars in his cell's ceiling and, having lost , was able to wriggle through it into the crawl space above.
Bundy later said that he initially resolved to find legitimate employment and refrain from further criminal activity, knowing he could probably remain free and undetected in Florida indefinitely as long as he did not attract the attention of police; but his lone job application, at a construction site, had to be abandoned when he was asked to produce identification.
He reverted to his old habits of shoplifting and stealing credit cards from women's wallets left in shopping carts.
In the early hours of January 15, 1978-one week after his arrival in Tallahassee-Bundy entered FSU's Chi Omega sorority house through a rear door with a faulty locking mechanism.
Beginning at about 2:45 a.m. he bludgeoned Margaret Bowman, 21, with a piece of oak firewood as she slept, then garroted her with a nylon stocking.
He then entered the bedroom of 20-year-old Lisa Levy and beat her unconscious, strangled her, tore one of her nipples, bit deeply into her left buttock, and sexually assaulted her with a hair mist bottle.
In an adjoining bedroom he attacked Kathy Kleiner, breaking her jaw and deeply lacerating her shoulder; and Karen Chandler, who suffered a concussion, broken jaw, loss of teeth, and a crushed finger.
Tallahassee detectives later determined that the four attacks took place in a total of less than 15 minutes, within earshot of more than 30 witnesses who heard nothing.
After leaving the sorority house, Bundy broke into a basement apartment eight blocks away and attacked FSU student Cheryl Thomas, dislocating her shoulder and fracturing her jaw and skull in five places.
She was left with permanent deafness, and equilibrium damage that ended her dance career.
On Thomas' bed, police found a semen stain and a pantyhose "mask" containing two hairs "similar to Bundy's in class and characteristic".
On February 8, Bundy drove east to Jacksonville, in a stolen FSU van.
In a parking lot he approached 14-year-old Leslie Parmenter, the daughter of Jacksonville Police Department's Chief of Detectives, identifying himself as "Richard Burton, Fire Department", but retreated when Parmenter's older brother arrived and challenged him.
That afternoon, he backtracked westward to Lake City.
At Lake City Junior High School the following morning, 12-year-old Kimberly Diane Leach was summoned to her homeroom by a teacher to retrieve a forgotten purse; she never returned to class.
Seven weeks later, after an intensive search, her partially mummified remains were found in a pig farrowing shed near Suwannee River State Park, northwest of Lake City.
On February 12, with insufficient cash to pay his overdue rent and a growing suspicion that police were closing in on him, Bundy stole a car and fled Tallahassee, driving westward across the Florida Panhandle.
Three days later, at around 1:00 am, he was stopped by Pensacola police officer David Lee near the Alabama state line after a "wants and warrants" check showed his Volkswagen Beetle was stolen.
Six months later, a second trial took place in Orlando, for the abduction and murder of Kimberly Leach.
As the sentence was announced, he reportedly stood and shouted, "Tell the jury they were wrong!"
This third death sentence would be the one ultimately carried out nearly nine years later.
In October 1981, Boone gave birth to a daughter and named Bundy as the father.
While conjugal visits were not allowed at Raiford Prison, inmates were known to pool their money in order to bribe guards to allow them intimate time alone with their female visitors.
Death row and confessions
Shortly after the conclusion of the Leach trial and the beginning of the long appeals process that followed, Bundy initiated a series of interviews with Stephen Michaud and Hugh Aynesworth.
Speaking mostly in third person to avoid "the stigma of confession", he began for the first time to divulge details of his crimes and thought processes.
He recounted his career as a thief, confirming Kloepfer's long-time suspicion that he had shoplifted virtually everything of substance that he owned.
"The big payoff for me," he said, "was actually possessing whatever it was I had stolen.
I really enjoyed having something ... that I had wanted and gone out and taken."
Possession proved to be an important motive for rape and murder as well.
Sexual assault, he said, fulfilled his need to "totally possess" his victims.
At first, he killed his victims "as a matter of expediency ... to eliminate the possibility of being caught"; but later, murder became part of the "adventure".
"The ultimate possession was, in fact, the taking of the life", he said.
"And then ... the physical possession of the remains."
Bundy also confided in Special Agent William Hagmaier of the FBI Behavioral Analysis Unit.
Hagmaier was struck by the "deep, almost mystical satisfaction" that Bundy took in murder.
"He said that after a while, murder is not just a crime of lust or violence", Hagmaier related.
"It becomes possession.
They are part of you ...
the victim becomes a part of you, and you two are forever one ... and the grounds where you kill them or leave them become sacred to you, and you will always be drawn back to them."
Bundy told Hagmaier that he considered himself to be an "amateur", an "impulsive" killer in his early years, before moving into what he termed his "prime" or "predator" phase at about the time of Lynda Healy's murder in 1974.
This implied that he began killing well before 1974-although he never explicitly admitted to having done so.
In July 1984, Raiford guards found two hacksaw blades that Bundy had hidden in his cell.
A steel bar in one of the cell's windows had been sawed completely through at the top and bottom and glued back into place with a homemade soap-based adhesive.
In early 1986, an execution date (March 4) was set on the Chi Omega convictions; the Supreme Court issued a brief stay, but the execution was quickly rescheduled.
In April, shortly after the new date (July 2) was announced, Bundy finally confessed to Hagmaier and Nelson what they believed was the full range of his depredations, including details of what he did to some of his victims after their deaths.
He told them that he revisited Taylor Mountain, Issaquah, and other secondary crime scenes, often several times, to lie with his victims and perform sexual acts with their decomposing bodies until putrefaction forced him to stop.
In some cases, he drove for several hours each way and remained the entire night.
In Utah, he applied makeup to Melissa Smith's lifeless face, and he repeatedly washed Laura Aime's hair.
"If you've got time," he told Hagmaier, "they can be anything you want them to be."
He decapitated approximately 12 of his victims with a hacksaw, A new date (November 18, 1986) was then set to carry out the Leach sentence; the Eleventh Circuit Court issued a stay on November 17.), such as outward charm and charisma with little true personality or genuine insight beneath the facade; and an absence of guilt or remorse.
On the afternoon before he was executed, Bundy granted an interview to James Dobson, a psychologist and founder of the Christian evangelical organization Focus on the Family.
and other observers and Bundy occasionally made cryptic comments to encourage that speculation.
He told Hugh Aynesworth in 1980 that for every murder "publicized", there "could be one that was not."
When FBI agents proposed a total tally of 36, Bundy responded, "Add one digit to that, and you'll have it."
Years later he told attorney Polly Nelson that the common estimate of 35 was accurate, but Robert Keppel wrote that "Ted and I both knew the total was much higher."
"I don't think even he knew ...
how many he killed, or why he killed them", said Rev. Fred Lawrence, the Methodist clergyman who administered Bundy's last rites.
"That was my impression, my strong impression."
On the evening before his execution, Bundy reviewed his victim tally with Bill Hagmaier on a state-by-state basis for a total of 30 homicides:
* in Washington, 11 (including Parks, abducted in Oregon but killed in Washington; and including 3 unidentified)
The following is a chronological summary of the 20 identified victims and five identified survivors:
Washington, Oregon
* January 4: Karen Sparks (often identified as Joni Lenz in Bundy literature) (age 18): Bludgeoned and sexually assaulted in her bed as she slept; survived
* February 1: Lynda Ann Healy (21): Bludgeoned while asleep and abducted; skull and mandible recovered at Taylor Mountain site
* March 12: Donna Gail Manson (19): Abducted while walking to a concert at The Evergreen State College; body left (according to Bundy) at Taylor Mountain site, but never found
* April 17: Susan Elaine Rancourt (18): Disappeared after attending an evening advisors' meeting at Central Washington State College; skull and mandible recovered at Taylor Mountain site in 1975
* May 6: Roberta Kathleen Parks (22): Vanished from Oregon State University in Corvallis; skull and mandible recovered at Taylor Mountain site in 1975
* June 1: Brenda Carol Ball (22): Disappeared after leaving the Flame Tavern in Burien; skull and mandible recovered at Taylor Mountain site in 1975
* June 11: Georgann (often misspelled "Georgeann") Hawkins (18): Abducted from an alley behind her sorority house, UW; skeletal remains identified by Bundy as those of Hawkins recovered at Issaquah site
* July 14:
Janice Ann Ott (23): Abducted from Lake Sammamish State Park in broad daylight; skeletal remains recovered at Issaquah site in 1975
* July 14: Denise Marie Naslund (19): Abducted four hours after Ott from the same park; skeletal remains recovered at Issaquah site in 1975
Utah, Colorado, Idaho
* October 2: Nancy Wilcox (16): Ambushed, assaulted, and strangled in Holladay, Utah; body buried (according to Bundy) near Capitol Reef National Park, south of Salt Lake City, but never found The Burr house was on Bundy's newspaper delivery route.
The victim's father was certain that he saw Bundy in a ditch at a construction site on the nearby UPS campus the morning his daughter disappeared.
Other circumstantial evidence implicates him as well, but detectives familiar with the case have never agreed on the likelihood of his involvement.
Bundy repeatedly denied culpability and wrote a letter of denial to the Burr family in 1986; but Keppel has observed that Burr fits all three of Bundy's "no discussion" categories of "too close to home", "too close to family", and "very young".
Forensic testing of material evidence from the Burr crime scene, in 2011, yielded insufficient intact DNA sequences for comparison with Bundy's.
Whitman County authorities have said that Bundy remains a suspect.
Artifacts
* Bundy's 1968 Volkswagen Beetle was displayed in the lobby of the National Museum of Crime and Punishment in Washington, D.C. until its closure in 2015.
It is presently on exhibit at the Alcatraz East Crime Museum in Pigeon Forge, Tennessee.
A ski mask, rope, flashlight, handcuffs, gloves, and a nylon mask were all found inside Bundy's 1968 Volkswagen Beetle's glove compartment.
* Polaroid photographs of Bundy's victims have been found throughout the years.
In media
Films
*The Deliberate Stranger (1986), played by Mark Harmon
*The Stranger Beside Me (2003), played by Billy Campbell
*The Capture of the Green River Killer (2008), played by James Marsters
*Extremely Wicked, Shockingly Evil and Vile (2019), played by Zac Efron
Books
* Rule, Ann (1980).
The Stranger Beside Me.
W.W. Norton and Company Inc.
* Sullivan, Kevin M (2009).
The Bundy Murders: A Comprehensive History.
McFarland and Company Inc.
* Michaud, Stephen G., and Hugh Aynesworth (2000).
Ted Bundy: Conversations with a Killer.
Authorlink Press.
* Nelson, Polly (2019).
Defending the Devil: My Story as Ted Bundy's Last Lawyer.
Echo Point Books & Media.
* Carlisle, Al (2017).
Violent Mind: The 1976 Psychological Assessment of Ted Bundy.
Genius Book Publishing.
*Michaud, Stephen G., and Hugh Aynesworth (2012).
The Only Living Witness: The True Story of Serial Sex Killer Ted Bundy. Authorlink.
Television
*Conversations with a Killer: The Ted Bundy Tapes (2019)
Further reading
* Updated after the arrest and confession of the Green River killer, Gary Ridgway.
* Transcripts of the authors' Death Row interviews with Bundy
