Belgrade ( ; , ; names in other languages) is the capital and largest city of Serbia.
It is located at the confluence of the Sava and Danube rivers and the crossroads of the Pannonian Plain and the Balkan Peninsula.
The urban area of Belgrade has a population of 1.23 million, while nearly 1.7 million people live within the administrative limits of the City of Belgrade (which encompasses almost all of its metropolitan area), a quarter of total population of Serbia.
One of the most important prehistoric cultures of Europe, the Vinča culture, evolved within the Belgrade area in the 6th millennium BC.
In antiquity, Thraco-Dacians inhabited the region and, after 279 BC, Celts settled the city, naming it Singidūn.
It was conquered by the Romans under the reign of Augustus and awarded Roman city rights in the mid-2nd century.
It frequently passed from Ottoman to Habsburg rule, which saw the destruction of most of the city during the Austro-Ottoman wars.
Belgrade was again named the capital of Serbia in 1841.
Northern Belgrade remained the southernmost Habsburg post until 1918, when it was attached to the city, due to former Austro-Hungarian territories becoming the part of the new Kingdom of Serbs, Croats and Slovenes after World War I.
In a fatally strategic position, the city was battled over in 115 wars and razed 44 times.
Belgrade was the capital of Yugoslavia from its creation in 1918 to its dissolution in 2006.
Being Serbia's primate city, Belgrade has special administrative status within Serbia.
It is the seat of the central government, administrative bodies, and government ministries, as well as home of almost all of the largest Serbian companies, media, and scientific institutions.
Belgrade is classified as a Beta-Global City.
History
Prehistory
Chipped stone tools found in Zemun show that the area around Belgrade was inhabited by nomadic foragers in the Palaeolithic and Mesolithic eras.
Some of these tools are of Mousterian industry-belonging to Neanderthals rather than modern humans.
Aurignacian and Gravettian tools have also been discovered near the area, indicating some settlement between 50,000 and 20,000 years ago.
The first farming people to settle in the region are associated with the Neolithic Starčevo culture, which flourished between 6200 and 5200 BC.
There are several Starčevo sites in and around Belgrade, including the eponymous site of Starčevo.
The Starčevo culture was succeeded by the Vinča culture (5500-4500 BC), a more sophisticated farming culture that grew out of the earlier Starčevo settlements and also named for a site in the Belgrade region (Vinča-Belo Brdo).
The Vinča culture is known for its very large settlements, one of the earliest settlements by continuous habitation and some of the largest in prehistoric Europe.
Also associated with the Vinča culture are anthropomorphic figurines such as the Lady of Vinča, the earliest known copper metallurgy in Europe, and a proto-writing form developed prior to the Sumerians and Minoans known as the Old European script, which dates back to around 5300 BC.
Within the city proper, on Cetinjska Street, a skull of a Paleolithic human was discovered in 1890.
The skull is dated to before 5000 BC.
Antiquity
Evidence of early knowledge about Belgrade's geographical location comes from a variety of ancient myths and legends.
The ridge overlooking the confluence of the Sava and Danube rivers, for example, has been identified as one of the places in the story of Jason and the Argonauts.
In the time of antiquity, too, the area was populated by Paleo-Balkan tribes, including the Thracians and the Dacians, who ruled much of Belgrade's surroundings.
Specifically, Belgrade was at one point inhabited by the Thraco-Dacian tribe Singi; While the first Christian Emperor of Rome -Constantine I, also known as Constantine the Great-was born in the territory of Naissus to the city's south, Roman Christianity's champion, Flavius Iovianus (Jovian), was born in Singidunum.
Jovian reestablished Christianity as the official religion of the Roman Empire, ending the brief revival of traditional Roman religions under his predecessor Julian the Apostate.
In 395 AD, the site passed to the Eastern Roman or Byzantine Empire.
Across the Sava from Singidunum was the Celtic city of Taurunum (Zemun); the two were connected with a bridge throughout Roman and Byzantine times.
Middle Ages
QTEMPLATE box
Tribal state of the Scordisci 279BC-33BC
Roman Republic 33BC-27BC
27BC-471AD
Ostrogothic Kingdom 471-539
Byzantine Empire 539-829
Bulgarian Empire 829-1018
Byzantine Empire 1018-1185
Bulgarian Empire 1185-1246
Kingdom of Hungary 1246-1284
Kingdom of Serbia (Syrmia) 1284-1402
Serbian Despotate 1402-1427
Kingdom of Hungary 1427-1521
Habsburg Monarchy 1688-1690
Habsburg Monarchy 1717-1739
Habsburg Monarchy 1789-1791
Revolutionary Serbia 1806-1813
German-occupied Serbia 1941-1944
2006-Present
In 442, the area was ravaged by Attila the Hun.
In 471, it was taken by Theodoric the Great, king of the Ostrogoths, who continued into Italy.
As the Ostrogoths left, another Germanic tribe, the Gepids, invaded the city.
In 539 it was retaken by the Byzantines.
In 577, some 100,000 Slavs poured into Thrace and Illyricum, pillaging cities and more permanently settling the region.
The Avars, under Bayan I, conquered the whole region and its new Slavic population by 582.
Following Byzantine reconquest, the Byzantine chronicle De Administrando Imperio mentions the White Serbs, who had stopped in Belgrade on their way back home, asking the strategos for lands; they received provinces in the west, towards the Adriatic, which they would rule as subjects to Heraclius (610-641).
In 829, Khan Omurtag was able to add Singidunum and its environs to the First Bulgarian Empire.
The first record of the name Belograd appeared on April, 16th, 878, in a Papal missive to Bulgarian ruler Boris I.
This name would appear in several variants:
Alba Bulgarica in Latin, Griechisch Weissenburg in High German, Nándorfehérvár in Hungarian, and Castelbianco in Venetian, among other names, all variations of 'white fortress'.
For about four centuries, the city would become a battleground between the Byzantine Empire, the medieval Kingdom of Hungary, and the Bulgarian Empire.
Basil II (976-1025) installed a garrison in Belgrade.
The city hosted the armies of the First and the Second Crusade, but, while passing through during the Third Crusade, Frederick Barbarossa and his 190,000 crusaders saw Belgrade in ruins.
King Stefan Dragutin (r. 1276-1282) received Belgrade from his father-in-law, Stephen V of Hungary, in 1284, and it served as the capital of the Kingdom of Syrmia, a vassal state to the Kingdom of Hungary.
Dragutin (Hungarian: Dragutin István) is regarded as the first Serbian king to rule over Belgrade.
Following the battles of Maritsa (1371) and Kosovo field (1389), Moravian Serbia, to Belgrade's south, began to fall to the Ottoman Empire.
The northern sections of what is now Serbia persisted as the Serbian Despotate, with Belgrade as its capital.
The city flourished under Stefan Lazarević, the son of Serbian prince Lazar Hrebeljanović.
Lazarević built a castle with a citadel and towers, of which only the Despot's tower and the west wall remain.
He also refortified the city's ancient walls, allowing the Despotate to resist Ottoman conquest for almost 70 years.
During this time, Belgrade was a haven for many Balkan peoples fleeing Ottoman rule, and is thought to have had a population ranging between 40,000 and 50,000 people.
As the city presented an obstacle to the Ottoman advance into Hungary and further, over 100,000 Ottoman soldiers besieged it in 1456, in which the Christian army led by the Hungarian General John Hunyadi successfully defended it.
The noon bell ordered by Pope Callixtus III commemorates the victory throughout the Christian world to this day.
Ottoman rule and Austrian invasions
Seven decades after the initial siege, on 28 August 1521, the fort was finally captured by Suleiman the Magnificent, 250,000 Turkish soldiers, and over 100 ships.
Subsequently, most of the city was razed to the ground and its entire Orthodox Christian population was deported to Istanbul Belgrade was made the seat of the Pashalik of Belgrade (also known as the Sanjak of Smederevo), and quickly became the second largest Ottoman town in Europe at over 100,000 people, surpassed only by Constantinople.
In 1594, a major Serb rebellion was crushed by the Ottomans.
Later, Grand Vizier Sinan Pasha ordered the relics of Saint Sava to be publicly torched on the Vračar plateau; in the 20th century, the Temple of Saint Sava was built to commemorate this event.
Occupied by the Habsburgs three times (1688-1690, 1717-1739, 1789-1791), headed by the Holy Roman Princes Maximilian of Bavaria and Eugene of Savoy, and field marshal Baron Ernst Gideon von Laudon, respectively, Belgrade was quickly recaptured by the Ottomans and substantially razed each time.
Principality of Serbia
At the beginning of the 19th century, Belgrade was predominantly inhabited by a Muslim population.
Traces of Ottoman rule and architecture-such as mosques and bazaars, were to remain a prominent part of Belgrade's townscape into the 19th century; several decades, even, after Serbia was granted autonomy from the Ottoman Empire.
During the First Serbian Uprising, Serbian revolutionaries held the city from 8 January 1807 until 1813, when it was retaken by the Ottomans.
After the Second Serbian Uprising in 1815, Serbia achieved some sort of sovereignty, which was formally recognised by the Porte in 1830.
The development of Belgrade architecture after 1815 can be divided into four periods.
In the first phase, which lasted from 1815 to 1835, the dominant architectural style was still of a Balkan character, with substantial Ottoman influence.
At the same time, an interest in joining the European mainstream allowed Central and Western European architecture to flourish.
Between 1835 and 1850, the amount of neoclassicist and baroque buildings south of the Austrian border rose considerably, exemplified by St Michael's Cathedral (Serbian: Saborna crkva), completed in 1840.
Between 1850 and 1875, new architecture was characterised by a turn towards the newly-popular Romanticism, along with older European architectural styles.
Typical of Central European cities in the last quarter of the 19th century, the fourth phase was characterised by an eclecticist style based on the Renaissance and Baroque periods.
In 1841, Prince Mihailo Obrenović moved the capital of the Principality of Serbia from Kragujevac to Belgrade.
During his first reign (1815-1839), Prince Miloš Obrenović pursued expansion of the city's population through the addition of new settlements, aiming and succeeding to make Belgrade the centre of the Principality's administrative, military and cultural institutions.
His project of creating a new market space (the Abadžijska čaršija), however, was less successful; trade continued to be conducted in the centuries-old Donja čaršija and Gornja čaršija.
Still, new construction projects were typical for the Christian quarters as the older Muslim quarters declined; from Serbia's autonomy until 1863, the number of Belgrade quarters even decreased, mainly as a consequence of the gradual disappearance of the city's Muslim population.
An Ottoman city map from 1863 counts only 9 Muslim quarters (mahalas).
The names of only five such neighbourhoods are known today: Ali-pašina, Reis-efendijina, Jahja-pašina, Bajram-begova and Laz Hadži-Mahmudova.
On 18 April 1867, the Ottoman government ordered the Ottoman garrison, which had been since 1826 the last representation of Ottoman suzerainty in Serbia, withdrawn from Kalemegdan.
The forlorn Porte's only stipulation was that the Ottoman flag continue to fly over the fortress alongside the Serbian one.
Serbia's de facto independence dates from this event.
In the following years, urban planner Emilijan Josimović had a significant impact on Belgrade.
He conceptualised a regulation plan for the city in 1867, in which he proposed the replacement of the town's crooked streets with a grid plan.
Of great importance also was the construction of independent Serbian political and cultural institutions, as well as the city's now-plentiful parks.
Pointing to Josimović's work, Serbian scholars have noted an important break with Ottoman traditions.
However, Istanbul-the capital city of the state to which Belgrade and Serbia de jure still belonged-underwent similar changes.
In May 1868, knez Mihailo was assassinated with his cousin Anka Konstantinović while riding in a carriage in his country residence.
Kingdom of Serbia
With the Principality's full independence in 1878 and its transformation into the Kingdom of Serbia in 1882, Belgrade once again became a key city in the Balkans, and developed rapidly.
Nevertheless, conditions in Serbia remained those of an overwhelmingly agrarian country, even with the opening of a railway to Niš, Serbia's second city.
In 1900, the capital had only 70,000 inhabitants (at the time Serbia numbered 2.5 million).
Still, by 1905, the population had grown to more than 80,000 and, by the outbreak of World War I in 1914, it had surpassed the 100,000 citizens, disregarding Zemun, which still belonged to Austria-Hungary.
The first-ever projection of motion pictures in the Balkans and Central Europe was held in Belgrade in June 1896 by André Carr, a representative of the Lumière brothers.
He shot the first motion pictures of Belgrade in the next year; however, they have not been preserved.
World War
The First World War began on 28 July 1914 when Austria-Hungary declared war on Serbia.
Most of the subsequent Balkan offensives occurred near Belgrade.
Austro-Hungarian monitors shelled Belgrade on 29 July 1914, and it was taken by the Austro-Hungarian Army under General Oskar Potiorek on 30 November.
On 15 December, it was re-taken by Serbian troops under Marshal Radomir Putnik.
After a prolonged battle which destroyed much of the city, starting on 6 October 1915, Belgrade fell to German and Austro-Hungarian troops commanded by Field Marshal August von Mackensen on 9 October of the same year.
The city was liberated by Serbian and French troops on 1 November 1918, under the command of Marshal Louis Franchet d'Espèrey of France and Crown Prince Alexander of Serbia.
Belgrade, decimated as a front-line city, lost the title of largest city in the Kingdom to Subotica for some time.
Kingdom of Yugoslavia
After the war, Belgrade became the capital of the new Kingdom of Serbs, Croats and Slovenes, renamed the Kingdom of Yugoslavia in 1929.
The Kingdom was split into banovinas and Belgrade, together with Zemun and Pančevo, formed a separate administrative unit.
During this period, the city experienced fast growth and significant modernisation.
Belgrade's population grew to 239,000 by 1931 (with the inclusion of Zemun), and to 320,000 by 1940.
The population growth rate between 1921 and 1948 averaged 4.08% a year.
In 1927, Belgrade's first airport opened, and in 1929, its first radio station began broadcasting.
The Pančevo Bridge, which crosses the Danube, was opened in 1935, while King Alexander Bridge over the Sava was opened in 1934.
On 3 September 1939 the first Belgrade Grand Prix, the last Grand Prix motor racing race before the outbreak of World War II, was held around the Belgrade Fortress and was followed by 80,000 spectators.
The winner was Tazio Nuvolari.
World War II
On 25 March 1941, the government of regent Crown Prince Paul signed the Tripartite Pact, joining the Axis powers in an effort to stay out of the Second World War and keep Yugoslavia neutral during the conflict.
This was immediately followed by mass protests in Belgrade and a military coup d'état led by Air Force commander General Dušan Simović, who proclaimed King Peter II to be of age to rule the realm.
As a result, the city was heavily bombed by the Luftwaffe on 6 April 1941, killing up to 2,274 people.
Yugoslavia was then invaded by German, Italian, Hungarian, and Bulgarian forces.
Belgrade was captured by subterfuge, with six German soldiers led by their officer Fritz Klingenberg feigning threatening size, forcing the city to capitulate.
Belgrade was more directly occupied by the German Army in the same month and became the seat of the puppet Nedić regime, headed by its namesake general.
During the summer and fall of 1941, in reprisal for guerrilla attacks, the Germans carried out several massacres of Belgrade citizens; in particular, members of the Jewish community were subject to mass shootings at the order of General Franz Böhme, the German Military Governor of Serbia.
Böhme rigorously enforced the rule that for every German killed, 100 Serbs or Jews would be shot.
The resistance movement in Belgrade was led by Major Žarko Todorović from 1941 until his arrest in 1943.
Just like Rotterdam, which was devastated twice by both German and Allied bombing, Belgrade was bombed once more during World War II, this time by the Allies on 16 April 1944, killing at least 1,100 people.
This bombing fell on the Orthodox Christian Easter.
Most of the city remained under German occupation until 20 October 1944, when it was liberated by the Red Army and the Communist Yugoslav Partisans.
On 29 November 1945, Marshal Josip Broz Tito proclaimed the Federal People's Republic of Yugoslavia in Belgrade (later to be renamed to Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia on 7 April 1963).
Higher estimates from the former secret police place the victim count of political persecutions in Belgrade at 10,000.
Socialist Yugoslavia
When the war ended, the city was left with 11,500 demolished housing units.
During the post-war period, Belgrade grew rapidly as the capital of the renewed Yugoslavia, developing as a major industrial centre.
Breakup of Yugoslavia
On 9 March 1991, massive demonstrations led by Vuk Drašković were held in the city against Slobodan Milošević.
According to various media outlets, there were between 100,000 and 150,000 people on the streets.
Two people were killed, 203 injured and 108 arrested during the protests, and later that day tanks were deployed onto the streets to restore order.
Further protests were held in Belgrade from November 1996 to February 1997 against the same government after alleged electoral fraud in local elections.
These protests brought Zoran Đinđić to power, the first mayor of Belgrade since World War II who did not belong to the League of Communists of Yugoslavia or its later offshoot, the Socialist Party of Serbia.
In 1999, during the Kosovo War, NATO bombings caused damage to the city.
Among the sites bombed were various ministry buildings, the RTS building, hospitals, Hotel Jugoslavija, the Central Committee building, Avala Tower, and the Chinese embassy.
After the 2000 presidential elections, Belgrade was the site of major public protests, with over half a million people on the streets.
These demonstrations resulted in the ousting of president Milošević as a part of the Otpor! movement.
Modern Belgrade
In 2014, Belgrade Waterfront, an urban renewal project, was initiated by the Government of Serbia and its Emirati partner, Eagle Hillls Properties.
Aimed at improving Belgrade's cityscape and economy, the project hopes to revitalise the Sava amphitheatre, a neglected expanse on the right bank of the Sava river between the Belgrade Fair and the former Belgrade Main railway station.
Around €3.5 billion will be jointly invested by the Serbian government and their Emirati partners.
The project includes office and luxury apartment buildings, five-star hotels, a shopping mall and the envisioned 'Belgrade Tower'.
The project is, however, quite controversial-there are a number of uncertainties regarding its funding, necessity, and its architecture's arguable lack of harmony with the rest of the city.
Apart from Belgrade Waterfront, the city is currently under rapid development and reconstruction, especially in the area of Novi Beograd, where many apartment and office buildings are under construction to support the burgeoning IT sector, now one of Serbia's largest economic players.
Geography
Topography
Belgrade lies above sea level and is located at the confluence of the Danube and Sava rivers.
The historical core of Belgrade, Kalemegdan, lies on the right banks of both rivers.
Since the 19th century, the city has been expanding to the south and east; after World War II, New Belgrade was built on the left bank of the Sava river, connecting Belgrade with Zemun.
Smaller, chiefly residential communities across the Danube, like Krnjača, Kotež and Borča, also merged with the city, while Pančevo, a heavily industrialised satellite city, remains a separate town.
The city has an urban area of , while together with its metropolitan area it covers .
On the right bank of the Sava, central Belgrade has a hilly terrain, while the highest point of Belgrade proper is Torlak hill at .
The mountains of Avala () and Kosmaj () lie south of the city.
Across the Sava and Danube, the land is mostly flat, consisting of alluvial plains and loessial plateaus.
plm809sdqxlwe11e6sbne8sdia2x75m
