Willy Wonka is a fictional character who appears in Roald Dahl's 1964 children's novel Charlie and the Chocolate Factory and its sequel Charlie and the Great Glass Elevator.
The eccentric owner of the Wonka Chocolate Factory, he has been portrayed by Gene Wilder and Johnny Depp in film.
Appearances
Charlie and the Chocolate Factory
In Charlie and the Chocolate Factory, Wonka has hidden five Golden Tickets inside his chocolate bars.
The finders are rewarded with a tour of his factory (with an adult of their choice) and a lifetime supply of chocolate.
The children are unaware, though, that the tour is also a competition to test their moral character.
As the tour proceeds, four of the children are eliminated, leaving Charlie Bucket the winner.
At this point Wonka reveals that the real prize is the factory, as Wonka needs someone to take it over and look after the Oompa-Loompas who work there.
Charlie and the Great Glass Elevator
Wonka goes aboard the Great Glass Elevator with Charlie and his family and links up with the Space Hotel USA.
The Space Hotel tracks the Elevator down back to Wonka's factory.
Wonka then goes with Charlie and his family to the White House in the United States.
Adaptations
Willy Wonka & the Chocolate Factory
Willy Wonka (portrayed by Gene Wilder) has hidden five Golden Tickets amongst his famous Wonka Bars.
The finders of these special tickets will be given a full tour of his tightly guarded candy factory, as well as a lifetime supply of chocolate.
During the tour, Wonka tempts each of the bad children to disobey his orders with something related to their individual character flaws.
One by one, each child disappears from the tour, until eventually Charlie Bucket is the only remaining child.
However, Charlie and Grandpa Joe have also succumbed to temptation by this time and sampled Fizzy Lifting Drinks, Mr. Wonka's experimental line of beverages that gives the drinker the power to float temporarily.
The drinks, still too strong, brought Charlie and Grandpa Joe close to death.
Wonka informs Charlie that the tour is over, abruptly dismisses him and Grandpa Joe, and disappears into his office without mentioning the promised grand prize of a lifetime supply of chocolate.
They both go into Wonka's office to confront him.
Grandpa Joe asks about the prize, but Wonka tells him that Charlie will not receive it because he broke the rules, angrily referring to the forfeiture clause of the contract that the ticket holders signed at the start of the tour.
Charlie's drinking of the Fizzy Lifting Drinks amounted to theft, so he violated the contract and gets nothing.
Wonka then dismisses them with a furious, "Good day, sir!"
Grandpa Joe angrily berates him for destroying his grandson's hopes, but Wonka is unmoved and angrily dismisses him again.
Grandpa Joe vows to get revenge on Wonka by selling the Everlasting Gobstopper to Slugworth (Wonka's main rival), but Charlie decides to return the Gobstopper to Wonka's desk.
Wonka joyfully tells him that he has passed his test, reinstates his grand prize, apologizes for putting Charlie through the ordeal, and reveals that Slugworth, who had been spying on the kids, was actually his own employee in disguise.
The trio enter the Great Glass Elevator, which goes high into the sky as Wonka reveals that the grand prize is really the entire factory and business, which Charlie will get when Wonka retires, and in the meantime Charlie and his whole family will move into the factory.
Wonka reminds Charlie not to forget what happened to the man who got everything that he ever wanted: "He lived happily ever after."
Charlie and the Chocolate Factory
Willy Wonka (portrayed by Johnny Depp, Blair Dunlop as young Willy Wonka), the owner of a famous chocolate factory, has long closed access to his factory due to problems concerning industrial espionage that ultimately led him to fire all his employees, among them Charlie's Grandpa Joe.
One day, Wonka informs the world of a contest, in which five Golden Tickets have been placed in five random Wonka Bars worldwide, and the winners will be given a full tour of the factory as well as a lifetime supply of chocolate, while one ticket holder will be given a special prize at the end of the tour.
After all five of the tickets are found, Wonka greets Charlie and the other ticket holders outside the factory and leads the group into the facility.
During the tour, Wonka tempts each of the bad children to disobey his orders with something related to their individual character flaws.
Wonka then invites Charlie to come live and work in the factory with him, and reveals that the purpose of the Golden Tickets and the tour was to make the "least rotten" child the heir of the factory itself, so he can have someone carry on his legacy when he gets too old.
The only condition, however, is that Charlie must leave his family behind, because Wonka believes that family is a hindrance to a chocolatier's creative freedom, a philosophy he developed due to his dentist father, Dr. Wilbur Wonka, denying his son any candy because of the potential risk to his teeth and forcing him to wear a large and hideously clunky set of braces.
After secretly sampling some candy, Wonka was instantly hooked and ran away to follow his dreams.
After Charlie refuses his offer, Wonka falls into a state of emotional depression and returns to Charlie to seek advice.
Wonka soon reunites with his estranged father and allows Charlie's family to live in the factory forever.
2013 musical adaptation
In 2013, an adaptation of the novel was produced in Theatre Royal Drury Lane starting on 25 June 2013.
Willy Wonka in this production was originated by Douglas Hodge.
Tom and Jerry adaptation
Concept and creation
2005 film adaptation
Early on in the production of the 2005 film, Nicolas Cage was under discussions for portraying Willy Wonka, but lost interest.
Warner Bros. president Alan F. Horn wanted Tom Shadyac to direct Jim Carrey as Willy Wonka, believing the duo could make Charlie and the Chocolate Factory relevant to mainstream audiences, but Roald Dahl's widow Liccy Dahl opposed this.
After Tim Burton was hired as director in May 2003, Burton immediately thought of Johnny Depp for the role of Willy Wonka, who joined the following August for his fourth collaboration with the director.
Burton and screenwriter John August worked together in creating Wilbur Wonka, Willy's domineering dentist father.
"You want a little bit of the flavor of why Wonka is the way he is," Burton reasoned.
"Otherwise, what is he?
He's just a weird guy."
Warner Bros. and Burton held differences over the characterization of Willy Wonka.
The studio wanted to make Willy Wonka the idyllic father figure Charlie Bucket had longed for his entire life.
Burton believed that Wonka would not be a good father, finding the character similar to a recluse.
"In some ways," Burton protested, "he's more screwed up than the kids."
Johnny Depp was the only actor that Burton had considered for the role.
"Regardless of what one thinks of that film," Depp explained, "Gene Wilder's persona, his character, stands out."
Comparisons were drawn between Willy Wonka and Michael Jackson, due to Wonka's more childish demeanour.
Burton joked, "Here's the deal.
There's a big difference: Michael Jackson likes children, Willy Wonka can't stand them.
To me that's a huge difference in the whole persona thing."
Burton agreed with the Hughes similarities, and additionally supplied Charles Foster Kane in Citizen Kane as inspiration.
"Somebody who was brilliant but then was traumatized and then retreats into their own world."
Critic Jeffrey M. Anderson, of Combustible Celluloid, wrote, "When the movie does actually reach the factory, and Gene Wilder takes the stage, the movie is saved.
Wilder was in the middle of an incredible run of subtle comic performances ... and he was at the height of his powers here."
Wilder himself considered the role to be one of his signature roles, with his next of kin noting that he purposely kept his diagnosis of Alzheimer's disease private because so many young children would recognize him on the street as Wonka and he wanted those encounters to be joyful experiences.
Regarding Wilder's effect, Anderson wrote "If you're a kid, Wonka seems magical, but watching it now, he has a frightening combination of warmth, psychosis, and sadism."
while critic Widgett Walls simply called it "Probably Gene Wilder's finest, most manic hour."
Wilder received a nomination for the Golden Globe Award for Best Actor in a Musical or Comedy for his role as Willy Wonka, but lost to Chaim Topol as Tevye in Fiddler on the Roof.
Critical response to Johnny Depp's performance as Willy Wonka was more mixed, however.
Critic Andrew Sarris, of the New York Observer, who did not enjoy the film's style in general, wrote "I wonder if even children will respond to the peculiarly humorless and charmless stylistic eccentricities of Mr. Burton and his star, Johnny Depp."
However, Owen Gleiberman of Entertainment Weekly wrote that "Johnny Depp as Willy Wonka may be a stone freak, but he is also one of Burton's classic crackpot conjurers, like Beetlejuice or Ed Wood."
Mick LaSalle from the San Francisco Chronicle found that "all the laughs in the film come from Depp, who gives Willy the mannerisms of a classic Hollywood diva".
Roger Ebert wrote "Depp, an actor of considerable gifts, has never been afraid to take a chance, but this time he takes the wrong one.
His Willy Wonka is an enigma in an otherwise mostly delightful movie from Tim Burton," while Peter Travers wrote in Rolling Stone magazine that "Depp's deliciously demented take on Willy Wonka demands to be seen.
Depp goes deeper to find the bruises on Wonka's secret heart than what Gene Wilder did."
Ann Hornaday of The Washington Post also criticized Depp's acting; "The cumulative effect isn't pretty.
Nor is it kooky, funny, eccentric or even mildly interesting.
Indeed, throughout his fey, simpering performance, Depp seems to be straining so hard for weirdness that the entire enterprise begins to feel like those excruciating occasions when your parents tried to be hip."
Joe Lozito of Big Picture Big Sound questioned the intention as well, writing "Depp's Wonka exudes none of the gravity required for the role.
It's as though he didn't take the role seriously.
Rather than an intimidating candyman teaching brats a lesson, this Wonka is simply a freak."
Depp received a nomination for the Golden Globe Award for Best Actor in a Musical or Comedy for his role as Willy Wonka, but lost to Joaquin Phoenix as Johnny Cash in Walk the Line.
Merchandising
Wonka served as the mascot of The Willy Wonka Candy Company, a real-life brand of confectioneries marketed by Nestlé Candy Shop.
Real-life versions of the Everlasting Gobstopper and the Wonka Bar were produced, along with a line of other candies not directly related to the book or the film.
The company had originated as a tie-in with the 1971 film, originally by Quaker Oats before a series of sales led to the company being acquired by Nestlé in 1988.
The Wonka brand was discontinued in 2015; its products continue to be produced under the Nestlé brand.
