Neuschwanstein Castle (, , Southern Bavarian: Schloss Neischwanstoa) is a 19th-century Romanesque Revival palace on a rugged hill above the village of Hohenschwangau near Füssen in southwest Bavaria, Germany.
The palace was commissioned by Ludwig II of Bavaria as a retreat and in honour of Richard Wagner.
Ludwig paid for the palace out of his personal fortune and by means of extensive borrowing, rather than Bavarian public funds.
The castle was intended as a home for the king, until he died in 1886.
It was open to the public shortly after his death.
Since then more than 61 million people have visited Neuschwanstein Castle.
More than 1.3 million people visit annually, with as many as 6,000 per day in the summer.
Location
The municipality of Schwangau lies at an elevation of at the southwest border of the German state of Bavaria.
Its surroundings are characterised by the transition between the Alpine foothills in the south (toward the nearby Austrian border) and a hilly landscape in the north that appears flat by comparison.
In the Middle Ages, three castles overlooked the villages.
One was called Schwanstein Castle.
In 1832, Ludwig's father King Maximilian II of Bavaria bought its ruins to replace them with the comfortable neo-Gothic palace known as Hohenschwangau Castle.
Finished in 1837, the palace became his family's summer residence, and his elder son Ludwig (born 1845) spent a large part of his childhood here.
Vorderhohenschwangau Castle and Hinterhohenschwangau Castle sat on a rugged hill overlooking Schwanstein Castle, two nearby lakes (Alpsee and Schwansee), and the village.
Separated by only a moat, they jointly consisted of a hall, a keep, and a fortified tower house.
In the nineteenth century only ruins remained of the twin medieval castles, but those of Hinterhohenschwangau served as a lookout place known as Sylphenturm.
The ruins above the family palace were known to the crown prince from his excursions.
He first sketched one of them in his diary in 1859.
When the young king came to power in 1864, the construction of a new palace in place of the two ruined castles became the first in his series of palace building projects.
The confusing result is that Hohenschwangau and Schwanstein have effectively swapped names: Hohenschwangau Castle replaced the ruins of Schwanstein Castle, and Neuschwanstein Castle replaced the ruins of the two Hohenschwangau Castles.
History
Inspiration and design
Neuschwanstein embodies both the contemporaneous architectural fashion known as castle romanticism (), and Ludwig II's immoderate enthusiasm for the operas of Richard Wagner.
In the 19th century, many castles were constructed or reconstructed, often with significant changes to make them more picturesque.
Palace-building projects similar to Neuschwanstein had been undertaken earlier in several of the German states and included Hohenschwangau Castle, Lichtenstein Castle, Hohenzollern Castle, and numerous buildings on the River Rhine such as Stolzenfels Castle.
The inspiration for the construction of Neuschwanstein came from two journeys in 1867 - one in May to the reconstructed Wartburg near Eisenach, another in July to the Château de Pierrefonds, which Eugène Viollet-le-Duc was transforming from a ruined castle into a historistic palace.
The king saw both buildings as representatives of a romantic interpretation of the Middle Ages, as well as the musical mythology of his friend Wagner, whose operas Tannhäuser and Lohengrin had made a lasting impression on him.
In February 1868, Ludwig's grandfather Ludwig I died, freeing the considerable sums that were previously spent on the abdicated king's appanage.
This allowed Ludwig II to start the architectural project of building a private refuge in the familiar landscape far from the capital Munich, so that he could live out his idea of the Middle Ages.
The building design was drafted by the stage designer Christian Jank and realised by the architect Eduard Riedel.
For technical reasons, the ruined castles could not be integrated into the plan.
Initial ideas for the palace drew stylistically on Nuremberg Castle and envisaged a simple building in place of the old Vorderhohenschwangau Castle, but they were rejected and replaced by increasingly extensive drafts, culminating in a bigger palace modelled on the Wartburg.
The king insisted on a detailed plan and on personal approval of each and every draft.
Ludwig's control went so far that the palace has been regarded as his own creation, rather than that of the architects involved.
The king's wishes and demands expanded during the construction of Neuschwanstein, and so did the expenses.
Drafts and estimated costs were revised repeatedly.
Initially a modest study was planned instead of the great throne hall, and projected guest rooms were struck from the drafts to make place for a Moorish Hall, which could not be realised due to lack of resources.
Completion was originally projected for 1872, but deferred repeatedly.
Linderhof, the smallest of the projects, was finished in 1886, and the other two remain incomplete.
All three projects together drained his resources.
The king paid for his construction projects by private means and from his civil list income.
Contrary to frequent claims, the Bavarian treasury was not directly burdened by his buildings.
From 1871, Ludwig had an additional secret income in return for a political favour given to Otto von Bismarck.
The construction costs of Neuschwanstein in the king's lifetime amounted to 6.2 million marks (equivalent to million €), almost twice the initial cost estimate of 3.2 million marks.
In 1876, a court counselor was replaced after pointing out the danger of insolvency.
By 1883 he already owed 7 million marks, and in spring 1884 and August 1885 debt conversions of 7.5 million marks and 6.5 million marks, respectively, became necessary.
In expectation of the commission, he alerted the gendarmerie and fire brigades of surrounding places for his protection.
Plans for a castle garden with terraces and a fountain west of the were also abandoned after the king's death.
The interior of the royal living space in the palace was mostly completed in 1886; the lobbies and corridors were painted in a simpler style by 1888.
The Moorish Hall desired by the king (and planned below the Throne Hall) was not realised any more than the so-called Knights' Bath, which, modelled after the Knights' Bath in the Wartburg, was intended to render homage to the knights' cult as a medieval baptism bath.
A Bride Chamber in the Bower (after a location in Lohengrin), guest rooms in the first and second floor of the and a great banquet hall were further abandoned projects.
From then until World War I, Neuschwanstein was a stable and lucrative source of revenue for the House of Wittelsbach, indeed Ludwig's castles were probably the single largest income source earned by the Bavarian royal family in the last years prior to 1914.
To guarantee a smooth course of visits, some rooms and the court buildings were finished first.
Initially the visitors were allowed to move freely in the palace, causing the furniture to wear quickly.
When Bavaria became a republic in 1918, the government socialised the civil list.
The resulting dispute with the House of Wittelsbach led to a split in 1923: Ludwig's palaces including Neuschwanstein fell to the state and are now managed by the Bavarian Palace Department, a division of the Bavarian finance ministry.
Nearby Hohenschwangau Castle fell to the Wittelsbacher Ausgleichsfonds, whose revenues go to the House of Wittelsbach.
The visitor numbers continued to rise, reaching 200,000 in 1939.
The castle was used to catalogue the works of arts.
In April 1945, the SS considered blowing up the palace to prevent the building itself and the artwork it contained from falling to the enemy.
The plan was not realised by the SS- who had been assigned the task, however, and at the end of the war the palace was surrendered undamaged to representatives of the Allied forces.
Architecture
The effect of the Neuschwanstein ensemble is highly stylistic, both externally and internally.
The king's influence is apparent throughout, and he took a keen personal interest in the design and decoration.
An example can be seen in his comments, or commands, regarding a mural depicting Lohengrin in the ; "His Majesty wishes that ...
the ship be placed further from the shore, that Lohengrin's neck be less tilted, that the chain from the ship to the swan be of gold and not of roses, and finally that the style of the castle shall be kept medieval."
The suite of rooms within the contains the Throne Room, Ludwig's suite, the Singers' Hall, and the Grotto.
The interior and especially the throne room Byzantine-Arab construction resumes to the chapels and churches of the royal Sicilian Norman-Swabian period in Palermo related to the kings of Germany House of Hohenstaufen.
Throughout, the design pays homage to the German legends of Lohengrin, the Swan Knight.
Hohenschwangau, where Ludwig spent much of his youth, had decorations of these sagas.
These themes were taken up in the operas of Richard Wagner.
Many rooms bear a border depicting the various operas written by Wagner, including a theatre permanently featuring the set of one such play.
Many of the interior rooms remain undecorated, with only 14 rooms finished before Ludwig's death.
With the palace under construction at the king's death, one of the major features of the palace remained unbuilt.
A massive keep, which would have formed the highest point and central focus of the ensemble, was planned for the middle of the upper courtyard but was never built, at the decision of the King's family.
The foundation for the keep is visible in the upper courtyard.
Neuschwanstein Castle consists of several individual structures which were erected over a length of 150 metres on the top of a cliff ridge.
The elongate building is furnished with numerous towers, ornamental turrets, gables, balconies, pinnacles and sculptures.
Following Romanesque style, most window openings are fashioned as bi- and triforia.
Before the backdrop of the Tegelberg and the Pöllat Gorge in the south and the Alpine foothills with their lakes in the north, the ensemble of individual buildings provides varying picturesque views of the palace from all directions.
It was designed as the romantic ideal of a knight's castle.
Unlike "real" castles, whose building stock is in most cases the result of centuries of building activity, Neuschwanstein was planned from the inception as an intentionally asymmetric building, and erected in consecutive stages.
In its lower stories the accommodates administrative and servants' rooms and the rooms of today's palace administration.
The king's staterooms are situated in the upper stories: The anterior structure accommodates the lodgings in the third floor, above them the Hall of the Singers.
The upper floors of the west-facing posterior structure are filled almost completely by the Throne Hall.
The total floor space of all floors amounts to nearly .
Among other things it had a battery-powered bell system for the servants and telephone lines.
The kitchen equipment included a Rumford oven that turned the skewer with its heat and so automatically adjusted the turning speed.
The hot air was used for a calorifère central heating system.
Further novelties for the era were running warm water and toilets with automatic flushing.
The largest room of the palace by area is the Hall of the Singers, followed by the Throne Hall.
The Hall of the Singers is located in the eastern, court-side wing of the , in the fourth floor above the king's lodgings.
It is designed as an amalgamation of two rooms of the Wartburg: The Hall of the Singers and the Ballroom.
It was one of the king's favourite projects for his palace.
The rectangular room was decorated with themes from Lohengrin and Parzival.
Its longer side is terminated by a gallery that is crowned by a tribune, modelled after the Wartburg.
The eastern narrow side is terminated by a stage that is structured by arcades and known as the Sängerlaube.
The Hall of the Singers was never designed for court festivities of the reclusive king.
Rather, like the Throne Hall it served as a walkable monument in which the culture of knights and courtly love of the Middle Ages was represented.
The first performance in this hall took place in 1933:
A concert commemorating the 50th anniversary of Richard Wagner's death.
is situated in the west wing of the .
With its height of It was in this room that Ludwig was arrested in the night from 11 to 12 June 1886.
The adjacent little house chapel is consecrated to Saint Louis, after whom the owner was named.
The servants' rooms in the basement of the are quite scantily equipped with massive oak furniture.
Besides one table and one cabinet there are two beds of length each.
Opaque glass windows separated the rooms from the corridor that connects the exterior stairs with the main stairs, so that the king could enter and leave unseen.
The servants were not allowed to use the main stairs, but were restricted to the much narrower and steeper servants' stairs.
Tourism
Neuschwanstein welcomes almost 1.5 million visitors per year making it one of the most popular tourist destinations in Europe.
For security reasons the palace can only be visited during a 35-minute guided tour, and no photography is allowed inside the castle.
There are also special guided tours that focus on specific topics.
In the peak season from June until August, Neuschwanstein has as many as 6000 visitors per day, and guests without advance reservation may have to wait several hours.
Ticket sales are processed exclusively via the ticket centre in Hohenschwangau. , the total number of visitors was more than 60 million.
It is also visited by the character Grace Nakimura alongside Herrenchiemsee in the game The Beast Within: A Gabriel Knight Mystery (1996).
In 1977, Neuschwanstein Castle became the motif of a West German definitive stamp, and it appeared on a €2 commemorative coin for the German series in 2012.
In 2007, it was a finalist in the widely publicised on-line selection of the New Seven Wonders of the World.
A meteorite that reached Earth spectacularly on 6 April 2002, at the Austrian border near Hohenschwangau was named Neuschwanstein after the palace.
Three fragments were found: Neuschwanstein I (, found July 2002) and Neuschwanstein II (, found May 2003) on the German side, and Neuschwanstein III (, found June 2003) on the Austrian side near Reutte.
The meteorite is classified as an enstatite chondrite with unusually large proportions of pure iron (29%), enstatite and the extremely rare mineral sinoite (Si2N2O).
World Heritage candidature
Since 2015, Neuschwanstein and Ludwig's Linderhof and Herrenchiemsee palaces are on the German tentative list for a future designation as UNESCO World Heritage Sites.
A joint candidature with other representative palaces of the romantic historicism is discussed (including Schwerin Palace, for example).
Panoramas
Notes
Sources
