The Cat in the Hat is a children's book written and illustrated by Theodor Geisel under the pen name Dr. Seuss and first published in 1957.
The story centers on a tall anthropomorphic cat, who wears a red and white-striped hat and a red bow tie.
The Cat shows up at the house of Sally and her brother one rainy day when their mother is away.
Despite the repeated objections of the children's fish, the Cat shows the children a few of his tricks in an attempt to entertain them.
In the process he and his companions, Thing One and Thing Two, wreck the house.
The children and the fish become more and more alarmed until the Cat produces a machine that he uses to clean everything up and disappears just before the children's mother comes home.
Geisel created the book in response to a debate in the United States about literacy in early childhood and the ineffectiveness of traditional primers such as those featuring Dick and Jane.
Geisel was asked to write a more entertaining primer by William Spaulding, whom he had met during World War II and who was then director of the education division at Houghton Mifflin.
However, because Geisel was already under contract with Random House, the two publishers agreed to a deal: Houghton Mifflin published the education edition, which was sold to schools, and Random House published the trade edition, which was sold in bookstores.
Geisel gave varying accounts of how he created The Cat in the Hat, but in the version he told most often he was so frustrated with the word list from which he could choose words to write his story that he decided to scan the list and create a story based on the first two rhyming words he found.
The words he found were cat and hat.
The book was met with immediate critical and commercial success.
Reviewers praised it as an exciting alternative to traditional primers.
Three years after its debut, the book had already sold over a million copies, and in 2001 Publishers Weekly listed the book at number nine on its list of best-selling children's books of all time.
The book's success led to the creation of Beginner Books, a publishing house centered on producing similar books for young children learning to read.
In 1983, Geisel said, "It is the book I'm proudest of because it had something to do with the death of the Dick and Jane primers."
The book was adapted into a 1971 animated television special and a 2003 live-action film.
Plot
The story begins as a girl named Sally and her brother, who serves as the narrator of the book, sit alone in their house on a cold, rainy day, staring wistfully out the window.
Then they hear a loud bump which is quickly followed by the arrival of the Cat in the Hat, a tall anthropomorphic cat in a red and white striped hat and a red bow tie.
The Cat proposes to entertain the children with some tricks that he knows.
The children's pet fish refuses, insisting that the Cat should leave.
The Cat responds by balancing the fish on the tip of his umbrella.
The game quickly becomes increasingly trickier, as the Cat balances himself on a ball and tries to balance lots of household items on his limbs until he falls on his head, dropping everything he was holding.
The fish admonishes him again, but the Cat in the Hat just proposes another game.
The Cat brings in a big red box from outside, from which he releases two identical characters, or "Things" as he refers them to, with blue hair and red suits called Thing One and Thing Two.
The Things cause more trouble, such as flying kites in the house, knocking pictures off the wall and picking up the children's mother's new polka-dotted dress.
All this comes to an end when the fish spots the children's mother out the window.
In response, Sally's brother catches the Things in a net, and the Cat, apparently ashamed, stores them back in the big red box.
He takes it out the front door as the fish and the children survey the mess he has made.
But the Cat soon returns, riding a machine that picks everything up and cleans the house, delighting the fish and the children.
The Cat then leaves just before their mother arrives, and the fish and the children are back where they started at the beginning of the story.
As she steps in, the mother asks the children what they did while she was out, but the children are hesitant and do not answer.
The story ends with the question, "What would you do if your mother asked you?"
Background
Theodor Geisel, writing as Dr. Seuss, created The Cat in the Hat partly in response to the May 24, 1954, Life magazine article by John Hersey titled "Why Do Students Bog Down on First R?
A Local Committee Sheds Light on a National Problem: Reading".
In the article, Hersey was critical of school primers like those featuring Dick and Jane:
In the classroom boys and girls are confronted with books that have insipid illustrations depicting the slicked-up lives of other children...
All feature abnormally courteous, unnaturally clean boys and girls....
In bookstores anyone can buy brighter, livelier books featuring strange and wonderful animals and children who behave naturally, i.e., sometimes misbehave...
Given incentive from school boards, publishers could do as well with primers.
After detailing many issues contributing to the dilemma connected with student reading levels, Hersey asked toward the end of the article:
Why should school primers not have pictures that widen rather than narrow the associative richness the children give to the words they illustrate-drawings like those of the wonderfully imaginative geniuses among children's illustrators, Tenniel, Howard Pyle, "Dr. Seuss", Walt Disney?
This article caught the attention of William Spaulding, who had met Geisel during the war and who was then the director of Houghton Mifflin's education division.
Spaulding had also read the best-selling 1955 book Why Johnny Can't Read by Rudolf Flesch.
Flesch, like Hersey, criticized primers as boring but also criticized them for teaching reading through word recognition rather than phonics.
In 1955 Spaulding invited Geisel to dinner in Boston where he proposed that Geisel create a book "for six- and seven-year-olds who had already mastered the basic mechanics of reading".
Creation
Geisel gave varying accounts of how he conceived of The Cat in the Hat.
According to the story Geisel told most often, he was so frustrated with the word list that William Spaulding had given him that he finally decided to scan the list and create a story out of the first two words he found that rhymed.
The words he found were cat and hat.
It was an old, shuddering elevator and was operated by a "small, stooped woman wearing 'a leather half-glove and a secret smile'".
Geisel told Silvey that, when he sketched the Cat in the Hat, he thought of Williams and gave the character Williams' white gloves and "sly, even foxy smile".
Geisel gave a similar account to Robert Cahn for an article in the July 6, 1957, edition of The Saturday Evening Post.
However, "queen" was not on the word list, nor did his first grade nephew, Norval, recognize it.
So Geisel returned to the work but could then think only of words that started with the letter "q", which did not appear in any word on the list.
He then had a similar fascination with the letter "z", which also did not appear in any word on the list.
When he did finally finish the book and showed it to his nephew, Norval had already graduated from the first grade and was learning calculus.
Philip Nel notes, in his dissection of the article, that Norval was Geisel's invention.
Geisel's niece, Peggy Owens, did have a son, but he was only a one-year-old when the article was published.
In "How Orlo Got His Book", he described Orlo, a fictional, archetypal young child who was turned off of reading by the poor selection of simple reading material.
To save Orlo the frustration, Geisel decided to write a book for children like Orlo but found the task "not dissimilar to... being lost with a witch in a tunnel of love".
On his approach to writing The Cat in the Hat he wrote, "The method I used is the same method you use when you sit down to make apple stroodle sic without stroodles."
Donald Pease notes that he worked on it primarily alone, unlike with previous books, which had been more collaborative efforts between Geisel and his wife, Helen.
This marked a general trend in his work and life.
As Robert L. Bernstein later said of that period, "The more I saw of him, the more he liked being in that room and creating all by himself."
Pease points to Helen's recovery from Guillain-Barré syndrome, which she was diagnosed with in 1954, as the marker for this change.
The two editions featured different covers but were otherwise identical.
According to Judith and Neil Morgan, the book sold well immediately.
The trade edition initially sold an average of 12,000 copies a month, a figure which rose rapidly.
Geisel told the Morgans, "Parents understood better than school people the necessity for this kind of reader."
As of 2007, more than 10 million copies of The Cat in the Hat have been printed, and it has been translated into more than 12 different languages, including Latin, under the title Cattus Petasatus.
In 2007, on the occasion of the book's fiftieth anniversary, Random House released The Annotated Cat: Under the Hats of Seuss and His Cats, which includes both The Cat in the Hat and its sequel, with annotations and an introduction by Philip Nel.
She wrote, "Beginning readers and parents who have been helping them through the dreary activities of Dick and Jane and other primer characters are due for a happy surprise."
Helen Adams Masten of the Saturday Review called the book Geisel's tour de force and wrote, "Parents and teachers will bless Mr. Geisel for this amusing reader with its ridiculous and lively drawings, for their children are going to have the exciting experience of learning that they can read after all."
Polly Goodwin of the Chicago Sunday Tribune predicted that The Cat in the Hat would cause seven- and eight-year-olds to "look with distinct distaste on the drab adventures of standard primer characters".
Both Helen E. Walker of Library Journal and Emily Maxwell of The New Yorker felt that the book would appeal to older children as well as to its target audience of first- and second-graders.
The reviewer for The Bookmark concurred, writing, "Recommended enthusiastically as a picture book as well as a reader".
In contrast, Heloise P. Mailloux wrote in The Horn Book Magazine, "This is a fine book for remedial purposes, but self-conscious children often refuse material if its seems meant for younger children."
She felt that the book's limited vocabulary kept it from reaching "the absurd excellence of early Seuss books".
In 2012 it was ranked number 36 among the "Top 100 Picture Books" in a survey published by School Library Journal - the third of five Dr. Seuss books on the list.
It was awarded the Early Readers BILBY Award in 2004 and 2012.
The book's fiftieth anniversary in 2007 prompted a reevaluation of the book from some critics.
Yvonne Coppard, reviewing the fiftieth anniversary edition in Carousel magazine, wondered if the popularity of the Cat and his "delicious naughty behavior" will endure another fifty years.
Coppard wrote, "The innocent ignorance of bygone days has given way to an all-embracing, almost paranoid awareness of child protection issues.
And here we have the mysterious stranger who comes in, uninvited, while your mother is out."
Analysis
Philip Nel places the book's title character in the tradition of con artists in American art, including the title characters from Meredith Willson's The Music Man and L. Frank Baum's The Wonderful Wizard of Oz.
Nel also contends that Geisel identified with the Cat, pointing to a self portrait of Geisel in which he appears as the Cat, which was published alongside a profile about him in The Saturday Evening Post on July 6, 1957.
In an article titled "Was the Cat in the Hat Black?", Philip Nel draws connections between the Cat and stereotyped depictions of African-Americans, including minstrel shows, Geisel's own minstrel-inspired cartoons from early in his career, and the use of the term "cat" to refer to jazz musicians.
Geisel once called the fish "my version of Cotton Mather", the Puritan moralist who advised the prosecutors during the Salem witch trials.
Betty Mensch and Alan Freeman support this view, writing, "Drawing on old Christian symbolism (the fish was an ancient sign of Christianity) Dr. Seuss portrays the fish as a kind of ever-nagging superego, the embodiment of utterly conventionalized morality."
Its conflict with the Cat, not only over the Cat's uninvited presence but also their inherent predator-prey relationship, provides the tension of the story.
She points out that on the last page, while the children are hesitant to tell their mother about what happened in her absence, the fish gives a knowing look to the readers to assure them "that something did go on but that silence is the better part of valor in this case".
She argues that, in the Cat's destruction of the house, "the kids&mdash;and not only those in the story, but those who read it&mdash;have vicariously given full rein to their destructive impulses without guilt or consequences."
Donald Pease notes that The Cat in the Hat shares some structural similarities with other Dr. Seuss books.
Like earlier books, The Cat in the Hat starts with "a child's feeling of discontent with his mundane circumstances" which is soon enhanced by make believe.
The book starts in a factual, realistic world, which crosses over into the world of make believe with the loud bump that heralds the arrival of the Cat.
Donald Pease concurs, writing, "The Cat in the Hat is the classic in the archive of Dr. Seuss stories for which it serves as a cornerstone and a linchpin.
Before writing it Geisel was better known for the 'Quick, Henry, the Flit!' ad campaign than for his nine children's books."
The publication and popularity of the book thrust Geisel into the center of the United States literacy debate, what Pease called "the most important academic controversy" of the Cold War era.
In 1983 Geisel told Jonathan Cott, "It is the book I'm proudest of because it had something to do with the death of the Dick and Jane primers."
Geisel became the president and editor, and the Cat in the Hat served as their mascot.
Geisel's wife, Helen, was made third partner.
Random House served as distributor Geisel wrote multiple books for the series, including The Cat in the Hat Comes Back (1958), Green Eggs and Ham (1960), Hop on Pop (1963), and Fox in Socks (1965).
He initially used word lists of limited vocabularies to create these books, as he had with The Cat in the Hat, but moved away from the lists as he came to believe "that a child could learn any amount of words if fed them slowly and if the books were amply illustrated".
Other authors also contributed notable books to the series, including A Fly Went By (1958), Sam and the Firefly (1958), Go, Dog.
Go!
(1961), and The Big Honey Hunt (1962).
In 2004 MAD magazine published "The Strange Similarities Between the Bush Administration and the World of Dr. Seuss", an article which matched quotes from White House officials to excerpts taken from Dr. Seuss books, and in which George W. Bush's State of the Union promises were contrasted with the Cat vowing , "I can hold up the cup and the milk and the cake!
I can hold up these books!
And the fish on a rake!"
In 2007, during the 110th Congress, Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid compared the impasse over a bill to reform immigration with the mess created by the Cat.
He read lines of the book from the Senate floor.
He then carried forward his analogy hoping the impasse would be straightened out for "If you go back and read Dr. Seuss, the cat manages to clean up the mess."
In 1999, the United States Postal Service issued a stamp featuring the Cat in the Hat.
The Cat in the Hats popularity also led to increased popularity and exposure for Geisel's previous children's books.
For example, 1940's Horton Hatches the Egg had sold 5,801 copies in its opening year and 1,645 the following year.
In 1958, the year after the publication of The Cat in the Hat, 27,643 copies of Horton were sold, and by 1960 the book had sold a total of over 200,000 copies.
Upcoming animated film
In 2012, following the financial success of The Lorax, an animated film adaptation of The Lorax, Universal Pictures and Illumination Entertainment announced plans to produce a CGI adaptation of The Cat in the Hat.
Rob Lieber was set to write the script, with Chris Meledandri as producer, and Audrey Geisel as the executive producer.
However, the project never came to fruition.
On January 24, 2018, it was announced that Warner Animation Group was in development of a different animated Cat in the Hat film as part of a creative partnership with Seuss Enterprises.
Soviet cartoon
In 1984 the book was adapted in Russian as a nine-minute cartoon called (The Cat in the Cap).
The short omits Thing One and Thing Two, along with changing the Cat's hat into a cap; initially an umbrella when it comes in from the rainy street, and making a number of additional transformations throughout the story.
Sally's name is not mentioned.
In 1997 the book was made into a Living Books adaption for the PC and then, there were similar differences to reflect the new media such as Conrad sings his lines at the subtitles of the story as the narrator in the rainy day.
National Theatre
In 2009 the Royal National Theatre created a stage version of the book, adapted and directed by Katie Mitchell.
Character and themes
Seussical, a musical adaptation that incorporates aspects of many Dr. Seuss works, features the Cat in the Hat as narrator.
The musical received weak reviews when it opened in November 2001 but eventually became a staple in regional and school theaters.
