Thales of Miletus (;
Miletus, however, received favorable terms from Cyrus.
The others remained in an Ionian League of twelve cities (excluding Miletus), and were subjugated by the Persians.
Astronomy
According to Herodotus, Thales predicted the solar eclipse of May 28, 585 BC.
Plutarch indicates that in his day (c. AD 100) there was an extant work, the Astronomy, composed in verse and attributed to Thales.
Herodotus writes that in the sixth year of the war, the Lydians under King Alyattes and the Medes under Cyaxares were engaged in an indecisive battle when suddenly day turned into night, leading to both parties halting the fighting and negotiating a peace agreement.
Herodotus also mentions that the loss of daylight had been predicted by Thales.
He does not, however, mention the location of the battle.
QTEMPLATE |Afterwards, on the refusal of Alyattes to give up his suppliants when Cyaxares sent to demand them of him, war broke out between the Lydians and the Medes, and continued for five years, with various success.
In the course of it the Medes gained many victories over the Lydians, and the Lydians also gained many victories over the Medes.
Among their other battles there was one night engagement.
As, however, the balance had not inclined in favour of either nation, another combat took place in the sixth year, in the course of which, just as the battle was growing warm, day was on a sudden changed into night.
This event had been foretold by Thales, the Milesian, who forewarned the Ionians of it, fixing for it the very year in which it actually took place.
The Medes and Lydians, when they observed the change, ceased fighting, and were alike anxious to have terms of peace agreed on.
However, based on the list of Medean kings and the duration of their reign reported elsewhere by Herodotus, Cyaxares died 10 years before the eclipse.
Sagacity
Diogenes Laërtius tells us that the Seven Sages were created in the archonship of Damasius at Athens about 582 BC and that Thales was the first sage.
The same story, however, asserts that Thales emigrated to Miletus.
There is also a report that he did not become a student of nature until after his political career.
Much as we would like to have a date on the seven sages, we must reject these stories and the tempting date if we are to believe that Thales was a native of Miletus, predicted the eclipse, and was with Croesus in the campaign against Cyrus.
Thales received instruction from an Egyptian priest.
It was fairly certain that he came from a wealthy, established family, in a class which customarily provided higher education for their children.
Moreover, the ordinary citizen, unless he was a seafaring man or a merchant, could not afford the grand tour in Egypt, and did not consort with noble lawmakers such as Solon.
In Diogenes Laërtius' Lives of Eminent Philosophers .39, Laërtius relates the several stories of an expensive object that is to go to the most wise.
In one version (that Laërtius credits to Callimachus in his Iambics)
Bathycles of Arcadia states in his will that an expensive bowl "'should be given to him who had done most good by his wisdom.'
So it was given to Thales, went the round of all the sages, and came back to Thales again.
And he sent it to Apollo at Didyma, with this dedication...
'Thales the Milesian, son of Examyas dedicates this to Delphinian Apollo after twice winning the prize from all the Greeks.'"
Theories
Early Greeks, and other civilizations before them, often invoked idiosyncratic explanations of natural phenomena with reference to the will of anthropomorphic gods and heroes.
Instead, Thales aimed to explain natural phenomena via rational hypotheses that referenced natural processes themselves.
For example, rather than assuming that earthquakes were the result of supernatural whims, Thales explained them by hypothesizing that the Earth floats on water and that earthquakes occur when the Earth is rocked by waves.
Thales was a hylozoist (one who thinks that matter is alive, i.e. containing soul (s)).
Aristotle wrote (De Anima 411 a7-8) of Thales: ...
Thales thought all things are full of gods.
Aristotle posits the origin of Thales thought on matter generally containing souls, to Thales thinking initially on the fact of, because magnets move iron, the presence of movement of matter indicated this matter contained life.
Thales, according to Aristotle, asked what was the nature (Greek arche) of the object so that it would behave in its characteristic way.
Physis () comes from phyein (), "to grow", related to our word "be".
(G)natura is the way a thing is "born", again with the stamp of what it is in itself.
Aristotle characterizes most of the philosophers "at first" () as thinking that the "principles in the form of matter were the only principles of all things", where "principle" is arche, "matter" is hyle ("wood" or "matter", "material") and "form" is eidos.
Arche is translated as "principle", but the two words do not have precisely the same meaning.
A principle of something is merely prior (related to pro-) to it either chronologically or logically.
An arche (from , "to rule") dominates an object in some way.
If the arche is taken to be an origin, then specific causality is implied; that is, B is supposed to be characteristically B just because it comes from A, which dominates it.
The archai that Aristotle had in mind in his well-known passage on the first Greek scientists are not necessarily chronologically prior to their objects, but are constituents of it.
For example, in pluralism objects are composed of earth, air, fire and water, but those elements do not disappear with the production of the object.
They remain as archai within it, as do the atoms of the atomists.
What Aristotle is really saying is that the first philosophers were trying to define the substance (s) of which all material objects are composed.
As a matter of fact, that is exactly what modern scientists are attempting to accomplish in nuclear physics, which is a second reason why Thales is described as the first western scientist, but some contemporary scholars reject this interpretation.
Geometry
Thales was known for his innovative use of geometry.
His understanding was theoretical as well as practical.
For example, he said:
QTEMPLATE
The greatest is space, for it holds all things.
Topos is in Newtonian-style space, since the verb, chorei, has the connotation of yielding before things, or spreading out to make room for them, which is extension.
Within this extension, things have a position.
Points, lines, planes and solids related by distances and angles follow from this presumption.
Thales understood similar triangles and right triangles, and what is more, used that knowledge in practical ways.
The story is told in Diogenes Laërtius (loc. cit.) that he measured the height of the pyramids by their shadows at the moment when his own shadow was equal to his height.
A right triangle with two equal legs is a 45-degree right triangle, all of which are similar.
The length of the pyramid's shadow measured from the center of the pyramid at that moment must have been equal to its height.
This story indicates that he was familiar with the Egyptian seked, or seqed, the ratio of the run to the rise of a slope (cotangent).
The seked is at the base of problems 56, 57, 58, 59 and 60 of the Rhind papyrus - an ancient Egyptian mathematical document.
More practically Thales used the same method to measure the distances of ships at sea, said Eudemus as reported by Proclus ("in Euclidem").
According to Kirk & Raven (reference cited below), all you need for this feat is three straight sticks pinned at one end and knowledge of your altitude.
One stick goes vertically into the ground.
A second is made level.
With the third you sight the ship and calculate the seked from the height of the stick and its distance from the point of insertion to the line of sight (Proclus, In Euclidem, 352).
Thales' theorems
There are two theorems of Thales in elementary geometry, one known as Thales' theorem having to do with a triangle inscribed in a circle and having the circle's diameter as one leg, the other theorem being also called the intercept theorem.
In addition Eudemus attributed to him the discovery that a circle is bisected by its diameter, that the base angles of an isosceles triangle are equal and that vertical angles are equal.
According to a historical Note, when Thales visited Egypt, Pliny the Elder, and Plutarch.
According to Hieronymus, historically quoted by Diogenes Laërtius, Thales found the height of pyramids by comparison between the lengths of the shadows cast by a person and by the pyramids.
Due to the variations among testimonies, such as the "story of the sacrifice of an ox on the occasion of the discovery that the angle on a diameter of a circle is a right angle" in the version told by Diogenes Laërtius being accredited to Pythagoras rather than Thales, some historians (such as D. R. Dicks) question whether such anecdotes have any historical worth whatsoever.
Water as a first principle
Thales' most famous philosophical position was his cosmological thesis, which comes down to us through a passage from Aristotle's Metaphysics.
In the work Aristotle unequivocally reported Thales' hypothesis about the nature of all matter - that the originating principle of nature was a single material substance: water.
Aristotle then proceeded to proffer a number of conjectures based on his own observations to lend some credence to why Thales may have advanced this idea (though Aristotle did not hold it himself).
Aristotle laid out his own thinking about matter and form which may shed some light on the ideas of Thales, in Metaphysics 983 b6 8-11, 17-21.
QTEMPLATE |That from which is everything that exists and from which it first becomes and into which it is rendered at last, its substance remaining under it, but transforming in qualities, that they say is the element and principle of things that are.
…For it is necessary that there be some nature (), either one or more than one, from which become the other things of the object being saved...
Thales the founder of this type of philosophy says that it is water.
In this quote we see Aristotle's depiction of the problem of change and the definition of substance.
He asked if an object changes, is it the same or different?
In either case how can there be a change from one to the other?
The answer is that the substance "is saved", but acquires or loses different qualities (, the things you "experience").
Aristotle conjectured that Thales reached his conclusion by contemplating that the "nourishment of all things is moist and that even the hot is created from the wet and lives by it."
While Aristotle's conjecture on why Thales held water as the originating principle of matter is his own thinking, his statement that Thales held it as water is generally accepted as genuinely originating with Thales and he is seen as an incipient matter-and-formist.
Thales thought the Earth must be a flat disk which is floating in an expanse of water.
Heraclitus Homericus states that Thales drew his conclusion from seeing moist substance turn into air, slime and earth.
It seems likely that Thales viewed the Earth as solidifying from the water on which it floated and the oceans that surround it.
Writing centuries later, Diogenes Laërtius also states that Thales taught "Water constituted (, 'stood under') the principle of all things."
Aristotle considered Thales’ position to be roughly the equivalent to the later ideas of Anaximenes, who held that everything was composed of air.
The 1870 book Dictionary of Greek and Roman Biography and Mythology noted:
Aristotle defined the soul as the principle of life, that which imbues the matter and makes it live, giving it the animation, or power to act.
The idea did not originate with him, as the Greeks in general believed in the distinction between mind and matter, which was ultimately to lead to a distinction not only between body and soul but also between matter and energy.
If things were alive, they must have souls.
This belief was no innovation, as the ordinary ancient populations of the Mediterranean did believe that natural actions were caused by divinities.
Accordingly, Aristotle and other ancient writers state that Thales believed that "all things were full of gods."
In their zeal to make him the first in everything some said he was the first to hold the belief, which must have been widely known to be false.
However, Thales was looking for something more general, a universal substance of mind.
That also was in the polytheism of the times.
Zeus was the very personification of supreme mind, dominating all the subordinate manifestations.
From Thales on, however, philosophers had a tendency to depersonify or objectify mind, as though it were the substance of animation per se and not actually a god like the other gods.
The end result was a total removal of mind from substance, opening the door to a non-divine principle of action.
Classical thought, however, had proceeded only a little way along that path.
Instead of referring to the person, Zeus, they talked about the great mind:
QTEMPLATE | "Thales", says Cicero, "assures that water is the principle of all things; and that God is that Mind which shaped and created all things from water."
The universal mind appears as a Roman belief in Virgil as well:
QTEMPLATE |
In the beginning, SPIRIT within (spiritus intus) strengthens Heaven and Earth,
The watery fields, and the lucid globe of Luna, and then -
Titan stars; and mind (mens) infused through the limbs
Agitates the whole mass, and mixes itself with GREAT MATTER (magno corpore)
According to Henry Fielding (1775), Diogenes Laërtius (1.35) affirmed that Thales posed "the independent pre-existence of God from all eternity, stating "that God was the oldest of all beings, for he existed without a previous cause even in the way of generation; that the world was the most beautiful of all things; for it was created by God."
Influences
Due to the scarcity of sources concerning Thales and the discrepancies between the accounts given in the sources that have survived, there is a scholarly debate over possible influences on Thales and the Greek mathematicians that came after him.
Historian Roger L. Cooke points out that Proclus does not make any mention of Mesopotamian influence on Thales or Greek geometry, but "is shown clearly in Greek astronomy, in the use of sexagesimal system of measuring angles and in Ptolemy's explicit use of Mesopotamian astronomical observations."
Historian B.L. Van der Waerden is among those advocating the idea of Mesopotamian influence, writing "It follows that we have to abandon the traditional belief that the oldest Greek mathematicians discovered geometry entirely by themselves…a belief that was tenable only as long as nothing was known about Babylonian mathematics.
This in no way diminishes the stature of Thales; on the contrary, his genius receives only now the honour that is due to it, the honour of having developed a logical structure for geometry, of having introduced proof into geometry."
Less controversial than the position that Thales learnt Babylonian mathematics is the claim he was influenced by Egyptians.
Pointedly historian S. N. Bychkov holds that the idea that the base angles of an isosceles triangle are equal likely came from Egypt.
This is because, when building a roof for a home - having a cross section be exactly an isosceles triangle isn't crucial (as it's the ridge of the roof that must fit precisely), in contrast a symmetric square pyramid cannot have errors in the base angles of the faces or they will not fit together tightly.
argues against the assertions from writers in late antiquity that Thales discovered and taught advanced concepts in these fields.
John Burnet (1892) noted
QTEMPLATE |Lastly, we have one admitted instance of a philosophic guild, that of the Pythagoreans.
And it will be found that the hypothesis, if it is to be called by that name, of a regular organisation of scientific activity will alone explain all the facts.
The development of doctrine in the hands of Thales, Anaximander, and Anaximenes, for instance, can only be understood as the elaboration of a single idea in a school with a continuous tradition.
Interpretations
In the long sojourn of philosophy, there has existed hardly a philosopher or historian of philosophy who did not mention Thales and try to characterize him in some way.
He is generally recognized as having brought something new to human thought.
Mathematics, astronomy, and medicine already existed.
Thales added something to these different collections of knowledge to produce a universality, which, as far as writing tells us, was not in tradition before, but resulted in a new field.
Ever since, interested persons have been asking what that new something is.
Answers fall into (at least) two categories, the theory and the method.
Once an answer has been arrived at, the next logical step is to ask how Thales compares to other philosophers, which leads to his classification (rightly or wrongly).
Theory
The most natural epithets of Thales are "materialist" and "naturalist", which are based on ousia and physis.
The Catholic Encyclopedia notes that Aristotle called him a physiologist, with the meaning "student of nature."
On the other hand, he would have qualified as an early physicist, as did Aristotle.
They studied corpora, "bodies", the medieval descendants of substances.
Most agree that Thales' stamp on thought is the unity of substance, hence Bertrand Russell:
QTEMPLATE |The view that all matter is one is quite a reputable scientific hypothesis.
...But it is still a handsome feat to have discovered that a substance remains the same in different states of aggregation.
Russell was only reflecting an established tradition; for example: Nietzsche, in his Philosophy in the Tragic Age of the Greeks, wrote:
QTEMPLATE |Greek philosophy seems to begin with an absurd notion, with the proposition that water is the primal origin and the womb of all things.
Is it really necessary for us to take serious notice of this proposition?
It is, and for three reasons.
First, because it tells us something about the primal origin of all things; second, because it does so in language devoid of image or fable, and finally, because contained in it, if only embryonically, is the thought, "all things are one."
This sort of materialism, however, should not be confused with deterministic materialism.
Thales was only trying to explain the unity observed in the free play of the qualities.
The arrival of uncertainty in the modern world made possible a return to Thales; for example, John Elof Boodin writes ("God and Creation"):
QTEMPLATE |We cannot read the universe from the past...
Boodin defines an "emergent" materialism, in which the objects of sense emerge uncertainly from the substrate.
Thales is the innovator of this sort of materialism.
Later scholastic thinkers would maintain that in his choice of water Thales was influenced by Babylonian or Chaldean religion, that held that a god had begun creation by acting upon the pre-existing water.
Historian Abraham Feldman holds this does not stand up under closer examination.
In Babylonian religion the water is lifeless and sterile until a god acts upon it, but for Thales water itself was divine and creative.
He maintained that "All things are full of gods", and to understand the nature of things was to discover the secrets of the deities, and through this knowledge open the possibility that one could be greater than the grandest Olympian.
Feldman points out that while other thinkers recognized the wetness of the world "none of them was inspired to conclude that everything was ultimately aquatic."
attempts to capture the new movement as follows.
Philosophical man is a "new cultural configuration" based in stepping back from "pregiven tradition" and taking up a rational "inquiry into what is true in itself;" that is, an ideal of truth.
It begins with isolated individuals such as Thales, but they are supported and cooperated with as time goes on.
Finally the ideal transforms the norms of society, leaping across national borders.
Classification
The term "Pre-Socratic" derives ultimately from the philosopher Aristotle, who distinguished the early philosophers as concerning themselves with substance.
Diogenes Laërtius on the other hand took a strictly geographic and ethnic approach.
Philosophers were either Ionian or Italian.
He used "Ionian" in a broader sense, including also the Athenian academics, who were not Pre-Socratics.
From a philosophic point of view, any grouping at all would have been just as effective.
There is no basis for an Ionian or Italian unity.
Some scholars, however, concede to Diogenes' scheme as far as referring to an "Ionian" school.
There was no such school in any sense.
The most popular approach refers to a Milesian school, which is more justifiable socially and philosophically.
They sought for the substance of phenomena and may have studied with each other.
Some ancient writers qualify them as Milesioi, "of Miletus."
Influence on others
Thales had a profound influence on other Greek thinkers and therefore on Western history.
Some believe Anaximander was a pupil of Thales.
Early sources report that one of Anaximander's more famous pupils, Pythagoras, visited Thales as a young man, and that Thales advised him to travel to Egypt to further his philosophical and mathematical studies.
Many philosophers followed Thales' lead in searching for explanations in nature rather than in the supernatural; others returned to supernatural explanations, but couched them in the language of philosophy rather than of myth or of religion.
Looking specifically at Thales' influence during the pre-Socratic era, it is clear that he stood out as one of the first thinkers who thought more in the way of logos than mythos.
The difference between these two more profound ways of seeing the world is that mythos is concentrated around the stories of holy origin, while logos is concentrated around the argumentation.
When the mythical man wants to explain the world the way he sees it, he explains it based on gods and powers.
Mythical thought does not differentiate between things and persons and furthermore it does not differentiate between nature and culture.
The way a logos thinker would present a world view is radically different from the way of the mythical thinker.
In its concrete form, logos is a way of thinking not only about individualism, but also the abstract.
Furthermore, it focuses on sensible and continuous argumentation.
This lays the foundation of philosophy and its way of explaining the world in terms of abstract argumentation, and not in the way of gods and mythical stories.
Reliability of sources
Because of Thales' elevated status in Greek culture an intense interest and admiration followed his reputation.
Due to this following, the oral stories about his life were open to amplification and historical fabrication, even before they were written down generations later.
Most modern dissension comes from trying to interpret what we know, in particular, distinguishing legend from fact.
Historian D.R. Dicks and other historians divide the ancient sources about Thales into those before 320 BC and those after that year (some such as Proclus writing in the 5th century C.E. and Simplicius of Cilicia in the 6th century C.E. writing nearly a millennium after his era).
Geoffrey Kirk and John Raven, English compilers of the fragments of the Pre-Socratics, assert that Aristotle's "judgments are often distorted by his view of earlier philosophy as a stumbling progress toward the truth that Aristotle himself revealed in his physical doctrines."
There was also an extensive oral tradition.
Both the oral and the written were commonly read or known by all educated men in the region.
Aristotle's philosophy had a distinct stamp: it professed the theory of matter and form, which modern scholastics have dubbed hylomorphism.
Though once very widespread, it was not generally adopted by rationalist and modern science, as it mainly is useful in metaphysical analyses, but does not lend itself to the detail that is of interest to modern science.
It is not clear that the theory of matter and form existed as early as Thales, and if it did, whether Thales espoused it.
While some historians, like B. Snell, maintain that Aristotle was relying on a pre-Platonic written record by Hippias rather than oral tradition, this is a controversial position.
Representing the scholarly consensus Dicks states that "the tradition about him even as early as the fifth century B.C., was evidently based entirely on hearsay....It would seem that already by Aristotle's time the early Ionians were largely names only to which popular tradition attached various ideas or achievements with greater or less plausibility".
This is primarily a biographical work, as the name indicates.
Compared to Aristotle, Diogenes is not much of a philosopher.
He is the one who, in the Prologue to that work, is responsible for the division of the early philosophers into "Ionian" and "Italian", but he places the Academics in the Ionian school and otherwise evidences considerable disarray and contradiction, especially in the long section on forerunners of the "Ionian School".
Diogenes quotes two letters attributed to Thales, but Diogenes wrote some eight centuries after Thales' death and that his sources often contained "unreliable or even fabricated information", hence the concern for separating fact from legend in accounts of Thales.
It is due to this use of hearsay and a lack of citing original sources that leads some historians, like Dicks and Werner Jaeger, to look at the late origin of the traditional picture of Pre-Socratic philosophy and view the whole idea as a construct from a later age, "the whole picture that has come down to us of the history of early philosophy was fashioned during the two or three generations from Plato to the immediate pupils of Aristotle".
Notes
* http:/ tb2 phil211 Third Edition
* Herodotus, Histories, A. D. Godley (translator), Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1920; .
http:/ cgi-bin M. 2004, .
Pliny the Elder, The Natural History (eds.
John Bostock, M.D., F.R.S. H.T. Riley, Esq., B.A.) London.
Taylor and Francis. (1855).
http:/ cgi-bin 13053487/_...Going_Further_On_Down_the_Road...
_The_Origin_and_Foundations_of_Milesian_Thought The Origin and Foundations of Milesian Thought."
The Review of Metaphysics 70, 3-31.
