Jimmy Donal "Jimbo" Wales (born August 7, 1966) is a British-American Internet entrepreneur.
He is a co-founder of the online non-profit encyclopedia Wikipedia
Early life
Wales was born in Huntsville, Alabama, shortly before midnight on August 7, 1966; however, his birth certificate lists his date of birth as August 8.
a small private school in the tradition of the one-room schoolhouse, where Wales and his three siblings received their early education.
During an interview in 2005 with Brian Lamb, Wales described his childhood private school as a "Montessori influenced philosophy of education", where he "spent lots of hours poring over the Britannicas and World Book Encyclopedias".
a university-preparatory school in Huntsville, graduating at sixteen.
the Bomis venture did not ultimately turn out to be successful.
In January 2001, Sanger was introduced to the concept of a wiki by extreme programming enthusiast Ben Kovitz after explaining to Kovitz the slow pace of growth Nupedia endured as a result of its onerous submission process.
Initially, neither Sanger nor Wales knew what to expect from the Wikipedia initiative.
Nonetheless, the cadre of early editors helped create a robust, self-regulating community that has proven conducive to the growth of the project.
Sanger developed Wikipedia in its early phase and guided the project.
He was also the closest the project had to a spokesperson in its early years.
Despite involvement in other projects, Wales has denied intending to reduce his role within Wikipedia, telling The New York Times in 2008 that "Dialing down is not an option for me ...
Not to be too dramatic about it, but, 'to create and distribute a free encyclopedia of the highest possible quality to every single person on the planet in their own language,' that's who I am.
That's what I am doing.
That's my life goal."
His work for the foundation, including his appearances to promote it at computer and educational conferences, has always been unpaid.
Controversies
Wales's association with the foundation has led to controversy.
In March 2008, Wales was accused by former Wikimedia Foundation employee Danny Wool of misusing the foundation's funds for recreational purposes.
Wikia and later pursuits
In 2004, Wales and then-fellow member of the WMF Board of Trustees Angela Beesley founded the for-profit company Wikia.
On November 4, 2011, Wales delivered an hour-long address at The Sage Gateshead in the United Kingdom to launch the 2011 Free Thinking Festival on BBC Radio Three.
His speech, which was entitled "The Future of the Internet", was largely devoted to Wikipedia.
Twenty days later, on November 24, Wales appeared on the British topical debate television program Question Time.
In May 2012, it was reported that Wales was advising the UK government on how to make taxpayer-funded academic research available on the internet at no cost.
His role reportedly involved working as "an unpaid advisor on crowdsourcing and opening up policymaking", and advising the Department of Business, Innovation and Skills and the UK research councils on distributing research.
On March 21, 2014, Wales spoke on a panel at a Clinton Global Initiative University conference held at Arizona State University, along with John McCain, Saudi Arabian women's rights activist Manal al-Sharif and Harvard University student Shree Bose.
The topic of discussion was "the age of participation" and the ability of an increasingly large number of citizens to "express their own opinions, pursue their own educations, and launch their own enterprises."
Wales exhorted young people to use social media to try to bring about societal change, and compared government suppression of the Internet to a human rights violation.
On May 26, 2014, Google appointed Wales to serve on a seven-member committee on privacy in response to Google v. Gonzalez, which led to Google's being inundated with requests to remove websites from their search results.
Wales said he wanted the committee to be viewed as "a blue-ribbon panel" by lawmakers and for the committee to advise the lawmakers as well as Google.
In 2017, Wales announced that he is launching an online publication called WikiTribune, with a goal to fight fake news through a combination of professional journalists and volunteer contributors.
Wales described it as "news by the people and for the people", and that it will be the "first time that professional journalists and citizen journalists will work side-by-side as equals writing stories as they happen, editing them live as they develop, and at all times backed by a community checking and rechecking all facts".
Political and economic views
Personal philosophy
Wales is a self-avowed Objectivist,
In a 2011 interview with The Independent, he expressed sympathy with the Occupy Wall Street and Occupy London protesters, saying, "You don't have to be a socialist to say it's not right to take money from everybody and give it to a few rich people.
That's not free enterprise."
Dan Hodges in The Telegraph has described Wales as a "Labour sympathizer".
In 2015, he offered to help Ed Miliband with the Labour Party's social media strategy, but Miliband turned him down.
In 2016, Wales and eleven other business leaders signed on to an open letter to American voters urging them not to vote for Donald Trump in that year's United States presidential election.
In May 2017, he said on Quora that he is a Centrist and a Gradualist and believes "that slow step-by-step change is better and more sustainable and allows us to test new things with a minimum of difficult disruption in society."
Philosophy in practice
The January/February 2006 issue of Maximum PC reported that Wales refused to comply with a request from the People's Republic of China to censor "politically sensitive" Wikipedia articles-other corporate Internet companies, such as Google, Yahoo! and Microsoft, had already yielded to Chinese government pressure.
Wales stated that he would rather see companies such as Google adhere to Wikipedia's policy of freedom of information.
In 2010, Wales criticized whistle-blower website WikiLeaks and its editor-in-chief Julian Assange, saying that their publication of Afghan war documents "could be enough to get someone killed"; furthermore, he expressed irritation at their use of the name "wiki": "What they're doing is not really a wiki.
The essence of wiki is a collaborative editing process".
Development and management of Wikipedia
Wales cites Austrian School economist Friedrich Hayek's essay, "The Use of Knowledge in Society", which he read as an undergraduate, He also submitted written testimony to the Senate Committee entitled "E-Government 2.0: Improving Innovation, Collaboration and Access".
Senator Joseph Lieberman introduced Wales by stating:
QTEMPLATE |We are very glad to have as a witness Jimmy Wales, the founder of Wikipedia, one of the most thrilling examples of what collaborative technology can produce.
We have asked Mr. Wales to take us through some of the ideas behind Wikipedia and then to relate them to our jurisdiction, which is to say to help us understand how similar technologies and collaborative activities can be applied to government for greater information sharing and communication, both within the government, but also between the government and the public.
In fact, quite encouragingly, the intelligence community has already developed and is using a process collaborative technology that they call Intellipedia, which is based directly on the Wikipedia model.
So Mr. Wales, if imitation is a form of flattery, you should feel flattered.
And the aim of this is to foster collaboration and information across the intelligence community, obviously on a closed site.
Wales's testimony is available for viewing on C-SPAN.
European Court of Justice Google ruling
On May 14, 2014, Wales strongly reacted to the European Court of Justice (ECJ)'s ruling on the right of individuals to request the removal of information from Google's search results.
He stated to the BBC that the ruling was "one of the most wide-sweeping internet censorship rulings that I've ever seen".
In early June 2014, the TechCrunch media outlet interviewed Wales on the subject, as he had been invited by Google to join an advisory committee that the corporation had formed as an addition to the formal process that the ECJ requested from Google to manage such requests.
The May 2014 ECJ ruling required swift action from Google to implement a process that allowed people to directly contact the corporation about the removal of information that they believe is outdated or irrelevant.
Google's Larry Page revealed that 30 percent of requests received by Google since the ruling was made were categorized as "other".
Wales explained in email responses that he was contacted by Google on May 28, 2014, and "The remit of the committee is to hold public hearings and issue recommendations-not just to Google but to legislators and the public."
After an agreement was reached to avoid the extradition, Wales commented, "This is very exciting news, and I'm pleased to hear it ...
What needs to happen next is a serious reconsideration of the UK extradition treaty that would allow this sort of nonsense in the first place."
In August 2013, Wales criticized U.K. Prime Minister David Cameron's plan for an Internet porn-filter, saying that the idea was "ridiculous."
In November 2013, Wales also commented on the Snowden affair, describing Edward Snowden as "a hero" whom history would judge "very favourably"; additionally, Wales said the U.S. public "would have never approved the sweeping surveillance program publicized by Snowden", had they been informed or asked about it.
Wales has visited Israel over ten times and taken over $1M in donations from Israeli universities.
He has said that he is "a strong supporter of Israel".
Personal life
Jimmy Wales has been married three times.
At the age of twenty, he married Pamela Green, a co-worker at a grocery store in Alabama.
and had a daughter before separating in 2008.
She is Tony Blair's former diary secretary, whom Wales met in Davos, Switzerland.
Wales has three daughters: one with Rohan and two with Garvey.
Wales is an atheist.
In an interview with Big Think, he said his personal philosophy is firmly rooted in reason and he is a complete non-believer.
, he lives in London, England.
Publications
Distinctions
*Wales is a former co-chair of the World Economic Forum on the Middle East 2008, in 2011, the Monaco Media Prize.
Wales has also received honorary degrees from Knox College, Amherst College, Stevenson University, Argentina's Universidad Empresarial Siglo 21,
Bibliography
