The American robin (Turdus migratorius) is a migratory songbird of the true thrush genus and Turdidae, the wider thrush family.
It is named after the European robin because of its reddish-orange breast, though the two species are not closely related, with the European robin belonging to the Old World flycatcher family.
The American robin is widely distributed throughout North America, wintering from southern Canada to central Mexico and along the Pacific Coast.
It is the state bird of Connecticut, Michigan, and Wisconsin.
According to some sources, the American robin ranks behind only the red-winged blackbird (and just ahead of the introduced European starling and the not-always-naturally-occurring house finch) as the most abundant extant land bird in North America.
It has seven subspecies, but only T. m. confinis of Baja California Sur is particularly distinctive, with pale gray-brown underparts.
The American robin is active mostly during the day and assembles in large flocks at night.
Its diet consists of invertebrates , fruits, and berries.
It is one of the earliest bird species to lay its eggs, beginning to breed shortly after returning to its summer range from its winter range.
The robin's nest consists of long coarse grass, twigs, paper, and feathers, and is smeared with mud and often cushioned with grass or other soft materials.
It is among the earliest birds to sing at dawn, and its song consists of several discrete units that are repeated.
The adult robin's main predators are hawks, domestic cats, and snakes.
When feeding in flocks, it can be vigilant, watching other birds for reactions to predators.
Brown-headed cowbirds (Molothrus ater) lay eggs in robin nests (see brood parasite), but the robins usually reject the eggs.
Taxonomy
This species was first described in 1766 by Carl Linnaeus in the twelfth edition of his Systema Naturae as Turdus migratorius.
The binomial name derives from two Latin words: turdus, "thrush", and migratorius from migrare "to go".
The term robin for this species has been recorded since at least 1703.
This conflicts with a 2007 DNA study of 60 of 65 Turdus species which places the American robin's closest relative as the rufous-collared thrush (T. rufitorques) of Central America.
Though having distinct plumage, the two species are similar in vocalization and behavior.
Beyond this, it lies in a small group of four species of otherwise Central American distribution, suggesting it recently spread northwards into North America.
Seven subspecies of American robin are recognized.
These subspecies intergrade and are only weakly defined.
* T. m. migratorius, the nominate subspecies, breeds in the US and Canada, other than down the west coast, to the edge of the tundra from Alaska and northern Canada east to New England and then south to Maryland, northwest Virginia, and North Carolina.
It winters in southern coastal Alaska, southern Canada, most of the US, Bermuda, the Bahamas and eastern Mexico.
* T. m. phillipsi is resident in Mexico south to central Oaxaca.
It is slightly smaller than propinquus but has a larger bill; the male's underparts are less brick-red than the nominate subspecies, and have a rustier tone.
Among standard measurements, the wing chord is , the culmen is and the tarsus is .
The head varies from jet black to gray, with white eye arcs and white supercilia.
The throat is white with black streaks, and the belly and undertail coverts are white.
The robin has a brown back and a reddish-orange breast, varying from a rich red maroon to peachy orange.
While robins occasionally overwinter in the northern part of the United States and southern Canada, although one was taken by a sparrowhawk.
A sighting occurred in Britain in January 2007.
This species has also occurred as a vagrant to Greenland, Jamaica, Hispaniola, Puerto Rico and Belize.
Vagrants to Europe, where identified to subspecies, are nominate T. m. migratorius, but the Greenland birds also included T. m. nigrideus, and some of the southern overshots may have been T. m. achrusterus.
Behavior
The American robin is active mostly during the day, and on its winter grounds it assembles in large flocks at night to roost in trees in secluded swamps or dense vegetation.
The flocks break up during the day when the birds feed on fruits and berries in smaller groups.
During the summer, the American robin defends a breeding territory and is less social.
It is frequently seen running across lawns picking up earthworms, and its running and stopping behavior is a distinguishing characteristic.
In addition to hunting visually, it also has the ability to hunt by hearing.
Experiments have discovered that it can find worms underground by simply using its listening skills.
They may be taken by nearly every variety of North American accipitrid, from the smallest, the sharp-shinned hawk, to one of the two largest, the golden eagle, most every North American falcon from the smallest, the American kestrel, to the largest, the gyrfalcon, and almost all owl species from northern pygmy owls to snowy owls.
Overall, 28 raptorial bird species are known to hunt robins.
Adult robins are most vulnerable when distracted by breeding activities though may also be attacked on the ground or even in flight.
However, when feeding in flocks, the American robin is able to remain vigilant and watch other flock members for reactions to predators.
In a study of 105 juvenile robins, 77.1% were infected with one or more species of endoparasite, with Syngamus species the most commonly encountered, found in 57.1% of the birds.
Breeding
The American robin begins to breed shortly after returning to its summer range.
It is one of the first North American bird species to lay eggs, and normally has two to three broods per breeding season, which lasts from April to July.
and will frequently construct nests under eaves or awnings on human homes when such locations provide adequate shelter.
Robins are not cavity nesters, and so will generally not use a bird house, but will take advantage of artificial nesting platforms.
A clutch consists of three to five light-blue eggs, and is incubated by the female alone.
The eggs hatch after 14 days, and the chicks leave the nest a further two weeks later.
The altricial chicks are naked and have their eyes closed for the first few days after hatching.
While the chicks are still young, the mother broods them continuously.
When they are older, the mother will brood them only at night or during bad weather.
The chicks are fed worms, insects, and berries.
Waste accumulation does not occur in the nest because adults collect and take it away.
Chicks are fed, and then raise tails for elimination of waste, a solid white clump that is collected by a parent prior to flying off.
All chicks in the brood leave the nest within two days of each other.
The song varies regionally, and its style varies by time of day.
The song period is from late February or early March to late July or early August; some birds, particularly in the east, sing occasionally into September or later.
The American robin is often among the first songbirds singing as dawn rises or hours before, and last as evening sets in.
It usually sings from a high perch in a tree.
In addition to its song, the American robin has a number of calls used for communicating specific information such as when a ground predator approaches, and when a nest or robin is being directly threatened.
Even during nesting season, when robins exhibit mostly competitive and territorial behavior, they may still band together to drive away a predator.
Robin's egg blue is a color named after the bird's eggs.
The American robin has a place in Native American mythology.
The story of how the robin got its red breast by fanning the dying flames of a campfire to save a Native American man and a boy is similar to those that surround the European robin.
The Tlingit people of Northwestern North America held it to be a culture hero created by Raven to please the people with its song.
One of the houses of the Raven Tribe from the Nisga'a Nation holds the robin as a house crest.
The Peace Bridge robins were a family of American robins that attracted minor publicity in the mid-1930s for their prominent nest on the Canadian side of the Peace Bridge connecting Buffalo, New York to Fort Erie, Ontario.
The robin is considered a symbol of spring.
A well-known example is a poem by Emily Dickinson, "I Dreaded That First Robin So".
Among other 19th-century poems about the first robin of spring is "The First Robin" by Dr. William H. Drummond, which according to the author's wife is based on a Quebec superstition that whoever sees the first robin of spring will have good luck.
The association has continued down to the present day, as, for example, in one Calvin and Hobbes cartoon from 1990 that had Calvin celebrating his inevitable wealth and fame after seeing the first robin of spring.
The harbinger of spring sobriquet is borne out by the fact that robins tend to follow the isotherm north in spring, but also south in fall.
American popular songs featuring this bird include "When the Red, Red Robin (Comes Bob, Bob, Bobbin' Along)", written by Harry M. Woods and a hit for Al Jolson and others, and "Rockin' Robin", written by Roger Thomas and a hit for Bobby Day and others.
Although the comic-book superhero Robin was inspired by an N. C. Wyeth illustration of Robin Hood, a later version had his mother nicknaming him Robin because he was born on the first day of spring.
His red shirt suggests the bird's red breast.
