Mary Todd Lincoln (née Mary Ann Todd; December 13, 1818 - July 16, 1882) was the wife of the 16th President of the United States, Abraham Lincoln, and as such the First Lady of the United States from 1861 to 1865.
She dropped the name Ann after her younger sister, Ann Todd (Clark), was born, and did not use the name Todd after marrying.
Mary was a member of a large, wealthy Kentucky family, and was well educated.
After finishing school during her teens, she moved to Springfield, Illinois, where she lived with her married sister Elizabeth Edwards.
Before she married Abraham Lincoln, Mary was courted by his long-time political opponent Stephen A. Douglas.
She and Lincoln had four sons together, only one of whom outlived her.
Their home of about 17 years still stands at Eighth and Jackson Streets in Springfield, Illinois.
She supported her husband throughout his presidency.
She witnessed his fatal shooting when they were together in the President's Box at Ford's Theatre on Tenth Street in Washington.
Mary was briefly involuntarily institutionalized for psychiatric disease ten years after her husband's murder, but later retired to the home of her sister.
She also complained of many physical symptoms during her adult life.
Early life and education
Mary was born in Lexington, Kentucky, as the fourth of seven children of Robert Smith Todd, a banker, and Elizabeth "Eliza" (Parker) Todd.
When Mary was six, her mother died in childbirth.
Two years later, her father married Elizabeth "Betsy" Humphreys and they had nine children together.
Mary had a difficult relationship with her stepmother.
From 1832, Mary and her family lived in what is now known as the Mary Todd Lincoln House, an elegant 14-room residence at 578 West Main Street in Lexington, Kentucky.
Mary's paternal great-grandfather, David Levi Todd, was born in County Longford, Ireland, and immigrated through Pennsylvania to Kentucky.
Another great-grandfather, Andrew Porter, was the son of an Irish immigrant to New Hampshire and later Pennsylvania.
Her great-great maternal grandfather Samuel McDowell was born in Scotland, and emigrated to Pennsylvania.
Other Todd ancestors came from England.
At an early age Mary was sent to Madame Mentelle's finishing school, where the curriculum concentrated on French and literature.
She learned to speak French fluently and studied dance, drama, music, and social graces.
By age 20, she was regarded as witty and gregarious, with a grasp of politics.
Like her family, she was a Whig.
Mary began living with her sister Elizabeth Porter Edwards in Springfield, Illinois, in October 1839.
Elizabeth, married to Ninian W. Edwards, son of a former governor, served as Mary's guardian.
Mary was popular among the gentry of Springfield, and though she was courted by the rising young lawyer and Democratic Party politician Stephen A. Douglas and others, she chose Abraham Lincoln, a fellow Whig. congestive heart failure, or tuberculosis)
Robert and Tad survived to adulthood and the death of their father, and only Robert outlived his mother.
File:Robert Todd Lincoln, three-quarter length portrait, seated.jpg|Robert Todd Lincoln
File:Eddielincoln (cropped).jpg|Edward Baker Lincoln
File:WILLIE.JPG|William Wallace Lincoln
File:Tad Lincoln in uniform.jpg|Thomas Lincoln
Lincoln's career and home life
Lincoln and Douglas eventually became political rivals in the great Lincoln-Douglas debates for a seat representing Illinois in the United States Senate in 1858.
Although Douglas successfully secured the seat when elected by the Illinois legislature, Lincoln became famous for his position on slavery, which generated national support for him.
While Lincoln pursued his increasingly successful career as a Springfield lawyer, Mary supervised their growing household.
Their house, where they resided from 1844 until 1861, still stands in Springfield, and has been designated the Lincoln Home National Historic Site.
During Lincoln's years as an Illinois circuit lawyer, Mary was often left alone for months at a time to raise their children and run the household.
Mary supported her husband socially and politically, not least when Lincoln was elected president in 1860.
First Lady of the United States
During her White House years, Mary Lincoln faced many personal difficulties generated by political divisions within the nation.
Her family was from a border state where slavery was permitted.
Several of her half-brothers served in the Confederate Army and were killed in action, and one brother served the Confederacy as a surgeon.
Mary staunchly supported her husband in his quest to save the Union and was strictly loyal to his policies.
Considered a "westerner" although she had grown up in the more refined Upper South city of Lexington, Mary worked hard to serve as her husband's First Lady in Washington, D.C., a political center dominated by eastern culture.
Lincoln was regarded as the first "western" president, and critics described Mary's manners as coarse and pretentious.
She had difficulty negotiating White House social responsibilities and rivalries, spoils-seeking solicitors, and baiting newspapers
Mary suffered from severe headaches, described as migraines, throughout her adult life, as well as protracted depression.
Her headaches seemed to become more frequent after she suffered a head injury in a carriage accident during her White House years.
A history of mood swings, fierce temper, public outbursts throughout Lincoln's presidency, as well as excessive spending, has led some historians and psychologists to argue that Mary suffered from bipolar disorder.
Another theory holds that Mary's manic and depressive episodes, as well as many of her physical symptoms, could be explained as manifestations of pernicious anemia.
Mary Lincoln's grief over Willie's death was so devastating that took to her bed for three weeks, so desolated that she could not attend his funeral or look after Tad.
Mary was so distraught for many months that Lincoln had to employ a nurse to look after her.
From time to time, she accompanied Lincoln on military visits to the field.
Responsible for hosting many social functions, she has often been blamed by historians for spending too much money on the White House.
She sat with her husband watching the comic play Our American Cousin at Ford's Theatre.
During the third act, the President and Mrs. Lincoln drew closer together, holding hands while enjoying the play.
Mary whispered to her husband, who was holding her hand, "What will Miss Harris think of my hanging on to you so?"
The president smiled and replied, "She won't think anything about it".
That was the last conversation the Lincolns ever had.
Minutes later, President Lincoln was shot by John Wilkes Booth.
She was holding Abraham's hand when Booth's bullet struck the back of his head.
Mrs. Lincoln accompanied her mortally wounded husband across the street to the Petersen House, where he was taken to a back bedroom and laid crosswise on the bed there, where Lincoln's Cabinet was summoned.
Their son Robert sat with Lincoln throughout the night and to the following morning - Saturday, April 15, 1865.
At one point, Secretary of War Edwin M. Stanton ordered Mary from the room as she was so unhinged with grief.
and, as Dixon reported, "she again seated herself by the President, kissing him and calling him every endearing name."
As he died his breathing grew quieter, his face more calm.
According to some accounts, at his last drawn breath, on the morning after the assassination, he smiled broadly and then expired.
Historians, most notably author Lee Davis have emphasized Lincoln's peaceful appearance when and after he died: "It was the first time in four years, probably, that a peaceful expression crossed his face."
Assistant Secretary of the Treasury in the Lincoln Administration, Maunsell Bradhurst Field wrote, "I had never seen upon the President's face an expression more genial and pleasing."
The President's secretary, John Hay, saw "a look of unspeakable peace came upon his worn features".
Later life and death
Afterwards, she received messages of condolence from all over the world, many of which she attempted to answer personally.
To Queen Victoria she wrote:
I have received the letter which Your Majesty has had the kindness to write.
I am deeply grateful for this expression of tender sympathy, coming as they do, from a heart which from its own sorrow, can appreciate the intense grief I now endure.
Victoria had suffered the loss of her husband, Prince Albert, four years earlier.
As a widow, Mrs. Lincoln returned to Illinois and lived in Chicago with her sons.
In 1868, her former modiste (dressmaker) and confidante, Elizabeth Keckley (1818-1907), published Behind the Scenes, or, Thirty Years a Slave, and Four Years in the White House.
She had been born into slavery, purchased her freedom and that of her son, and became a successful businesswoman in Washington, D.C.
Although this book provides valuable insight into the character and life of Mary Todd Lincoln, at the time the former First Lady (and much of the public and press) regarded it as a breach of friendship and confidentiality.
Keckley was widely criticized for her book, especially as her editor had published letters from Mary Lincoln to her.
It has now been gratefully accepted by many historians and biographers and been used to flesh out the President and First Lady's personalities behind the scenes in the Executive Mansion and been used as the basis for several motion pictures and TV mini-series during the late 20th and early 21st centuries.
In an act approved by a low margin on July 14, 1870, the United States Congress granted Mrs. Lincoln a life pension of $3,000 a year ($ in dollars).
Mary had lobbied hard for such a pension, writing numerous letters to Congress and urging patrons such as Simon Cameron to petition on her behalf.
She insisted that she deserved a pension just as much as the widows of soldiers, as she portrayed her husband as a fallen commander.
At the time it was unprecedented for widows of presidents, and Mary Lincoln had alienated many congressmen, making it difficult for her to gain approval.
Paranormal researcher Melvyn Willin, in his book Ghosts Caught on Film, claims that the photo was taken around 1869 (after Abraham Lincoln's death), and that Mumler did not know that his sitter was Lincoln, instead believing her to be a 'Mrs Tundall'.
Willin goes on to say that Mumler did not discover who she was until after the photo was developed.
The College of Psychic Studies, referencing notes belonging to William Stainton Moses (who has appeared in photographs by other spirit photographers), claim that the photo was taken in the early 1870s, Lincoln had assumed the name of 'Mrs. Lindall' and that Lincoln had to be encouraged by Mumler's wife (a medium) to identify her husband on the photo.
Though the image has been dismissed as being accidental double exposure, it has been widely circulated.
After the court proceedings, she was so despondent that she attempted suicide.
She went to several pharmacies and ordered enough laudanum to kill herself, but an alert pharmacist frustrated her attempts and finally gave her a placebo.
Mary Lincoln was released into the custody of her sister in Springfield.
In 1876 she was declared competent to manage her own affairs.
The earlier committal proceedings had resulted in Mary being profoundly estranged from her son Robert, and they did not see each other again until shortly before her death.
Congress eventually granted the increase, along with an additional monetary gift.
During the early 1880s, Mary Lincoln was confined to the Springfield, Illinois, residence of her sister Elizabeth Edwards.
On July 15, 1882, exactly eleven years after her youngest son died, she collapsed at her sister's home, lapsed into a coma, and died the next morning of a stroke at age 63.
In popular culture
Biographies have been written about Mary Lincoln as well as her husband.
Barbara Hambly's The Emancipator's Wife (2005) is considered a well-researched historical novel that provides context for her use of over-the-counter drugs containing alcohol and opium, which were frequently given to women of her era.
Janis Cooke Newman's historical novel Mary: Mrs. A. Lincoln (2007), in which Mary tells her own story after incarceration in the asylum in an effort to maintain and prove her sanity, is considered by Mary's recent biographer, Jean H. Baker, to be 'close to life' in its depiction of Mary Lincoln's life.
The grief experienced through her widowhood is a theme of Andrew Holleran's 2006 novel, Grief.
Mary Lincoln has been portrayed by several actresses in film, including Kay Hammond in Abraham Lincoln (1930) directed by D.W. Griffith; Ruth Gordon in Abe Lincoln in Illinois (1940); Julie Harris in The Last of Mrs. Lincoln, a 1976 television adaptation of the stage play; Mary Tyler Moore in the 1988 television mini-series Lincoln; Sally Field in Steven Spielberg's 2012 film Lincoln; Penelope Ann Miller in Saving Lincoln (2012); and Mary Elizabeth Winstead in Abraham Lincoln: Vampire Hunter (2012), set during the Civil War.
Mezzo-soprano Elaine Bonazzi portrayed Mary in Thomas Pasatieri's Emmy Award winning opera The Trial of Mary Lincoln in 1972.
In 1955, Vivi Janiss played the historical Mary Todd Lincoln in "How Chance Made Lincoln President" in the anthology television series, TV Reader's Digest.
Richard Gaines was cast as Abraham Lincoln, and Ken Hardison played their son, Robert Todd Lincoln.
In 2005, Sufjan Stevens referenced Mary Todd Lincoln in the instrumental track "A Short Reprise for Mary Todd, Who Went Insane, but for Very Good Reasons" from his album Illinois, which is themed around the state where she resided the majority of her life.
Family
Her sister Elizabeth Todd married Ninian Edwards Jr., the son of the Illinois Governor Ninian Edwards.
Their daughter Julia Edwards married Edward L. Baker, editor of the Illinois State Journal and son of Congressman David Jewett Baker.
Their daughter, Mary Todd Lincoln's grandniece Mary Edwards Brown, served as custodian of the Lincoln Homestead, as did her own daughter.
Mary's half-sister Emilie Todd married Benjamin Hardin Helm, CSA general and son of the Kentucky Governor John L. Helm.
Another half-sister Elodie Todd married CSA Brig.
General Nathaniel H. R. Dawson, later the third U.S. Commissioner of Education.
One of Mary Todd's cousins was Kentucky Congressman Mary-Todd-Lincoln-A-Biography 0393333035/ excerpt and text search
* Michael Burlingame, The Inner World of Abraham Lincoln (University of Illinois Press, 1994)
* Clinton, Catherine.
Mrs. Lincoln: A Life (HarperCollins, 2011)
* Emerson, Jason (2007).
The Madness of Mary Lincoln.
Carbondale, Illinois: Southern Illinois University Press.
pp. 20-22. .
* King, C.J. Four Marys and a Jessie: The Story of the Lincoln Women (Hildene, 2015)
* Neely, Mark E. Jr. and R. Gerald McMurtry.
The Insanity File: The Case of Mary Todd Lincoln (1993) https:/ The-Insanity-File-Case-Lincoln 0809318954/ excerpt and text search
* Ruth Painter Randall, Mary Lincoln: Biography of a Marriage (Little, Brown & Co., 1953)
* Williams, Frank J. and Michael Burkhimer, eds.
The Mary Lincoln Enigma: Historians on America's Most Controversial First Lady (Southern Illinois University Press; 2012) 392 pages; scholarly essays on her childhood in Kentucky, the early years of her marriage, her political relationship with her husband, and her relationship with her son Robert.
