Cannabis () is a genus of flowering plants in the family Cannabaceae.
The number of species within the genus is disputed.
Three species may be recognized: Cannabis sativa, Cannabis indica, and Cannabis ruderalis; C. ruderalis may be included within C. sativa; all three may be treated as subspecies of a single species, C. sativa; or C. sativa may be accepted as a single undivided species.
The genus is widely accepted as being indigenous to and originating from Central Asia, with some researchers also including upper South Asia in its origin.
The plant is also known as hemp, although this term is often used to refer only to varieties of Cannabis cultivated for non-drug use.
Cannabis has long been used for hemp fibre, hemp seeds and their oils, hemp leaves for use as vegetables and as juice, medicinal purposes, and as a recreational drug.
Industrial hemp products are made from cannabis plants selected to produce an abundance of fiber.
To satisfy the UN Narcotics Convention, some cannabis strains have been bred to produce minimal levels of tetrahydrocannabinol (THC), the principal psychoactive constituent.
Some strains have been selectively bred to produce a maximum of THC (a cannabinoid), the strength of which is enhanced by , are extracted from the plant.
Globally, in 2013, 60,400 kilograms of cannabis were produced legally.
In 2014 there were an estimated 182.5 million cannabis users (3.8% of the population aged 15-64).
Description
Cannabis is an annual, dioecious, flowering herb.
The leaves are palmately compound or digitate, with serrate leaflets.
The first pair of leaves usually have a single leaflet, the number gradually increasing up to a maximum of about thirteen leaflets per leaf (usually seven or nine), depending on variety and growing conditions.
At the top of a flowering plant, this number again diminishes to a single leaflet per leaf.
The lower leaf pairs usually occur in an opposite leaf arrangement and the upper leaf pairs in an alternate arrangement on the main stem of a mature plant.
The leaves have a peculiar and diagnostic venation pattern that enables persons poorly familiar with the plant to distinguish a cannabis leaf from unrelated species that have confusingly similar leaves (see illustration).
As is common in serrated leaves, each serration has a central vein extending to its tip.
However, the serration vein originates from lower down the central vein of the leaflet, typically opposite to the position of, not the first notch down, but the next notch.
This means that on its way from the midrib of the leaflet to the point of the serration, the vein serving the tip of the serration passes close by the intervening notch.
Sometimes the vein will actually pass tangent to the notch, but often it will pass by at a small distance, and when that happens a spur vein (occasionally a pair of such spur veins) branches off and joins the leaf margin at the deepest point of the notch.
This venation pattern varies slightly among varieties, but in general it enables one to tell Cannabis leaves from superficially similar leaves without difficulty and without special equipment.
Tiny samples of Cannabis plants also can be identified with precision by microscopic examination of leaf cells and similar features, but that requires special expertise and equipment.
Reproduction
All known strains of Cannabis are wind-pollinated and the fruit is an achene.
Most strains of Cannabis are short day plants, having imperfect flowers, with staminate "male" and pistillate "female" flowers occurring on separate plants.
"At a very early period the Chinese recognized the Cannabis plant as dioecious", and the (c. 3rd century BCE) Erya dictionary defined xi .
Retrieved on 23 February 2007
Many monoecious varieties have also been described, in which individual plants bear both male and female flowers.
Subdioecy (the occurrence of monoecious individuals and dioecious individuals within the same population) is widespread.
Many populations have been described as sexually labile.
As a result of intensive selection in cultivation, Cannabis exhibits many sexual phenotypes that can be described in terms of the ratio of female to male flowers occurring in the individual, or typical in the cultivar.
Dioecious varieties are preferred for drug production, where the fruits (produced by female flowers) are used.
Dioecious varieties are also preferred for textile fiber production, whereas monoecious varieties are preferred for pulp and paper production.
It has been suggested that the presence of monoecy can be used to differentiate licit crops of monoecious hemp from illicit drug crops.
Soon thereafter, Schaffner disputed Hirata's interpretation, and published results from his own studies of sex reversal in hemp, concluding that an X:A system was in use and that furthermore sex was strongly influenced by environmental conditions.
Since the 1920s, a number of sex determination models have been proposed for Cannabis.
Ainsworth describes sex determination in the genus as using "an X/autosome dosage type".
According to other researchers, no modern karyotype of Cannabis had been published as of 1996.
Proponents of the XY system state that Y chromosome is slightly larger than the X, but difficult to differentiate cytologically.
More recently, Sakamoto and various co-authors have used RAPD to isolate several genetic marker sequences that they name Male-Associated DNA in Cannabis (MADC), and which they interpret as indirect evidence of a male chromosome.
Several other research groups have reported identification of male-associated markers using RAPD and AFLP.
Ainsworth commented on these findings, stating,
QTEMPLATE |It is not surprising that male-associated markers are relatively abundant.
In dioecious plants where sex chromosomes have not been identified, markers for maleness indicate either the presence of sex chromosomes which have not been distinguished by cytological methods or that the marker is tightly linked to a gene involved in sex determination.
Many researchers have suggested that sex in Cannabis is determined or strongly influenced by environmental factors.
A PCR-based method for the detection of female-associated DNA polymorphisms by genotyping has been developed.
File:Hemp plants-cannabis sativa-single 3.JPG|A male hemp plant
File:Cannabis indica Selkem.jpg|Dense raceme of female flowers typical of drug-type varieties of Cannabis
Biochemistry and drugs
Cannabis plants produce a group of chemicals called cannabinoids, which produce mental and physical effects when consumed.
Cannabinoids, terpenoids, and other compounds are secreted by glandular trichomes that occur most abundantly on the floral calyxes and bracts of female plants.
As a drug it usually comes in the form of dried infructescences ("buds" or "marijuana"), resin (hashish), or various extracts collectively known as hashish oil.
The first genome sequence of Cannabis, which is estimated to be 820 Mb in size, was published in 2011 by a team of Canadian scientists.
Taxonomy
The genus Cannabis was formerly placed in the nettle family (Urticaceae) or mulberry family (Moraceae), and later, along with the genus Humulus (hops), in a separate family, the hemp family (Cannabaceae sensu stricto).
Recent phylogenetic studies based on cpDNA restriction site analysis and gene sequencing strongly suggest that the Cannabaceae sensu stricto arose from within the former family Celtidaceae, and that the two families should be merged to form a single monophyletic family, the Cannabaceae sensu lato.
Various types of Cannabis have been described, and variously classified as species, subspecies, or varieties:
* plants cultivated for fiber and seed production, described as low-intoxicant, non-drug, or fiber types.
* plants cultivated for drug production, described as high-intoxicant or drug types.
* escaped, hybridised, or wild forms of either of the above types.
Cannabis plants produce a unique family of terpeno-phenolic compounds called cannabinoids, some of which produce the "high" which may be experienced from consuming marijuana.
There are 483 identifiable chemical constituents known to exist in the cannabis plant, and at least 85 different cannabinoids have been isolated from the plant.
The two cannabinoids usually produced in greatest abundance are cannabidiol (CBD) and/or Δ9-tetrahydrocannabinol (THC), but only THC is psychoactive.
Since the early 1970s, Cannabis plants have been categorized by their chemical phenotype or "chemotype", based on the overall amount of THC produced, and on the ratio of THC to CBD.
Although overall cannabinoid production is influenced by environmental factors, the THC/CBD ratio is genetically determined and remains fixed throughout the life of a plant.
Non-drug plants produce relatively low levels of THC and high levels of CBD, while drug plants produce high levels of THC and low levels of CBD.
When plants of these two chemotypes cross-pollinate, the plants in the first filial (F1) generation have an intermediate chemotype and produce intermedite amounts of CBD and THC.
Female plants of this chemotype may produce enough THC to be utilized for drug production.
Whether the drug and non-drug, cultivated and wild types of Cannabis constitute a single, highly variable species, or the genus is polytypic with more than one species, has been a subject of debate for well over two centuries.
This is a contentious issue because there is no universally accepted definition of a species.
One widely applied criterion for species recognition is that species are "groups of actually or potentially interbreeding natural populations which are reproductively isolated from other such groups."
Populations that are physiologically capable of interbreeding, but morphologically or genetically divergent and isolated by geography or ecology, are sometimes considered to be separate species.
It remains controversial whether sufficient morphological and genetic divergence occurs within the genus as a result of geographical or ecological isolation to justify recognition of more than one species.
Early classifications
The genus Cannabis was first classified using the "modern" system of taxonomic nomenclature by Carl Linnaeus in 1753, who devised the system still in use for the naming of species.
He considered the genus to be monotypic, having just a single species that he named Cannabis sativa L. (L. stands for Linnaeus, and indicates the authority who first named the species).
Linnaeus was familiar with European hemp, which was widely cultivated at the time.
In 1785, noted evolutionary biologist Jean-Baptiste de Lamarck published a description of a second species of Cannabis, which he named Cannabis indica Lam.
Lamarck based his description of the newly named species on plant specimens collected in India.
He described C. indica as having poorer fiber quality than C. sativa, but greater utility as an inebriant.
Additional Cannabis species were proposed in the 19th century, including strains from China and Vietnam (Indo-China) assigned the names Cannabis chinensis Delile, and Cannabis gigantea Delile ex Vilmorin.
However, many taxonomists found these putative species difficult to distinguish.
In the early 20th century, the single-species concept was still widely accepted, except in the Soviet Union where Cannabis continued to be the subject of active taxonomic study.
The name Cannabis indica was listed in various Pharmacopoeias, and was widely used to designate Cannabis suitable for the manufacture of medicinal preparations.
20th century
In 1924, Russian botanist D.E. Janichevsky concluded that ruderal Cannabis in central Russia is either a variety of C. sativa or a separate species, and proposed C. sativa L. var.
ruderalis Janisch, and Cannabis ruderalis Janisch, as alternative names.
In the 1970s, the taxonomic classification of Cannabis took on added significance in North America.
Laws prohibiting Cannabis in the United States and Canada specifically named products of C. sativa as prohibited materials.
Enterprising attorneys for the defense in a few drug busts argued that the seized Cannabis material may not have been C. sativa, and was therefore not prohibited by law.
Attorneys on both sides recruited botanists to provide expert testimony.
Among those testifying for the prosecution was Dr. Ernest Small, while Dr. Richard E. Schultes and others testified for the defense.
The botanists engaged in heated debate (outside of court), and both camps impugned the other's integrity.
In 1976, Canadian botanist Ernest Small and American taxonomist Arthur Cronquist published a taxonomic revision that recognizes a single species of Cannabis with two subspecies: C. sativa L. subsp.
sativa, and C. sativa L. subsp.
indica (Lam.)
Small & Cronq.
Professors William Emboden, Loran Anderson, and Harvard botanist Richard E. Schultes and coworkers also conducted taxonomic studies of Cannabis in the 1970s, and concluded that stable morphological differences exist that support recognition of at least three species, C. sativa, C. indica, and C. ruderalis.
For Schultes, this was a reversal of his previous interpretation that Cannabis is monotypic, with only a single species.
According to Schultes' and Anderson's descriptions, C. sativa is tall and laxly branched with relatively narrow leaflets, C. indica is shorter, conical in shape, and has relatively wide leaflets, and C. ruderalis is short, branchless, and grows wild in Central Asia.
This taxonomic interpretation was embraced by Cannabis aficionados who commonly distinguish narrow-leafed "sativa" strains from wide-leafed "indica" strains.
Continuing research
Molecular analytical techniques developed in the late 20th century are being applied to questions of taxonomic classification.
This has resulted in many reclassifications based on evolutionary systematics.
Several studies of Random Amplified Polymorphic DNA (RAPD) and other types of genetic markers have been conducted on drug and fiber strains of Cannabis, primarily for plant breeding and forensic purposes.
Dutch Cannabis researcher E.P.M. de Meijer and coworkers described some of their RAPD studies as showing an "extremely high" degree of genetic polymorphism between and within populations, suggesting a high degree of potential variation for selection, even in heavily selected hemp cultivars.
The patterns of genetic, morphological, and chemotaxonomic variation support recognition of C. sativa and C. indica as separate species, C. ruderalis is a separate species from C. sativa.
Despite advanced analytical techniques, much of the cannabis used recreationally is inaccurately classified.
One laboratory at the University of British Columbia found that Jamaican Lamb's Bread, claimed to be 100% sativa, was in fact almost 100% indica (the opposite strain).
Legalization of cannabis in Canada () may help spur private-sector research, especially in terms of diversification of strains.
It should also improve classification accuracy for cannabis used recreationally.
Legalization coupled with Canadian government (Health Canada) oversight of production and labelling will likely result in more-and more accurate-testing to determine exact strains and content.
Furthermore, the rise of craft cannabis growers in Canada should ensure quality, experimentation/research, and diversification of strains among private-sector producers.
Popular usage
The scientific debate regarding taxonomy has had little effect on the terminology in widespread use among cultivators and users of drug-type Cannabis.
Cannabis aficionados recognize three distinct types based on such factors as morphology, native range, aroma, and subjective psychoactive characteristics.
Sativa is the most widespread variety, which is usually tall, laxly branched, and found in warm lowland regions.
Indica designates shorter, bushier plants adapted to cooler climates and highland environments.
Ruderalis is the informal name for the short plants that grow wild in Europe and Central Asia.
Breeders, seed companies, and cultivators of drug type Cannabis often describe the ancestry or gross phenotypic characteristics of cultivars by categorizing them as "pure indica", "mostly indica", "indica/sativa", "mostly sativa", or "pure sativa".
Uses
Cannabis is used for a wide variety of purposes.
History
The use of Cannabis as a mind-altering drug has been documented by archaeological finds in prehistoric societies in Eurasia and Africa.
The oldest written record of cannabis usage is the Greek historian Herodotus's reference to the central Eurasian Scythians taking cannabis steam baths.
His (c. 440 BCE) Histories records, "The Scythians, as I said, take some of this hemp-seed presumably, flowers, and, creeping under the felt coverings, throw it upon the red-hot stones; immediately it smokes, and gives out such a vapour as no Greek vapour-bath can exceed; the Scyths, delighted, shout for joy."
Classical Greeks and Romans were using cannabis, while in the Middle East, use spread throughout the Islamic empire to North Africa.
In 1545, cannabis spread to the western hemisphere where Spaniards imported it to Chile for its use as fiber.
In North America, cannabis, in the form of hemp, was grown for use in rope, clothing and paper.
Recreational use
Cannabis is a popular recreational drug around the world, only behind alcohol, caffeine, and tobacco.
In the United States alone, it is believed that over 100 million Americans have tried cannabis, with 25 million Americans having used it within the past year.
The psychoactive effects of cannabis are known to have a triphasic nature.
Primary psychoactive effects include a state of relaxation, and to a lesser degree, euphoria from its main psychoactive compound, tetrahydrocannabinol.
Secondary psychoactive effects, such as a facility for philosophical thinking, introspection and metacognition have been reported among cases of anxiety and paranoia.
Finally, the tertiary psychoactive effects of the drug cannabis, can include an increase in heart rate and hunger, believed to be caused by 11-OH-THC, a psychoactive metabolite of THC produced in the liver.
Normal cognition is restored after approximately three hours for larger doses via a smoking pipe, bong or vaporizer.
attenuates, or reduces the higher anxiety levels caused by THC alone.
According to Delphic analysis by British researchers in 2007, cannabis has a lower risk factor for dependence compared to both nicotine and alcohol.
However, everyday use of cannabis may be correlated with psychological withdrawal symptoms, such as irritability or insomnia, However, cannabis withdrawal symptoms are typically mild and are never life-threatening.
Risk of adverse outcomes from cannabis use may be reduced by implementation of evidence-based education and intervention tools communicated to the public with practical regulation measures.
Medical use
Medical cannabis (or medical marijuana) refers to the use of cannabis and its constituent cannabinoids, to treat disease or improve symptoms.
Cannabis is used to reduce nausea and vomiting during chemotherapy, to improve appetite in people with HIV/AIDS, and to treat chronic pain and muscle spasms.
Cannabinoids are under preliminary research for their potential to affect stroke.
Short-term use increases both minor and major adverse effects.
Concerns including memory and cognition problems, risk of addiction, schizophrenia in young people, and the risk of children taking it by accident.
ranging from paper, cordage, construction material and textiles in general, to clothing.
Hemp is stronger and longer-lasting than cotton.
It also is a useful source of foodstuffs (hemp milk, hemp seed, hemp oil) and biofuels.
Hemp has been used by many civilizations, from China to Europe (and later North America) during the last 12,000 years.
In modern times novel applications and improvements have been explored with modest commercial success.
Ancient and religious uses
The Cannabis plant has a history of medicinal use dating back thousands of years across many cultures.
The Yanghai Tombs, a vast ancient cemetery (54 000 m2) situated in the Turfan district of the Xinjiang Uyghur Autonomous Region in northwest China, have revealed the 2700-year-old grave of a shaman.
He is thought to have belonged to the Jushi culture recorded in the area centuries later in the Hanshu, Chap 96B. Near the head and foot of the shaman was a large leather basket and wooden bowl filled with 789g of cannabis, superbly preserved by climatic and burial conditions.
An international team demonstrated that this material contained tetrahydrocannabinol, the psychoactive component of cannabis.
The cannabis was presumably employed by this culture as a medicinal or psychoactive agent, or an aid to divination.
This is the oldest documentation of cannabis as a pharmacologically active agent.
The earliest evidence of cannabis smoking has been found in the 2,500-year-old tombs of Jirzankal Cemetery in the Pamir Mountains in Western China, where cannabis residue were found in burners with charred pebbles possibly used during funeral rituals.
Settlements which date from c. 2200-1700 BCE in the Bactria and Margiana contained elaborate ritual structures with rooms containing everything needed for making drinks containing extracts from poppy (opium), hemp (cannabis), and ephedra (which contains ephedrine).
Although there is no evidence of ephedra being used by steppe tribes, they engaged in cultic use of hemp.
Cultic use ranged from Romania to the Yenisei River and had begun by 3rd millennium BC Smoking hemp has been found at Pazyryk.
Cannabis is first referred to in Hindu Vedas between 2000 and 1400 BCE, in the Atharvaveda.
By the 10th century CE, it has been suggested that it was referred to by some in India as "food of the gods".
Cannabis use eventually became a ritual part of the Hindu festival of Holi.
One of the earliest to use this plant in medical purposes was Korakkar, one of the 18 Siddhas.
The plant is called Korakkar Mooli in the Tamil language, meaning Korakkar's herb.
In Buddhism, cannabis is generally regarded as an intoxicant and may be a hindrance to development of meditation and clear awareness.
In ancient Germanic culture, Cannabis was associated with the Norse love goddess, Freya.
An anointing oil mentioned in Exodus is, by some translators, said to contain Cannabis.
Sufis have used Cannabis in a spiritual context since the 13th century CE.
In modern times, the Rastafari movement has embraced Cannabis as a sacrament.
Elders of the Ethiopian Zion Coptic Church, a religious movement founded in the United States in 1975 with no ties to either Ethiopia or the Coptic Church, consider Cannabis to be the Eucharist, claiming it as an oral tradition from Ethiopia dating back to the time of Christ.
Like the Rastafari, some modern Gnostic Christian sects have asserted that Cannabis is the Tree of Life.
Other organized religions founded in the 20th century that treat Cannabis as a sacrament are the THC Ministry, Cantheism, the Cannabis Assembly and the Church of Cognizance.
Rastafarians tend to be among the biggest consumers of modern Cannabis use.
Cannabis is frequently used among Sufis - the mystical interpretation of Islam that exerts strong influence over local Muslim practices in Bangladesh, India, Indonesia, Turkey, and Pakistan.
Cannabis preparations are frequently used at Sufi festivals in those countries.
Etymology
The word cannabis is from Greek () (see Latin ), which was originally Scythian or Thracian.
It is related to the Persian kanab, the English canvas and possibly the English hemp (Old English ).
Further reading
* Hulsewé, A. F. P. (1979).
China in Central Asia: The Early Stage 125 BC - AD 23: an annotated translation of chapters 61 and 96 of the History of the Former Han Dynasty.
E. J. Brill, Leiden. .
* Mallory, J. P. and Victor H. Mair (2000).
The Tarim Mummies: Ancient China and the Mystery of the Earliest Peoples from the West.
Thames & Hudson, London. .
