The Great Mosque of Xi'an () is the largest mosque in China.
An active place of worship within Xi'an Muslim Quarter, this courtyard complex is also a popular tourist site.
The majority of the mosque was built during the early Ming dynasty.
It now houses more than twenty buildings in its five courtyards, and covers .
Etymology
The mosque is also known as the Huajue Mosque (),
History
The mosque was constructed during the Hongwu reign of the Ming dynasty, with further additions during the Qing dynasty.
In 1956, the mosque was declared a Historical and Cultural Site Protected at the Shaanxi Province Level, and was later promoted to a Major Historical and Cultural Site Protected at the National Level in 1988.
The mosque is still used as a place of worship by Chinese Muslims, primarily Hui people, today however attendance is greatly reduced.
Just the main hall of the Great Mosque of Xi’an can accommodate 1,000 people yet today a typical service only attracts around 100.
Architecture
The mosque is a walled complex of five courtyards, with the prayer hall located in the fourth courtyard.
Each courtyard contains a central monument, such as a gate, and is lined with greenery as well as subsidiary buildings.
The first courtyard, for instance, contains a Qing dynasty monumental gate, while the fourth courtyard houses the Phoenix Pavilion, a hexagonal gazebo.
Many walls throughout the complex are filled with inscriptions of birds, plants, objects, and text, both in Chinese and Arabic.
Stone steles record repairs to the mosque and feature calligraphic works.
In the second courtyard, two steles feature scripts of the calligrapher Mi Fu of the Song dynasty and Dong Qichang, a calligrapher of the Ming dynasty.
Overall, the mosque's architecture combines a traditional Chinese architectural form with Islamic functionality.
For example, whereas traditional Chinese buildings align along a north-south axis in accordance with feng shui, the mosque is directed west towards Mecca, while still conforming to the axes of the imperial city.
Furthermore, calligraphy in both Chinese and Arabic writing appears throughout the complex, sometimes exhibiting a fusion of styles called Sini, referring to Arabic text written in Chinese-influenced script.
Some scholars also speculate that the three-story, octagonal pagoda in the third courtyard, called the Shengxinlou or “Examining the Heart Tower,” originally served as the mosque's minaret, used for the call to prayer.
The prayer hall is a monumentally sized timber building with a turquoise hip roof, painted dougong (wooden brackets), a six-pillared portico, and five doors.
It is raised upon a large stone platform lined with balustrades.
The expansive prayer hall consists of three conjoined buildings, set one behind the other.
Interior ornamentation is centered on the rear qibla wall, which has wooden carvings of floral and calligraphic designs.
Gallery
File:Chinese-style minaret of the Great Mosque.jpg|“Examining the Heart Tower” in the third courtyard
File:WAH Xian.gif|Wahbi Al-Hariri's graphite drawing of the Great Mosque of Xi'an
File:1 great mosque xian 2011.JPG|Phoenix
Pavilion in the fourth courtyard
File:Xian Mosque6.jpg|Facing the prayer hall of the Great Mosque of Xi'an, in the fourth courtyard
File:Xi'anGreatMosque.jpg|Entrance to the prayer hall
File:Arabic Plaque, Great Mosque, Xian.jpg|Calligraphy on a plaque in the Great Mosque of Xi'an
