Plasma () is one of the four fundamental states of matter, and was first described by chemist Irving Langmuir
It consists of a gas of ions - atoms which have some of their orbital electrons removed - and free electrons.
Plasma can be artificially generated by heating or subjecting a neutral gas to a strong electromagnetic field to the point where an ionized gaseous substance becomes increasingly electrically conductive.
The resulting charged ions and electrons become influenced by long-range electromagnetic fields, making the plasma dynamics more sensitive to these fields than a neutral gas.
Plasma and ionized gases have properties and display behaviours unlike those of the other states, and the transition between them is mostly a matter of nomenclature Based on the temperature and density of the environment that contains a plasma, partially ionized or fully ionized forms of plasma may be produced.
Neon signs and lightning are examples of partially ionized plasmas.
The Earth's ionosphere is a plasma and the magnetosphere contains plasma in the Earth's surrounding space environment.
The interior of the Sun is an example of fully ionized plasma, along with the solar corona and stars.
Positive charges in ions are achieved by stripping away electrons orbiting the atomic nuclei, where the total number of electrons removed is related to either increasing temperature or the local density of other ionized matter.
This also can be accompanied by the dissociation of molecular bonds,
Plasma may be the most abundant form of ordinary matter in the universe, although this hypothesis is currently tentative based on the existence and unknown properties of dark matter.
Plasma is mostly associated with stars, extending to the rarefied intracluster medium and possibly the intergalactic regions.
History
The word plasma comes and describes the behaviour of the ionized atomic nuclei and the electrons within the surrounding region of the plasma.
Very simply, each of these nuclei are suspended in a movable sea of electrons.
Plasma was first identified in a Crookes tube, and so described by Sir William Crookes in 1879 (he called it "radiant matter").
The nature of this "cathode ray" matter was subsequently identified by British physicist Sir J.J. Thomson in 1897.
The term "plasma" was coined by Irving Langmuir in 1928.
Lewi Tonks and Harold Mott-Smith, both of whom worked with Irving Langmuir in the 1920s, recall that Langmuir first used the word "plasma" in analogy with blood.
Mott-Smith recalls, in particular, that the transport of electrons from thermionic filaments reminded Langmuir of "the way blood plasma carries red and white corpuscles and germs."
Langmuir described the plasma he observed as follows:
:"Except near the electrodes, where there are sheaths containing very few electrons, the ionized gas contains ions and electrons in about equal numbers so that the resultant space charge is very small.
We shall use the name plasma to describe this region containing balanced charges of ions and electrons."
The plasma state can be contrasted with the other states: solid, liquid, and gas.
Plasma is an electrically neutral medium of unbound positive and negative particles (i.e. the overall charge of a plasma is roughly zero).
Although these particles are unbound, they are not "free" in the sense of not experiencing forces.
Moving charged particles generate an electric current within a magnetic field, and any movement of a charged plasma particle affects and is affected by the fields created by the other charges.
In turn this governs collective behaviour with many degrees of variation.
Three factors define a plasma:
#The plasma approximation: The plasma approximation applies when the plasma parameter, Λ, representing the number of charge carriers within a sphere (called the Debye sphere whose radius is the Debye screening length) surrounding a given charged particle, is sufficiently high as to shield the electrostatic influence of the particle outside of the sphere.
#Plasma frequency: The electron plasma frequency (measuring plasma oscillations of the electrons) is large compared to the electron-neutral collision frequency .
When this condition is valid, electrostatic interactions dominate over the processes of ordinary gas kinetics.
Temperature
Plasma temperature is commonly measured in kelvin or electronvolts and is, informally, a measure of the thermal kinetic energy per particle.
High temperatures are usually needed to sustain ionisation, which is a defining feature of a plasma.
The degree of plasma ionisation is determined by the electron temperature relative to the ionization energy (and more weakly by the density), in a relationship called the Saha equation.
At low temperatures, ions and electrons tend to recombine into bound states-atoms-and the plasma will eventually become a gas.
In most cases the electrons are close enough to thermal equilibrium that their temperature is relatively well-defined; this is true even when there is a significant deviation from a Maxwellian energy distribution function, for example, due to UV radiation, energetic particles, or strong electric fields.
Because of the large difference in mass, the electrons come to thermodynamic equilibrium amongst themselves much faster than they come into equilibrium with the ions or neutral atoms.
For this reason, the ion temperature may be very different from (usually lower than) the electron temperature.
This is especially common in weakly ionized technological plasmas, where the ions are often near the ambient temperature.
Fully vs. partially (weakly) ionized gases
For plasma to exist, ionisation is necessary.
The term "plasma density" by itself usually refers to the "electron density", that is, the number of free electrons per unit volume.
The degree of ionisation of a plasma is the proportion of atoms that have lost or gained electrons, and is controlled by the electron and ion temperatures and electron-ion vs electron-neutral collision frequencies.
The degree of ionisation, \alpha, is defined as \alpha
\frac, where n_i is the number density of ions and n_n is the number density of neutral atoms.
The electron density is related to this by the average charge state \langle Z\rangle of the ions through n_e
\langle Z\rangle n_i, where n_e is the number density of electrons.
In a plasma, the electron-ion collision frequency \nu_ is much greater than the electron-neutral collision frequency \nu_.
Therefore, with a weak degree of ionization \alpha, the electron-ion collision frequency can equal the electron-neutral collision frequency: \nu_ = \nu_ is the limit separating a plasma from being partially or fully ionized.
The term fully ionized gas introduced by Lyman Spitzer does not mean the degree of ionization is unity, but only that the plasma is in a Coulomb-collision dominated regime, i.e. when \nu_ > \nu_, which can correspond to a degree of ionization as low as 0.01%.
* A partially or weakly ionized gas means the plasma is not dominated by Coulomb collisions, i.e. when \nu_ 1, where \omega_ is the "electron gyrofrequency" and v_ is the "electron collision rate".
It is often the case that the electrons are magnetized while the ions are not.
Magnetized plasmas are anisotropic, meaning that their properties in the direction parallel to the magnetic field are different from those perpendicular to it.
While electric fields in plasmas are usually small due to the high conductivity, the electric field associated with a plasma moving in a magnetic field is given by \mathbf = -v\times\mathbf (where \mathbf is the electric field, \mathbf is the velocity, and \mathbf is the magnetic field), and is not affected by Debye shielding.
Comparison of plasma and gas phases
Plasma is often called the fourth state of matter after solid, liquids and gases, despite plasma typically being an ionized gas.
It is distinct from these and other lower-energy states of matter.
Although it is closely related to the gas phase in that it also has no definite form or volume, it differs in a number of ways, including the following:
Plasmas in space science and astronomy
Plasmas are by far the most common phase of ordinary matter in the universe, both by mass and by volume.
Above the Earth's surface, the ionosphere is a plasma, and the magnetosphere contains plasma.
Within our Solar System, interplanetary space is filled with the plasma expelled via the solar wind, extending from the Sun's surface out to the heliopause.
Furthermore, all the distant stars, and much of interstellar space or intergalactic space is also likely filled with plasma, albeit at very low densities.
Astrophysical plasmas are also observed in Accretion disks around stars or compact objects like white dwarfs, neutron stars, or black holes in close binary star systems.
Plasma is associated with ejection of material in astrophysical jets, which have been observed with accreting black holes or in active galaxies like M87's jet that possibly extends out to 5,000 light-years.
Common plasmas
Plasmas can appear in nature in various forms and locations, which can be usefully broadly summarised in the following Table:
Complex plasma phenomena
Although the underlying equations governing plasmas are relatively simple, plasma behaviour is extraordinarily varied and subtle: the emergence of unexpected behaviour from a simple model is a typical feature of a complex system.
Such systems lie in some sense on the boundary between ordered and disordered behaviour and cannot typically be described either by simple, smooth, mathematical functions, or by pure randomness.
The spontaneous formation of interesting spatial features on a wide range of length scales is one manifestation of plasma complexity.
The features are interesting, for example, because they are very sharp, spatially intermittent (the distance between features is much larger than the features themselves), or have a fractal form.
Many of these features were first studied in the laboratory, and have subsequently been recognized throughout the universe.
Examples of complexity and complex structures in plasmas include:
Filamentation
Striations or string-like structures, also known as Birkeland currents, are seen in many plasmas, like the plasma ball, the aurora, lightning, electric arcs, solar flares, and supernova remnants.
They are sometimes associated with larger current densities, and the interaction with the magnetic field can form a magnetic rope structure.
High power microwave breakdown at atmospheric pressure also leads to the formation of filamentary structures.
Filamentation also refers to the self-focusing of a high power laser pulse.
At high powers, the nonlinear part of the index of refraction becomes important and causes a higher index of refraction in the center of the laser beam, where the laser is brighter than at the edges, causing a feedback that focuses the laser even more.
The tighter focused laser has a higher peak brightness (irradiance) that forms a plasma.
The plasma has an index of refraction lower than one, and causes a defocusing of the laser beam.
The interplay of the focusing index of refraction, and the defocusing plasma makes the formation of a long filament of plasma that can be micrometers to kilometers in length.
One interesting aspect of the filamentation generated plasma is the relatively low ion density due to defocusing effects of the ionized electrons.
Non-neutral plasma
The strength and range of the electric force and the good conductivity of plasmas usually ensure that the densities of positive and negative charges in any sizeable region are equal ("quasineutrality").
A plasma with a significant excess of charge density, or, in the extreme case, is composed of a single species, is called a non-neutral plasma.
In such a plasma, electric fields play a dominant role.
Examples are charged particle beams, an electron cloud in a Penning trap and positron plasmas.
Dusty plasma/grain plasma
A dusty plasma contains tiny charged particles of dust (typically found in space).
The dust particles acquire high charges and interact with each other.
A plasma that contains larger particles is called grain plasma.
Under laboratory conditions, dusty plasmas are also called complex plasmas.
Impermeable plasma
Impermeable plasma is a type of thermal plasma which acts like an impermeable solid with respect to gas or cold plasma and can be physically pushed.
Interaction of cold gas and thermal plasma was briefly studied by a group led by Hannes Alfvén in 1960s and 1970s for its possible applications in insulation of fusion plasma from the reactor walls.
However, later it was found that the external magnetic fields in this configuration could induce kink instabilities in the plasma and subsequently lead to an unexpectedly high heat loss to the walls.
In 2013, a group of materials scientists reported that they have successfully generated stable impermeable plasma with no magnetic confinement using only an ultrahigh-pressure blanket of cold gas.
While spectroscopic data on the characteristics of plasma were claimed to be difficult to obtain due to the high pressure, the passive effect of plasma on synthesis of different nanostructures clearly suggested the effective confinement.
They also showed that upon maintaining the impermeability for a few tens of seconds, screening of ions at the plasma-gas interface could give rise to a strong secondary mode of heating (known as viscous heating) leading to different kinetics of reactions and formation of complex nanomaterials.
Mathematical descriptions
To completely describe the state of a plasma, all of the
particle locations and velocities that describe the electromagnetic field in the plasma region would need to be written down.
However, it is generally not practical or necessary to keep track of all the particles in a plasma.
Therefore, plasma physicists commonly use less detailed descriptions, of which
there are two main types:
Fluid model
Fluid models describe plasmas in terms of smoothed quantities, like density and averaged velocity around each position (see Plasma parameters).
One simple fluid model, magnetohydrodynamics, treats the plasma as a single fluid governed by a combination of Maxwell's equations and the Navier-Stokes equations.
A more general description is the two-fluid plasma picture, where the ions and electrons are described separately.
Fluid models are often accurate when collisionality is sufficiently high to keep the plasma velocity distribution close to a Maxwell-Boltzmann distribution.
Because fluid models usually describe the plasma in terms of a single flow at a certain temperature at each spatial location, they can neither capture velocity space structures like beams or double layers, nor resolve wave-particle effects.
Kinetic model
Kinetic models describe the particle velocity distribution function at each point in the plasma and therefore do not need to assume a Maxwell-Boltzmann distribution.
A kinetic description is often necessary for collisionless plasmas.
There are two common approaches to kinetic description of a plasma.
One is based on representing the smoothed distribution function on a grid in velocity and position.
The other, known as the particle-in-cell (PIC) technique, includes kinetic information by following the trajectories of a large number of individual particles.
Kinetic models are generally more computationally intensive than fluid models.
The Vlasov equation may be used to describe the dynamics of a system of charged particles interacting with an electromagnetic field.
In magnetized plasmas, a gyrokinetic approach can substantially reduce the computational expense of a fully kinetic simulation.
Artificial plasmas
Most artificial plasmas are generated by the application of electric and/or magnetic fields through a gas.
Plasma generated in a laboratory setting and for industrial use can be generally categorized by:
*The type of power source used to generate the plasma-DC, AC (typically with radio frequency (RF)) and microwave
*The pressure they operate at-vacuum pressure (
