Svalbard ( , ; prior to 1925 known as Spitsbergen, or Spitzbergen) is a Norwegian archipelago in the Arctic Ocean.
Situated north of mainland Europe, it is about midway between continental Norway and the North Pole.
The islands of the group range from 74° to 81° north latitude, and from 10° to 35° east longitude.
The largest island is Spitsbergen, followed by Nordaustlandet and Edgeøya.
Administratively, the archipelago is not part of any Norwegian county, but forms an unincorporated area administered by a governor appointed by the Norwegian government.
Since 2002, Svalbard's main settlement, Longyearbyen, has had an elected local government, somewhat similar to mainland municipalities.
Other settlements include the Russian mining community of Barentsburg, the research station of Ny-Ålesund, and the mining outpost of Sveagruva.
Ny-Ålesund is the northernmost settlement in the world with a permanent civilian population.
Other settlements are farther north, but are populated only by rotating groups of researchers.
The islands were first used as a whaling base by whalers who sailed far north in pursuit of whales for blubber in the 17th and 18th centuries, after which they were abandoned.
Coal mining started at the beginning of the 20th century, and several permanent communities were established.
The Svalbard Treaty of 1920 recognizes Norwegian sovereignty, and the 1925 Svalbard Act made Svalbard a full part of the Kingdom of Norway.
They also established Svalbard as a free economic zone and a demilitarized zone.
The Norwegian Store Norske and the Russian Arktikugol remain the only mining companies in place.
Research and tourism have become important supplementary industries, with the University Centre in Svalbard (UNIS) and the Svalbard Global Seed Vault playing critical roles.
No roads connect the settlements; instead snowmobiles, aircraft and boats serve inter-community transport.
Svalbard Airport, Longyear serves as the main gateway.
The archipelago features an Arctic climate, although with significantly higher temperatures than other areas at the same latitude.
The flora take advantage of the long period of midnight sun to compensate for the polar night.
Svalbard is a breeding ground for many seabirds, and also features polar bears, reindeer, the Arctic fox, and certain marine mammals.
Seven national parks and twenty-three nature reserves cover two-thirds of the archipelago, protecting the largely untouched, yet fragile, natural environment.
Approximately 60% of the archipelago is covered with glaciers, and the islands feature many mountains and fjords.
Svalbard and Jan Mayen are collectively assigned the ISO 3166-1 alpha-2 country code "SJ".
Both areas are administered by Norway, though they are separated by a distance of over and have very different administrative structures.
Geography
The Svalbard Treaty of 1920 defines Svalbard as all islands, islets and skerries from 74° to 81° north latitude, and from 10° to 35° east longitude.
The land area is , and dominated by the island of Spitsbergen, which constitutes more than half the archipelago, followed by Nordaustlandet and Edgeøya.
All settlements are located on Spitsbergen, except the meteorological outposts on Bjørnøya and Hopen.
In Longyearbyen, midnight sun lasts from 20 April until 23 August, and polar night lasts from 26 October to 15 February.
On the summer solstice, the sun bottoms out at 12° sun angle in the middle of the night, being much higher during night than in mainland Norway's polar light areas.
However, the daytime strength of the sun remains as low as 35°, which is not enough to generate heat.
Glacial ice covers or 60% of Svalbard; 30% is barren rock while 10% is vegetated.
The largest glacier is Austfonna () on Nordaustlandet, followed by Olav V Land and Vestfonna.
During summer, it is possible to ski from Sørkapp in the south to the north of Spitsbergen, with only a short distance not being covered by snow or glacier.
Kvitøya is 99.3% covered by glacier.
The landforms of Svalbard were created through repeated ice ages, when glaciers cut the former plateau into fjords, valleys, and mountains.
The tallest peak is Newtontoppen (), followed by Perriertoppen (), Ceresfjellet (), Chadwickryggen (), and Galileotoppen ().
The longest fjord is Wijdefjorden (), followed by Isfjorden (), Van Mijenfjorden (), Woodfjorden (), and Wahlenbergfjorden ().
Svalbard is part of the High Arctic Large Igneous Province, and experienced Norway's strongest earthquake on 6 March 2009, which hit a magnitude of 6.5.
History
Discovery, exploration, and mapping of a terra nullius
Norsemen possibly discovered Svalbard as early as the 12th century.
There are traditional Norse accounts of a land known as Svalbarð-literally "cold shores"-although this might have referred to Jan Mayen, or a part of eastern Greenland.
It was thought both Svalbard and Greenland were connected to mainland Europe.
The archipelago might, in that period, have been used for fishing and hunting.
The Dutchman Willem Barentsz made the first discovery of the archipelago in 1596, when he sighted its coast while searching for the Northern Sea Route.
The name Spitsbergen originated with Barentsz, who described the "pointed mountains" he saw on the west coast of the main island, Spitsbergen, although his 1599 map of the Arctic labels the island as Het Nieuwe Land ("The New Land").
Barentsz did not recognize that he had discovered an archipelago, and consequently the name Spitsbergen long remained in use both for the main island and for the archipelago as a whole.
The first known landing on the island dates to 1604, when an English ship landed at Bjørnøya and started hunting walrus; annual expeditions soon followed, and Spitsbergen became a base for hunting the bowhead whale from 1611.
Because of the lawless nature of the area, English, Danish, Dutch, and French companies and authorities tried to use force to keep out other countries' fleets.
17th-18th centuries
(1639), but
based on a painting of a Dansk hvalfangststation (Danish whaling station) by A.B.R.
Speeck (1634), which represented the Danish station in Copenhagen Bay (Kobbefjorden)
Smeerenburg was one of the first settlements, established by the Dutch in 1619.
Smaller bases were also built by the English, Danish, and French.
At first the outposts were merely summer camps, but from the early 1630s, a few individuals started to overwinter.
Whaling at Spitsbergen lasted until the 1820s, when the Dutch, British, and Danish whalers moved elsewhere in the Arctic.
By the late 17th century, Russian hunters arrived; they overwintered to a greater extent and hunted land mammals such as the polar bear and fox.
19th century
After the Anglo-Russian War in 1809, Russian activity on Svalbard diminished, and ceased by the 1820s.
Norwegian hunting-mostly for walrus-started in the 1790s.
The first Norwegian citizens to reach Spitsbergen proper were a number of Coast Sámi people from the Hammerfest region, who were hired as part of a Russian crew for an expedition in 1795.
Norwegian whaling was abandoned about the same time as the Russians left, but whaling continued around Spitsbergen until the 1830s, and around Bjørnøya until the 1860s.
20th century
Svalbard Treaty and Norwegian sovereignty
By the 1890s, Svalbard had become a destination for Arctic tourism, coal deposits had been found and the islands were being used as a base for Arctic exploration.
The first mining was along Isfjorden by Norwegians in 1899; by 1904, British interests had established themselves in Adventfjorden and started the first all-year operations.
Production in Longyearbyen, by American interests, started in 1908; and Store Norske established itself in 1916, as did other Norwegian interests during the war, in part by buying American interests.
Discussions to establish the sovereignty of the archipelago commenced in the 1910s, but were interrupted by World War I. On 9 February 1920, following the Paris Peace Conference, the Svalbard Treaty was signed, granting full sovereignty to Norway.
However, all signatory countries were granted non-discriminatory rights to fishing, hunting, and mineral resources.
The treaty took effect on 14 August 1925, at the same time as the Svalbard Act regulated the archipelago and the first governor, Johannes Gerckens Bassøe, took office.
The archipelago has traditionally been known as Spitsbergen, and the main island as West Spitsbergen.
From the 1920s, Norway renamed the archipelago Svalbard, and the main island became Spitsbergen.
Kvitøya, Kong Karls Land, Hopen, and Bjørnøya were not regarded as part of the Spitsbergen archipelago.
Russians have traditionally called the archipelago Grumant ().
The Soviet Union retained the name Spitsbergen () to support undocumented claims that Russians were the first to discover the island.
In 1928, Italian explorer Umberto Nobile and the crew of the airship Italia crashed on the icepack off the coast of Foyn Island.
The subsequent rescue attempts were covered extensively in the press and Svalbard received short-lived fame as a result.
Second World War
Svalbard, known to both British and Germans as Spitzbergen, was little affected by the German invasion of Norway in April 1940.
The settlements continued to operate as before, mining coal and monitoring the weather.
In July 1941, following the German invasion of the Soviet Union, the Royal Navy reconnoitred the islands with a view to using them as a base of operations to facilitate sending supplies to north Russia, but the idea was rejected as too impractical.
Instead, with the agreement of the Soviets and the Norwegian government in exile, in August 1941 the Norwegian and Soviet settlements on Svalbard were evacuated, and facilities there destroyed, in Operation Gauntlet.
However the Norwegian government in exile decided it would be important politically to establish a garrison in the islands, which was done in May 1942 during Operation Fritham.
Meanwhile the Germans had responded to the destruction of weather station by establishing a reporting station of their own, codenamed "Banso", in October 1941.
This was chased away in November by a visit from four British warships, but later returned.
A second station, "Knospel", was established at Ny Alesund in 1941, remaining until 1942.
In May 1942, after the arrival of the Fritham force, the German unit at Banso was evacuated.
In September 1943 in Operation Zitronella a German task force, which included the battleship Tirpitz, was sent to attack the garrison and destroy the settlements at Longyearbyen and Barentsburg.
This was achieved, but had little long-term effect: after their departure the Norwegians returned and re-established their presence.
In September 1944, the Germans set up their last weather station, Operation Haudegen in NordOstLand; this remained functioning until after the German surrender.
On 4 September 1945, the soldiers were picked up by a Norwegian seal hunting vessel and surrendered to its captain.
This group of men were the last German troops to surrender after the Second World War.
After the war, the Soviet Union proposed common Norwegian and Soviet administration and military defence of Svalbard.
This was rejected in 1947 by Norway, which two years later joined NATO.
The Soviet Union retained high civilian activity on Svalbard, in part to ensure that the archipelago was not used by NATO.
Post-war
After the war, Norway re-established operations at Longyearbyen and Ny-Ålesund, while the Soviet Union established mining in Barentsburg, Pyramiden and Grumant.
The mine at Ny-Ålesund had several fatal accidents, killing 71 people while it was in operation from 1945 to 1954 and from 1960 to 1963.
The Kings Bay Affair, caused by the 1962 accident killing 21 workers, forced Gerhardsen's Third Cabinet to resign.
From 1964, Ny-Ålesund became a research outpost, and a facility for the European Space Research Organisation.
Petroleum test drilling was started in 1963 and continued until 1984, but no commercially viable fields were found.
From 1960, regular charter flights were made from the mainland to a field at Hotellneset; in 1975, Svalbard Airport, Longyear opened, allowing year-round services.
During the Cold War, the Soviet Union retained about two-thirds of the population on the islands (with a third being Norwegians) with the archipelago's population slightly under 4,000.
Grumant was closed after it was depleted in 1962.
Coal exports from Barentsburg ceased in 2006 because of a fire, The Russian community has also experienced two air accidents, Vnukovo Airlines Flight 2801, which killed 141 people, and the Heerodden helicopter accident, which killed three people.
Longyearbyen remained purely a company town until 1989 when utilities, culture, and education was separated into Svalbard Samfunnsdrift.
In 1993, it was sold to the national government and the University Centre was established.
Through the 1990s, tourism increased and the town developed an economy independent of Store Norske and the mining.
bus transport, hotels, a bank, and several museums.
The newspaper Svalbardposten is published weekly.
Only a small fraction of the mining activity remains at Longyearbyen; instead, workers commute to Sveagruva (or Svea) where Store Norske operates a mine.
Sveagruva is a dormitory town, with workers commuting from Longyearbyen weekly.
The Norwegian Meteorological Institute has outposts at Bjørnøya and Hopen, with respectively ten and four people stationed.
Both outposts can also house temporary research staff.
, a handful of workers are stationed in the largely abandoned Pyramiden to maintain the infrastructure and run the hotel, which has been re-opened for tourists.
Religion
Most of the population is Christian and affiliated with the Church of Norway.
Catholics on the archipelago are pastorally served by the Territorial Prelature of Tromsø.
Politics
The Svalbard Treaty of 1920 established full Norwegian sovereignty over the archipelago.
The islands are, unlike the Norwegian Antarctic Territory, a part of the Kingdom of Norway and not a dependency.
The treaty came into effect in 1925, following the Svalbard Act.
All forty signatory countries of the treaty have the right to conduct commercial activities on the archipelago without discrimination, although all activity is subject to Norwegian legislation.
The treaty limits Norway's right to collect taxes to that of financing services on Svalbard.
Therefore, Svalbard has a lower income tax than mainland Norway, and there is no value added tax.
There is a separate budget for Svalbard to ensure compliance.
Svalbard is a demilitarized zone, as the treaty prohibits the establishment of military installations.
Norwegian military activity is limited to fishery surveillance by the Norwegian Coast Guard as the treaty requires Norway to protect the natural environment.
The Svalbard Act established the institution of the Governor of Svalbard (), who holds the responsibility as both county governor and chief of police, as well as holding other authority granted from the executive branch.
Duties include environmental policy, family law, law enforcement, search and rescue, tourism management, information services, contact with foreign settlements, and judge in some areas of maritime inquiries and judicial examinations-albeit never in the same cases as acting as police.
Since 2015, Kjerstin Askholt has been governor; she is assisted by a staff of 26 professionals.
The institution is subordinate to the Ministry of Justice and the Police, but reports to other ministries in matters within their portfolio.
Since 2002, Longyearbyen Community Council has had many of the same responsibilities of a municipality, including utilities, education, cultural facilities, fire department, roads, and ports.
No care or nursing services are available, nor is welfare payment available.
Norwegian residents retain pension and medical rights through their mainland municipalities.
The hospital is part of University Hospital of North Norway, while the airport is operated by state-owned Avinor.
Ny-Ålesund and Barentsburg remain company towns with all infrastructure owned by Kings Bay and Arktikugol, respectively.
Svalbard is subordinate to Nord-Troms District Court and Hålogaland Court of Appeal, both located in Tromsø.
Although Norway is part of the European Economic Area (EEA) and the Schengen Agreement, Svalbard is not part of the Schengen Area or the EEA.
Non-EU and non-Nordic Svalbard residents do not need Schengen visas, but are prohibited from reaching Svalbard from mainland Norway without such.
People without a source of income can be rejected by the governor.
No person is required to have a visa or residence permit for Svalbard.
Everybody can live and work in Svalbard indefinitely regardless of citizenship.
Svalbard Treaty grants treaty nationals equal right of abode as Norwegian nationals.
So far, non-treaty nationals were admitted visa-free as well.
"Regulations concerning rejection and expulsion from Svalbard" in force.
Russia retains a consulate in Barentsburg.
In September 2010, a treaty was made between Russia and Norway fixing the boundary between the Svalbard archipelago and the Novaya Zemlya archipelago.
Increased interest in petroleum exploration in the Arctic raised interest in a resolution of the dispute.
The agreement takes into account the relative positions of the archipelagos, rather than being based simply on northward extension of the continental border of Norway and Russia.
Economy
The three main industries on Svalbard are coal mining, tourism, and research.
In 2007, there were 484 people working in the mining sector, 211 people working in the tourism sector, and 111 people working in the education sector.
The same year, the mining gave a revenue of 2.008 billion Norwegian kroner (US$227,791,078), tourism 317 million kroner ($35,967,202), and research 142 million kroner ($16,098,404).
In 2006, the average income for economically active people was 494,700 kroner; 23% higher than on the mainland.
Svalbard has historically been a base for both whaling and fishing.
Norway claimed a exclusive economic zone (EEZ) around Svalbard in 1977, with of internal waters and of EEZ.
Norway retains a restrictive fisheries policy in the zone, The University Centre in Svalbard in Longyearbyen offers undergraduate, graduate, and postgraduate courses to 350 students in various arctic sciences, particularly biology, geology, and geophysics.
Courses are provided to supplement studies at the mainland universities; there are no tuition fees and courses are held in English, with Norwegian and international students equally represented.
The Svalbard Undersea Cable System is a fibre optic line from Svalbard to Harstad, needed for communicating with polar orbiting satellites through Svalbard Satellite Station and installations in Ny-Ålesund.
One source of income for the area was, until 2015, visiting cruise ships.
The Norwegian government became concerned about large numbers of cruise ship passengers suddenly landing at small settlements such as Ny-Ålesund, which is conveniently close to the barren-yet-picturesque Magdalena Fjord.
With the increasing size of the larger ships, up to 2,000 people can potentially appear in a community that normally numbers less than 40.
As a result, the government severely restricted the size of cruise ships that may visit.
Transport
Within Longyearbyen, Barentsburg, and Ny-Ålesund, there are road systems, but they do not connect with each other.
Off-road motorized transport is prohibited on bare ground, but snowmobiles are used extensively during winter-both for commercial and recreational activities.
Transport from Longyearbyen to Barentsburg () and Pyramiden () is possible by snowmobile in winter, or by ship all year round.
All settlements have ports and Longyearbyen has a bus system.
Svalbard Airport, Longyear, located from Longyearbyen, is the only airport offering air transport off the archipelago.
Scandinavian Airlines has daily scheduled services to Tromsø and Oslo.
Low-cost carrier Norwegian Air Shuttle also has a service between Oslo and Svalbard, operating three or four times a week; there are also irregular charter services to Russia.
Finnair announced commencement of service from Helsinki, operating three times a week starting 1 June 2016 and lasting until 27 August 2016, but Norwegian authorities did not allow this route, citing the 1978 bilateral agreement on air traffic between Finland and Norway.
Lufttransport provides regular corporate charter services from Longyearbyen to Ny-Ålesund Airport and Svea Airport for Kings Bay and Store Norske; these flights are generally not available to the public.
There are heliports in Barentsburg and Pyramiden, and helicopters are frequently used by the governor and to a lesser extent the mining company Arktikugol.
Climate
The climate of Svalbard is dominated by its high latitude, with the average summer temperature at and January averages at .
The West Spitsbergen Current, the northernmost branch of the North Atlantic Current system, moderates Svalbard's temperatures, particularly during winter.
Winter temperatures in Svalbard are up to higher than those at similar latitudes in Russia and Canada.
The warm Atlantic water keeps the surrounding waters open and navigable most of the year.
The interior fjord areas and valleys, sheltered by the mountains, have larger temperature differences than the coast, giving about warmer summer temperatures and colder winter temperatures.
On the south of Spitsbergen, the temperature is slightly higher than further north and west.
During winter, the temperature difference between south and north is typically , and about in summer.
Bear Island has average temperatures even higher than the rest of the archipelago.
Svalbard is where cold polar air from the north and mild, wet sea air from the south meet, creating low pressure, changeable weather and strong winds, particularly in winter; in January, a strong breeze is registered 17% of the time at Isfjord Radio, but only 1% of the time in July.
In summer, particularly away from land, fog is common, with visibility under registered 20% of the time in July and 1% of the time in January, at Hopen and Bjørnøya.
Nature
In addition to humans, three primarily terrestrial mammalian species inhabit the archipelago: the Arctic fox, the Svalbard reindeer, and accidentally introduced southern voles, which are found only in Grumant.
Attempts to introduce the Arctic hare and the muskox have both failed.
There are 15 to 20 types of marine mammals, including whales, dolphins, seals, walruses, and polar bears.
The animals are protected and people moving outside the settlements are required to have appropriate scare devices to ward off attacks.
They are also advised to carry a firearm for use as a last resort.
A British schoolboy was killed by a polar bear in 2011.
In July 2018, a polar bear was shot dead after it attacked and injured a polar bear guard leading tourists off a cruise ship.
Svalbard and Franz Joseph Land share a common population of 3,000 polar bears, with Kong Karls Land being the most important breeding ground.
The Svalbard reindeer (R. tarandus platyrhynchus) is a distinct subspecies; although it was previously almost extinct, it can be legally hunted (as can Arctic fox).
About eighty species of bird are found on Svalbard, most of which are migratory.
The Barents Sea is among the areas in the world with most seabirds, with about 20 million individuals during late summer.
The most common are little auk, northern fulmar, thick-billed murre, and black-legged kittiwake.
Sixteen species are on the IUCN Red List.
Particularly Bjørnøya, Storfjorden, Nordvest-Spitsbergen, and Hopen are important breeding ground for seabirds.
The Arctic tern has the furthest migration, all the way to Antarctica.
Remains of Predator X from the Jurassic period have been found; it is the largest dinosaur-era marine reptile ever found-a pliosaur estimated to have been almost long.
Svalbard has permafrost and tundra, with both low, middle, and high Arctic vegetation.
165 species of plants have been found on the archipelago.
Vegetation is most abundant in Nordenskiöld Land, around Isfjorden and where affected by guano.
While there is little precipitation, giving the archipelago a steppe climate, plants still have good access to water because the cold climate reduces evaporation.
There are seven national parks in Svalbard: Forlandet, Indre Wijdefjorden, Nordenskiöld Land, Nordre Isfjorden Land, Nordvest-Spitsbergen, Sassen-Bünsow Land and Sør-Spitsbergen.
The archipelago has fifteen bird sanctuaries, one geotopic protected area and six nature reserves-with Nordaust-Svalbard and Søraust-Svalbard both being larger than any of the national parks.
Most of the nature reserves and three of the national parks were created in 1973, with the remaining areas gaining protection in the 2000s.
All human traces dating from before 1946 are automatically protected.
Svalbard is on Norway's tentative list for nomination as a UNESCO World Heritage Site.
The total solar eclipse of 20 March 2015 included only Svalbard and the Faroe Islands in the band of totality.
Many scientists and tourists observed it.
Education
Longyearbyen School serves ages 6-18.
It is the primary/secondary school in the northernmost location on Earth.
Once pupils reach ages 16 or 17, most families move to mainland Norway.
Barentsburg has its own school serving the Russian community; by 2014 it had three teachers, and its welfare funds had declined.
A primary school served the community of Pyramiden in the pre-1998 period.
There is a non-degree offering tertiary educational institution in Longyearbyen,
File:Longyearbyen skole IMG 2955.jpg|Longyearbyen School
File:Barentsburg IMG 2473 Barentsburg skole.jpg|Barentsburg School
File:UNIS01.jpg|University Centre in Svalbard (UNIS)
Sports
Association football is the most popular sport in Svalbard.
There are three football pitches, but no stadiums because of the small population.
