A fungus (s.
A characteristic that places fungi in a different kingdom from plants, bacteria, and some protists is chitin in their cell walls.
Similar to animals, fungi are heterotrophs; they acquire their food by absorbing dissolved molecules, typically by secreting digestive enzymes into their environment.
Fungi do not photosynthesize.
Growth is their means of mobility, except for spores (a few of which are flagellated), which may travel through the air or water.
Fungi are the principal decomposers in ecological systems.
These and other differences place fungi in a single group of related organisms, named the Eumycota (true fungi or Eumycetes), which share a common ancestor (form a monophyletic group), an interpretation that is also strongly supported by molecular phylogenetics.
This fungal group is distinct from the structurally similar myxomycetes (slime molds) and oomycetes (water molds).
The discipline of biology devoted to the study of fungi is known as mycology (from the Greek μύκης , mushroom).
In the past, mycology was regarded as a branch of botany, although it is now known fungi are genetically more closely related to animals than to plants.
Abundant worldwide, most fungi are inconspicuous because of the small size of their structures, and their cryptic lifestyles in soil or on dead matter.
Fungi include symbionts of plants, animals, or other fungi and also parasites.
They may become noticeable when fruiting, either as mushrooms or as molds.
Fungi perform an essential role in the decomposition of organic matter and have fundamental roles in nutrient cycling and exchange in the environment.
They have long been used as a direct source of human food, in the form of mushrooms and truffles; as a leavening agent for bread; and in the fermentation of various food products, such as wine, beer, and soy sauce.
Since the 1940s, fungi have been used for the production of antibiotics, and, more recently, various enzymes produced by fungi are used industrially and in detergents.
Fungi are also used as biological pesticides to control weeds, plant diseases and insect pests.
Many species produce bioactive compounds called mycotoxins, such as alkaloids and polyketides, that are toxic to animals including humans.
The fruiting structures of a few species contain psychotropic compounds and are consumed recreationally or in traditional spiritual ceremonies.
Fungi can break down manufactured materials and buildings, and become significant pathogens of humans and other animals.
Losses of crops due to fungal diseases (e.g., rice blast disease) or food spoilage can have a large impact on human food supplies and local economies.
The fungus kingdom encompasses an enormous diversity of taxa with varied ecologies, life cycle strategies, and morphologies ranging from unicellular aquatic chytrids to large mushrooms.
However, little is known of the true biodiversity of Kingdom Fungi, which has been estimated at 2.2 million to 3.8 million species.
Ever since the pioneering 18th and 19th century taxonomical works of Carl Linnaeus, Christian Hendrik Persoon, and Elias Magnus Fries, fungi have been classified according to their morphology (e.g., characteristics such as spore color or microscopic features) or physiology.
Advances in molecular genetics have opened the way for DNA analysis to be incorporated into taxonomy, which has sometimes challenged the historical groupings based on morphology and other traits.
Phylogenetic studies published in the last decade have helped reshape the classification within Kingdom Fungi, which is divided into one subkingdom, seven phyla, and ten subphyla.
Etymology
The English word fungus is directly adopted from the Latin fungus (mushroom), used in the writings of Horace and Pliny.
the root is also used in other languages, such as the German Schwamm ("sponge") and Schimmel ("mold").
It denotes the scientific study of fungi.
The Latin adjectival form of "mycology" (mycologicæ) appeared as early as 1796 in a book on the subject by Christiaan Hendrik Persoon.
The word appeared in English as early as 1824 in a book by Robert Kaye Greville.
In 1836 the English naturalist Miles Joseph Berkeley's publication The English Flora of Sir James Edward Smith, Vol. 5. also refers to mycology as the study of fungi.
A group of all the fungi present in a particular area or geographic region is known as mycobiota (plural noun, no singular), e.g., "the mycobiota of Ireland".
Characteristics
Before the introduction of molecular methods for phylogenetic analysis, taxonomists considered fungi to be members of the plant kingdom because of similarities in lifestyle: both fungi and plants are mainly immobile, and have similarities in general morphology and growth habitat.
Like plants, fungi often grow in soil and, in the case of mushrooms, form conspicuous fruit bodies, which sometimes resemble plants such as mosses.
The fungi are now considered a separate kingdom, distinct from both plants and animals, from which they appear to have diverged around one billion years ago .).
* With animals: Fungi lack chloroplasts and are heterotrophic organisms and so require preformed organic compounds as energy sources.
* With euglenoids and bacteria: Higher fungi, euglenoids, and some bacteria produce the amino acid L-lysine in specific biosynthesis steps, called the α-aminoadipate pathway.
Both fungi and oomycetes grow as filamentous hyphal cells.
In contrast, similar-looking organisms, such as filamentous green algae, grow by repeated cell division within a chain of cells.
* In common with some plant and animal species, more than 70 fungal species display bioluminescence.
Most fungi lack an efficient system for the long-distance transport of water and nutrients, such as the xylem and phloem in many plants.
To overcome this limitation, some fungi, such as Armillaria, form rhizomorphs, Species may also be distinguished by their biochemical and physiological characteristics, such as their ability to metabolize certain biochemicals, or their reaction to chemical tests.
The biological species concept discriminates species based on their ability to mate.
The application of molecular tools, such as DNA sequencing and phylogenetic analysis, to study diversity has greatly enhanced the resolution and added robustness to estimates of genetic diversity within various taxonomic groups.
History
Mycology is a relatively new science that became systematic after the development of the microscope in the 17th century.
Although fungal spores were first observed by Giambattista della Porta in 1588, the seminal work in the development of mycology is considered to be the publication of Pier Antonio Micheli's 1729 work Nova plantarum genera.
Micheli not only observed spores but also showed that, under the proper conditions, they could be induced into growing into the same species of fungi from which they originated.
Extending the use of the binomial system of nomenclature introduced by Carl Linnaeus in his Species plantarum (1753), the Dutch Christian Hendrik Persoon (1761-1836) established the first classification of mushrooms with such skill as to be considered a founder of modern mycology.
Later, Elias Magnus Fries (1794-1878) further elaborated the classification of fungi, using spore color and microscopic characteristics, methods still used by taxonomists today.
Other notable early contributors to mycology in the 17th-19th and early 20th centuries include Miles Joseph Berkeley, August Carl Joseph Corda, Anton de Bary, the brothers Louis René and Charles Tulasne, Arthur H. R. Buller, Curtis G. Lloyd, and Pier Andrea Saccardo.
The 20th century has seen a modernization of mycology that has come from advances in biochemistry, genetics, molecular biology, and biotechnology.
The use of DNA sequencing technologies and phylogenetic analysis has provided new insights into fungal relationships and biodiversity, and has challenged traditional morphology-based groupings in fungal taxonomy.
Septa have pores that allow cytoplasm, organelles, and sometimes nuclei to pass through; an example is the dolipore septum in fungi of the phylum Basidiomycota.
Coenocytic hyphae are in essence multinucleate supercells.
Some individual fungal colonies can reach extraordinary dimensions and ages as in the case of a clonal colony of Armillaria solidipes, which extends over an area of more than 900ha (3.5 square miles), with an estimated age of nearly 9,000years.
The fruit bodies of the basidiomycetes (basidiocarps) and some ascomycetes can sometimes grow very large, and many are well known as mushrooms.
Growth and physiology
The growth of fungi as hyphae on or in solid substrates or as single cells in aquatic environments is adapted for the efficient extraction of nutrients, because these growth forms have high surface area to volume ratios.
It is estimated that a third of all fungi reproduce using more than one method of propagation; for example, reproduction may occur in two well-differentiated stages within the life cycle of a species, the teleomorph and the anamorph.
Environmental conditions trigger genetically determined developmental states that lead to the creation of specialized structures for sexual or asexual reproduction.
These structures aid reproduction by efficiently dispersing spores or spore-containing propagules.
Asexual reproduction
Asexual reproduction occurs via vegetative spores (conidia) or through mycelial fragmentation.
Mycelial fragmentation occurs when a fungal mycelium separates into pieces, and each component grows into a separate mycelium.
Mycelial fragmentation and vegetative spores maintain clonal populations adapted to a specific niche, and allow more rapid dispersal than sexual reproduction.
In ascomycetes, dikaryotic hyphae of the hymenium (the spore-bearing tissue layer) form a characteristic hook at the hyphal septum.
During cell division, formation of the hook ensures proper distribution of the newly divided nuclei into the apical and basal hyphal compartments.
An ascus (plural asci) is then formed, in which karyogamy (nuclear fusion) occurs.
Asci are embedded in an ascocarp, or fruiting body.
Karyogamy in the asci is followed immediately by meiosis and the production of ascospores.
After dispersal, the ascospores may germinate and form a new haploid mycelium.
Sexual reproduction in basidiomycetes is similar to that of the ascomycetes.
Compatible haploid hyphae fuse to produce a dikaryotic mycelium.
However, the dikaryotic phase is more extensive in the basidiomycetes, often also present in the vegetatively growing mycelium.
A specialized anatomical structure, called a clamp connection, is formed at each hyphal septum.
As with the structurally similar hook in the ascomycetes, the clamp connection in the basidiomycetes is required for controlled transfer of nuclei during cell division, to maintain the dikaryotic stage with two genetically different nuclei in each hyphal compartment.
A basidiocarp is formed in which club-like structures known as basidia generate haploid basidiospores after karyogamy and meiosis.
The most commonly known basidiocarps are mushrooms, but they may also take other forms (see Morphology section).
In fungi formerly classified as Zygomycota, haploid hyphae of two individuals fuse, forming a gametangium, a specialized cell structure that becomes a fertile gamete-producing cell.
The gametangium develops into a zygospore, a thick-walled spore formed by the union of gametes.
When the zygospore germinates, it undergoes meiosis, generating new haploid hyphae, which may then form asexual sporangiospores.
These sporangiospores allow the fungus to rapidly disperse and germinate into new genetically identical haploid fungal mycelia.
Spore dispersal
Both asexual and sexual spores or sporangiospores are often actively dispersed by forcible ejection from their reproductive structures.
This ejection ensures exit of the spores from the reproductive structures as well as traveling through the air over long distances., a group of fungi with lively colors and putrid odor that attract insects to disperse their spores.
The most common means of spore dispersal is by wind - species using this form of dispersal often produce dry or hydrophobic spores which do not absorb water and are readily scattered by raindrops, for example.
Most of the researched species of fungus are transported by wind.
Homothallism
In homothallic sexual reproduction, two haploid nuclei derived from the same individual fuse to form a zygote that can then undergo meiosis.
Homothallic fungi include species with an aspergillus-like asexual stage (anamorphs) occurring in numerous different genera, several species of the ascomycete genus Cochliobolus, and the ascomycete Pneumocystis jiroveccii.
Heitman reviewed evidence bearing on the evolution of sexual reproduction in the fungi and concluded that the earliest mode of sexual reproduction among eukaryotes was likely homothallism, that is, self-fertile unisexual reproduction.
Other sexual processes
Besides regular sexual reproduction with meiosis, certain fungi, such as those in the genera Penicillium and Aspergillus, may exchange genetic material via parasexual processes, initiated by anastomosis between hyphae and plasmogamy of fungal cells.
The frequency and relative importance of parasexual events is unclear and may be lower than other sexual processes.
It is known to play a role in intraspecific hybridization Researchers study compression fossils by dissolving the surrounding matrix with acid and then using light or scanning electron microscopy to examine surface details.
The earliest fossils possessing features typical of fungi date to the Paleoproterozoic era, some (Ma); these multicellular benthic organisms had filamentous structures capable of anastomosis.
Other studies (2009) estimate the arrival of fungal organisms at about 760-1060Ma on the basis of comparisons of the rate of evolution in closely related groups.
Recent (2009) studies suggest that the ancestral ecological state of the Ascomycota was saprobism, and that independent lichenization events have occurred multiple times.
Earlier, it had been presumed that the fungi colonized the land during the Cambrian (542-488.3Ma), also long before land plants.
Taxonomy
Although commonly included in botany curricula and textbooks, fungi are more closely related to animals than to plants and are placed with the animals in the monophyletic group of opisthokonts.
There is no unique generally accepted system at the higher taxonomic levels and there are frequent name changes at every level, from species upwards.
Efforts among researchers are now underway to establish and encourage usage of a unified and more consistent nomenclature.
The lengths of the branches are not proportional to evolutionary distances.
Taxonomic groups
The major phyla (sometimes called divisions) of fungi have been classified mainly on the basis of characteristics of their sexual reproductive structures.
Currently, seven phyla are proposed: Microsporidia, Chytridiomycota, Blastocladiomycota, Neocallimastigomycota, Glomeromycota, Ascomycota, and Basidiomycota.
Medically relevant genera include Mucor, Rhizomucor, and Rhizopus.
The Ascomycota, commonly known as sac fungi or ascomycetes, constitute the largest taxonomic group within the Eumycota.
Such mycorrhizal communities are called "common mycorrhizal networks".
A special case of mycorrhiza is myco-heterotrophy, whereby the plant parasitizes the fungus, obtaining all of its nutrients from its fungal symbiont.
They are able to grow on inhospitable surfaces, including bare soil, rocks, tree bark, wood, shells, barnacles and leaves.
Characteristics common to most lichens include obtaining organic carbon by photosynthesis, slow growth, small size, long life, long-lasting (seasonal) vegetative reproductive structures, mineral nutrition obtained largely from airborne sources, and greater tolerance of desiccation than most other photosynthetic organisms in the same habitat.
With insects
Many insects also engage in mutualistic relationships with fungi.
Several groups of ants cultivate fungi in the order Agaricales as their primary food source, while ambrosia beetles cultivate various species of fungi in the bark of trees that they infest.
At least one species of stingless bee has a relationship with a fungus in the genus Monascus, where the larvae consume and depend on fungus transferred from old to new nests.
This same principle is applied to fungi-feeding parasites, including Asterotremella albida, which feeds on the fruit bodies of other fungi both while they are living and after they are dead.
Some fungi can cause serious diseases in humans, several of which may be fatal if untreated.
These include aspergillosis, candidiasis, coccidioidomycosis, cryptococcosis, histoplasmosis, mycetomas, and paracoccidioidomycosis.
Furthermore, persons with immuno-deficiencies are particularly susceptible to disease by genera such as Aspergillus, Candida, Cryptoccocus, Fungi can also act as mycoparasites or antagonists of other fungi, such as Hypomyces chrysospermus, which grows on bolete mushrooms.
Mycotoxins
Many fungi produce biologically active compounds, several of which are toxic to animals or plants and are therefore called mycotoxins.
Of particular relevance to humans are mycotoxins produced by molds causing food spoilage, and poisonous mushrooms (see above).
Particularly infamous are the lethal amatoxins in some Amanita mushrooms, and ergot alkaloids, which have a long history of causing serious epidemics of ergotism (St Anthony's Fire) in people consuming rye or related cereals contaminated with sclerotia of the ergot fungus, Claviceps purpurea.
Certain types of cheeses require inoculation of milk curds with fungal species that impart a unique flavor and texture to the cheese.
Examples include the blue color in cheeses such as Stilton or Roquefort, which are made by inoculation with Penicillium roqueforti.
Cited literature
