Uno (; from Italian and Spanish for 'one'; stylized as UNO) is an American shedding-type card game that is played with a specially printed deck.
The game's general principles put it into the Crazy Eights family of card games, and it is similar to the traditional European game Mau-Mau.
It has been a Mattel brand since 1992.
History
The game was originally developed in 1971 by Merle Robbins in Reading, Ohio, a suburb of Cincinnati.
When his family and friends began to play more and more, he spent $8,000 to have 5,000 copies of the game made.
He sold it from his barbershop at first, and local businesses began to sell it as well.
Robbins later sold the rights to UNO to a group of friends headed by Robert Tezak, a funeral parlor owner in Joliet, Illinois, for $50,000 plus royalties of 10 cents per game.
Tezak formed International Games, Inc., to market UNO, with offices behind his funeral parlor.
The games were produced by Lewis Saltzman of Saltzman Printers in Maywood, Illinois.
In 1992, International Games became part of the Mattel family of companies.
There can be 2-10 players.
Official rules
The aim of the game is to be the first player to score 500 points, achieved (usually over several rounds of play) by being the first to play all of one's own cards and scoring points for the cards still held by the other players.
The deck consists of 108 cards: four each of "Wild" and "Wild Draw Four," and 25 each of four different colors (red, yellow, green, blue).
Each color consists of one zero, two each of 1 through 9, and two each of "Skip," "Draw Two," and "Reverse."
These last three types are known as "action cards."
To start a hand, seven cards are dealt to each player, and the top card of the remaining deck is flipped over and set aside to begin the discard pile.
The player to the dealer's left plays first unless the first card on the discard pile is an action or Wild card (see below).
On a player's turn, they must do one of the following:
* play one card matching the discard in color, number, or symbol
* play a Wild card, or a playable Wild Draw Four card (see restriction below)
* draw the top card from the deck, then play it if possible
Cards are played by laying them face-up on top of the discard pile.
Play proceeds clockwise around the table.
Action or Wild cards have the following effects:
A player who draws from the deck must either play or keep that card and may play no other card from their hand on that turn.
A player may play a Wild card at any time, even if that player has other playable cards.
A player may play a Wild Draw Four card only if that player has no cards matching the current color.
The player may have cards of a different color matching the current number or symbol or a Wild card and still play the Wild Draw Four card.
A player who plays a Wild Draw Four may be challenged by the next player in sequence (see Penalties) to prove that their hand meets this condition.
If the entire deck is used during play, the top discard is set aside and the rest of the pile is shuffled to create a new deck.
Play then proceeds normally.
* It is illegal to trade cards of any sort with another player.
A player who plays their next-to-last-card must call "Uno" as a warning to the other players.
The first player to get rid of their last card ("going out") wins the hand and scores points for the cards held by the other players.
Number cards count their face value, all action cards count 20, and Wild and Wild Draw
Four cards count 50.
If a Draw Two or Wild Draw Four card is played to go out, the next player in the sequence must draw the appropriate number of cards before the score is tallied.
The first player to score 500 points wins the game.
Penalties
* If a player does not call "Uno" after laying down their next-to-last card and is caught before the next player in sequence takes a turn (i.e., plays a card from their hand, draws from the deck, or touches the discard pile), they must draw two cards as a penalty.
If the player is not caught in time (subject to interpretation) or remembers to call "Uno" before being caught, they suffer no penalty.
If a player falsely calls "Uno" while having multiple cards in their hand, they must draw two cards.
* Seven-O: When a certain card is played, the player is able to trade hands with another player or with all players.
For example, the person who played the 7 card is able to switch all of their cards with another player; the player who played the 0 card is able to make every player exchange all their cards to the next player.
On October 1, 2019, Mattel released a Braille version of their game, with Mark Riccobono, President of the National Federation of the Blind, said in a press release, "The fact that a blind person is now able to play a classic game of UNO straight out of the box with both blind and sighted friends or family members is a truly meaningful moment for our community."
Theme packs
There are many different themes and versions of Uno.
These theme games may come with slightly different directions and special cards.
* American Kennel Club (Non-Sporting Group) Uno (2006)
The Simpsons: Springfield / Great Scot Uno (2006)
* Marvel Ultimate Spider-Man Web-Warriors Uno (2014)
* SpongeBob SquarePants - Eye Eye SpongeBob! (2008)
* UNO in FitSand Travel Zipper Carry EVA Hard Case (2016)
Note: * indicates HIT Entertainment character, by which Mattel acquired HIT in 2012.
Themed My First Uno games
Card sets only have 36 cards designed for children at least 3 years of age.
These sets come in several variants, based on titles for children.
My First Uno versions:
Disney's Jake and the Neverland Pirates Uno (2011)
* Winnie the Pooh and Friends Uno (2002, 2011, 2012)
Themed video games
Uno versions available on the Xbox 360:
Themed sports teams
Several sports teams each have 112-card sets, featuring players from those teams.
The special cards in each deck vary depending on the card set itself.
The following teams have confirmed Uno sets.
* Hockey
Calgary Flames (2010)
NHL
NHL Stars of Finland
* MLB All-Stars
American League (2005)
American League - Stars of the American League (2006)
American League - Baltimore Orioles Miguel Tejada
American League - Boston Red Sox (Regular (2004) and World Series editions (2007))
American League - Boston Red Sox David Ortiz Limited (2007)
American League - Chicago White Sox (2007)
American League - Chicago White Sox World Series Championship
American League - Los Angeles Angels of Anaheim (2005)
American League - New York Yankees (2006)
American League - New York Yankees Derek Jeter Limited (2007)
American League - Seattle Mariners (2003)
American League - Texas Rangers (2006)
National League
National League - MLB All Stars National League
National League - Chicago Cubs
National League - Chicago Cubs: Derek Lee (2006)
National League - Houston Astros (2005)
National League - New York Mets (2005)
National League - New Your Mets: David Wright Special (2007)
National League - Philadelphia Phillies (2005)
National League - St. Louis Cardinals (2006)
* NBA All-Stars
Eastern Conference - NBA
All Stars Eastern Conference (2006)
Eastern Conference - Boston Celtics Legends (2005)
Eastern Conference - Cleveland Cavaliers: LeBron James Special Edition (2007)
Eastern Conference - New York Knicks (2006)
Western Conference - NBA
All Stars Western Conference (2006)
Western Conference - Los Angeles Lakers Legends Edition (2006)
Western Conference - Los Angeles Lakers Kobe Bryant Special Edition (2007)
Western Conference - San Antonio Spurs (2006)
* American Football
Chicago Bears (2006)
Dallas Cowboys (2006)
Green Bay Packers (2007)
Minnesota Vikings
National Football League NFC Edition (2006)
New England Patriots (2007)
New York Giants (2006)
New York Jets (2009)
NFL American League (2006)
NFL National League (2006)
Phil.
Eagles (2006)
Pittsburgh Steelers (2006)
Super Bowl XL Steelers Special Edition (2006)
* NFL Greatest Players Editions
Tom Brady (2007)
Reggie Bush (2007)
Brett Favre (2007)
LaDanian Tomlinson (2007)
Brian Urlacher (2007)
Special Uno games
* Uno Attack (Uno Extreme in the UK and Canada) (1999)
* King Size Uno
The oversized cards have animal illustrations in addition to numbers (1-6) and colors to help children make matches.
The deck also contains 4 wild cards, a Draw 2 card for each suit, and a Free Turn card for each suit.
* Uno Royal Revenge Whoever wears the crown makes the rules!
Video games
* Uno (handheld video game for the Game Boy Color of the classic Uno board game)
* UNO DX (Japanese exclusive Sega Saturn game by Mitsui & Co. - 1998)
* Uno Challenge (mobile version of the classic Uno board game)
* Uno (Facebook) (Adobe Flash-based version of the classic Uno card game produced by GameHouse Studios)
* Uno (iPhone) Features online and local play.
Produced by Gameloft
* Uno (iPad) The same as on the iPhone, but with enhanced graphics.
Produced by Gameloft
* Uno (Android) Released as three versions: SD, HD and Free with adverts.
Produced by Gameloft
* Uno (2016 video game for PC, PlayStation 4, and Xbox One by Ubisoft)
* Uno - 2017 video game (release of 2016 game on the Nintendo Switch), produced by Ubisoft
Variations
Many variations from standard gameplay exist, such as Elimination Uno, Speed Uno, French Uno, Pirate Uno, and Pakistani Uno.
In 2018, Mattel released a spin-off of Uno entitled Dos; the game is differentiated primarily by having a "center row" of discard piles.
where pairs of cards that add up to the sum of a card on the top of one of the piles may be discarded.
The game can be played with two decks of standard playing cards, if the jokers are marked up as the zeroes of the four suits, and the royalty treated as the special cards.
UNO: Slots
In 2002, International Gaming Technology (IGT) released a video slot machine based on UNO.
UNO: The Game Show
In March 2013, it was announced that Mattel and The Gurin Company were teaming up to create a game show based on the card game, produced as a half-hour daily strip with a $100,000 cash jackpot along with a primetime version in which contestants competed for 1 million dollars.
However, the idea was scrapped later on.
Similar games
Uno is a member of the shedding family of card games.
The shedding family of card games consists of games where the objective is to get rid of all your cards while preventing the other players from getting rid of their cards.
Notes
Bibliography
* http:/ instruction_sheets en-us uno Official Mattel Uno site
* http:/ Uno Rules at
* http:/ invented uno/ Uno News at Wonkavator
51fwistufeq7ae03kgq0wrj85agau9t
