Gorillas are ground-dwelling, predominantly herbivorous apes that inhabit the forests of central Sub-Saharan Africa.
The genus Gorilla is divided into two species: the eastern gorillas and the western gorillas (both critically endangered), and either four or five subspecies.
They are the largest living primates.
The DNA of gorillas is highly similar to that of humans, from 95 to 99% depending on what is included, and they are the next closest living relatives to humans after the chimpanzees and bonobos.
Gorillas' natural habitats cover tropical or subtropical forests in Sub-Saharan Africa.
Although their range covers a small percentage of Sub-Saharan Africa, gorillas cover a wide range of elevations.
The mountain gorilla inhabits the Albertine Rift montane cloud forests of the Virunga Volcanoes, ranging in altitude from .
Lowland gorillas live in dense forests and lowland swamps and marshes as low as sea level, with western lowland gorillas living in Central West African countries and eastern lowland gorillas living in the Democratic Republic of the Congo near its border with Rwanda.
Etymology
The word "gorilla" comes from the history of Hanno the Navigator, ( 500 BC) a Carthaginian explorer on an expedition on the west African coast to the area that later became Sierra Leone.
Members of the expedition encountered "savage people, the greater part of whom were women, whose bodies were hairy, and whom our interpreters called Gorillae".
The word was then later used as the species name, though it is unknown whether what these ancient Carthaginians encountered were truly gorillas, another species of ape or monkeys, or humans.
The name was derived , described by Hanno.
Evolution and classification
The closest relatives of gorillas are the other two Homininae genera, chimpanzees and humans, all of them having diverged from a common ancestor about 7 million years ago.
Human gene sequences differ only 1.6% on average from the sequences of corresponding gorilla genes, but there is further difference in how many copies each gene has.
Until recently, gorillas were considered to be a single species, with three subspecies: the western lowland gorilla, the eastern lowland gorilla and the mountain gorilla.
There is now agreement that there are two species, each with two subspecies.
More recently, a third subspecies has been claimed to exist in one of the species.
The separate species and subspecies developed from a single type of gorilla during the Ice Age, when their forest habitats shrank and became isolated from each other.
Physical characteristics
Gorillas move around by knuckle-walking, although they sometimes walk bipedally for short distances while carrying food or in defensive situations, and some Mountain Gorillas use other parts of their hand to aid locomotion .
Wild male gorillas weigh , while adult females usually weigh about half as much as adult males at .
Adult males are tall, with an arm span that stretches from .
Female gorillas are shorter at , with smaller arm spans.
Adult male gorillas are known as silverbacks due to the characteristic silver hair on their backs reaching to the hips.
The tallest gorilla recorded was a silverback with an arm span of , a chest of , and a weight of , shot in Alimbongo, northern Kivu in May 1938.
Males in captivity are noted to be capable of reaching weights up to .
Studies have shown gorilla blood is not reactive to anti-A and anti-B monoclonal antibodies, which would, in humans, indicate type O blood.
Due to novel sequences, though, it is different enough to not conform with the human ABO blood group system, into which the other great apes fit.
Like humans, gorillas have individual fingerprints.
Their eye colour is dark brown, framed by a black ring around the iris.
Distribution and habitat
Gorillas have a patchy distribution.
The range of the two species is separated by the Congo River and its tributaries.
The western gorilla lives in west central Africa, while the eastern gorilla lives in east central Africa.
Between the species, and even within the species, gorillas live in a variety of habitats and elevations.
Gorilla habitat ranges from montane forests to swamps.
Eastern gorillas inhabit montane and submontane forests between above sea level.
Mountain gorillas live in the montane forests at the higher ends of the elevation range, while eastern lowland gorillas live in submontane forests at the lower ends of the elevation range.
In addition, eastern lowland gorillas live in montane bamboo forests, as well as lowland forests ranging from in elevation.
Western gorillas live in both lowland swamp forests and montane forests, and elevations ranging from sea level to .
Gorilla nests are distributed arbitrarily and use of tree species for site and construction appears to be opportunistic.
Nest-building by great apes is now considered to be not just animal architecture, but as an important instance of tool use.
Mountain gorilla food is widely distributed and neither individuals nor groups have to compete with one another.
Their home ranges vary from 3 to 15 km2 (1.16 to 5.79 mi2), and their movements range around or less on an average day.
Western lowland gorillas depend on fruits more than the others and they are more dispersed across their range.
They travel even farther than the other gorilla subspecies, at per day on average, and have larger home ranges of 7-14 km2 (2.70-5.41 mi2).
although both mountain and lowland gorillas have been observed drinking.
Behaviour
Social structure
Gorillas live in groups called troops.
Troops tend to be made of one adult male or silverback, multiple adult females and their offspring.
Without a silverback to protect them, the infants will likely fall victim to infanticide.
Joining a new group is likely to be a tactic against this.
However, while gorilla troops usually disband after the silverback dies, female eastern lowlands gorillas and their offspring have been recorded staying together until a new silverback transfers into the group.
This likely serves as protection from leopards.
Females form strong relationships with males to gain mating opportunities and protection from predators and infanticidal outside males.
However, aggressive behaviours between males and females do occur, but rarely lead to serious injury.
Relationships between females may vary.
Maternally related females in a troop tend to be friendly towards each other and associate closely.
Otherwise, females have few friendly encounters and commonly act aggressively towards each other.
and occasionally they even engage in homosexual interactions.
Severe aggression is rare in stable groups, but when two mountain gorilla groups meet, the two silverbacks can sometimes engage in a fight to the death, using their canines to cause deep, gaping injuries.
When the group is attacked by humans, leopards, or other gorillas, an individual silverback will protect the group, even at the cost of his own life.
Reproduction and parenting
Females mature at 10-12 years (earlier in captivity), and males at 11-13 years.
A female’s first ovulatory cycle occurs when she is six years of age, and is followed by a two-year period of adolescent infertility.
The estrous cycle lasts 30-33 days, with outward ovulation signs subtle compared to those of chimpanzees.
The gestation period lasts 8.5 months.
Female mountain gorillas first give birth at 10 years of age and have four-year interbirth intervals.
Females will purse their lips and slowly approach a male while making eye contact.
This serves to urge the male to mount her.
If the male does not respond, then she will try to attract his attention by reaching towards him or slapping the ground.
In multiple-male groups, solicitation indicates female preference, but females can be forced to mate with multiple males.
Gorilla infants are vulnerable and dependent, thus mothers, their primary caregivers, are important to their survival.
The silverback has a largely supportive relationship with the infants in his troop and shields them from aggression within the group.
Infants begin to break contact with their mothers after five months, but only for a brief period each time.
By 12 months old, infants move up to from their mothers.
At around 18-21 months, the distance between mother and offspring increases and they regularly spend time away from each other.
In addition, nursing decreases to once every two hours.
They may also be used during social interactions when discipline is required.
Screams and roars signal alarm or warning, and are produced most often by silverbacks.
Deep, rumbling belches suggest contentment and are heard frequently during feeding and resting periods.
They are the most common form of intragroup communication.
For this reason, conflicts are most often resolved by displays and other threat behaviours that are intended to intimidate without becoming physical.
The ritualized charge display is unique to gorillas.
The entire sequence has nine steps: (1) progressively quickening hooting, (2) symbolic feeding, (3) rising bipedally, (4) throwing vegetation, (5) chest-beating with cupped hands, (6) one leg kick, (7) sideways running, two-legged to four-legged, (8) slapping and tearing vegetation, and (9) thumping the ground with palms to end display.
Lifespan
A gorilla's lifespan is normally between 35 and 40 years, although zoo gorillas may live for 50 years or more.
Colo, a female western gorilla at the Columbus Zoo and Aquarium was the oldest known gorilla, at 60 years of age when she died on January 17, 2017.
Intelligence
Gorillas are considered highly intelligent.
A few individuals in captivity, such as Koko, have been taught a subset of sign language.
Like the other great apes, gorillas can laugh, grieve, have "rich emotional lives", develop strong family bonds, make and use tools, and think about the past and future.
Some researchers believe gorillas have spiritual feelings or religious sentiments.
In September 2005, a two-and-a-half-year-old gorilla in the Republic of Congo was discovered using rocks to smash open palm nuts inside a game sanctuary.
While this was the first such observation for a gorilla, over 40 years previously, chimpanzees had been seen using tools in the wild 'fishing' for termites.
Great apes are endowed with semiprecision grips, and have been able to use both simple tools and even weapons, such as improvising a club from a convenient fallen branch.
Scientific study
American physician and missionary Thomas Staughton Savage obtained the first specimens (the skull and other bones) during his time in Liberia.
where Troglodytes gorilla is described, now known as the western gorilla.
Other species of gorilla were described in the next few years.
The first systematic study was not conducted until the 1920s, when Carl Akeley of the American Museum of Natural History traveled to Africa to hunt for an animal to be shot and stuffed.
On his first trip, he was accompanied by his friends Mary Bradley, a mystery writer, her husband, and their young daughter Alice, who would later write science fiction under the pseudonym James Tiptree Jr.
After their trip, Mary Bradley wrote On the Gorilla Trail.
She later became an advocate for the conservation of gorillas, and wrote several more books (mainly for children).
In the late 1920s and early 1930s, Robert Yerkes and his wife Ava helped further the study of gorillas when they sent Harold Bigham to Africa.
Yerkes also wrote a book in 1929 about the great apes.
After World War II, George Schaller was one of the first researchers to go into the field and study primates.
In 1959, he conducted a systematic study of the mountain gorilla in the wild and published his work.
Years later, at the behest of Louis Leakey and the National Geographic, Dian Fossey conducted a much longer and more comprehensive study of the mountain gorilla.
When she published her work, many misconceptions and myths about gorillas were finally disproved, including the myth that gorillas are violent.
Western lowland gorillas (G. g. gorilla) are believed to be one of the zoonotic origins of HIV/AIDS.
The SIVgor Simian immunodeficiency virus that infects them is similar to a certain strain of HIV-1.
Genome sequencing
The gorilla became the next-to-last great ape genus to have its genome sequenced.
The first gorilla genome was generated with short read and Sanger sequencing using DNA from a female western lowland gorilla named Kamilah.
This gave scientists further insight into the evolution and origin of humans.
Despite the chimpanzees being the closest extant relatives of humans, 15% of the human genome was found to be more like that of the gorilla.
In addition, 30% of the gorilla genome "is closer to human or chimpanzee than the latter are to each other; this is rarer around coding genes, indicating pervasive selection throughout great ape evolution, and has functional consequences in gene expression."
Analysis of the gorilla genome has cast doubt on the idea that the rapid evolution of hearing genes gave rise to language in humans, as it also occurred in gorillas.
Cultural references
Since coming to the attention of western society in the 1860s, Threats to gorilla survival include habitat destruction and poaching for the bushmeat trade.
In 2004, a population of several hundred gorillas in the Odzala National Park, Republic of Congo was essentially wiped out by the Ebola virus.
A 2006 study published in Science concluded more than 5,000 gorillas may have died in recent outbreaks of the Ebola virus in central Africa.
The researchers indicated in conjunction with commercial hunting of these apes, the virus creates "a recipe for rapid ecological extinction".
Conservation efforts include the Great Apes Survival Project, a partnership between the United Nations Environment Programme and the UNESCO, and also an international treaty, the Agreement on the Conservation of Gorillas and Their Habitats, concluded under UNEP-administered Convention on Migratory Species.
The Gorilla Agreement is the first legally binding instrument exclusively targeting gorilla conservation; it came into effect on 1 June 2008.
