Sylhet (Sylheti: , ), is a metropolitan city in northeastern Bangladesh.
It is the administrative seat of Sylhet Division.
The city is located on the right bank of the Surma River in northeastern Bengal.
It has a subtropical climate and lush highland terrain.
The city has a population of more than half a million.
In 1303, the Sultan of Bengal Shamsuddin Firoz Shah conquered Sylhet by defeating the local Hindu Raja.
Ibn Battuta visited Sylhet in the 14th century and saw Bengali Muslims transforming the region into an agricultural basket.
Sylhet was a realm of the Bengal Sultanate.
In the 16th-century, Sylhet was controlled by the Baro-Bhuyan zamindars and became a district of the Mughal Empire.
British rule began in the 18th century under the administration of the East India Company.
With its ancient seafaring tradition, Sylhet became a key source of lascars in the British Empire.
The Sylhet municipal board was established in 1867.
Originally part of the Bengal Presidency and later Eastern Bengal and Assam; the town was part of Colonial Assam between 1874 and 1947, when following a referendum and the partition of British India, it became part of East Bengal.
The hinterland of the Sylhet valley is the largest oil and gas-producing region in Bangladesh.
It is also the largest hub of tea production in Bangladesh.
It is notable for its high-quality cane and agarwood.
The city is served by the Osmani International Airport which is named after General M A G Osmani, the Commander of the Bangladesh Liberation Forces.
People from Sylhet form a significant portion of the Bangladeshi diaspora, particularly in the United Kingdom and the United States, as well as other countries in the Middle East.
Etymology
The name Sylhet is anglicized from Srihatta.
In Indo-Aryan languages, Sri means prestige or beauty.
Hatta (Haat) is a term for a marketplace.
The name of the region was changed to Jalalabad during the Sultanate period, but the actual town of Srihatta kept its name.
In the Mughal Empire's records, Srihatta was used as the name for the city in the Bengal Subah.
In British India, Srihatta became known as Sylhet in English.
History
In 1995, the Government of Bangladesh declared Sylhet as the sixth divisional headquarters of the country.
Sylhet has played a vital role in the Bangladeshi economy.
Several of Bangladesh's finance ministers have been Members of Parliament from the city of Sylhet.
Badar Uddin Ahmed Kamran was a longtime mayor of Sylhet.
Humayun Rashid Choudhury, a diplomat from Sylhet, served as President of the UN General Assembly and Speaker of the Bangladesh National Parliament.
In 2001, the municipality was upgraded to the Sylhet City Corporation.
It was made a metropolitan city in 2009.
The city is located within the region where there are hills and basins which constitute one of the most distinctive regions in Bangladesh.
The physiography of Sylhet consists mainly of hill soils, encompassing a few large depressions known locally as "beels" which can be mainly classified as oxbow lakes, caused by tectonic subsidence primarily during the earthquake of 1762.
It is flanked by the Indian states of the Meghalaya in the north, Assam in the east, Tripura in the south and the Bangladesh districts of Netrokona, Kishoregonj and Brahmanbaria in the west.
The area covered by Sylhet Division is 12,569 km2, which is about 8% of the total land area of Bangladesh.
Geologically, the region is complex having diverse sacrificial geomorphology; high topography of Plio-Miocene age such as Khasi and Jaintia hills and small hillocks along the border.
At the centre there is a vast low laying flood plain of recent origin with saucer shaped depressions, locally called Haors.
Available limestone deposits in different parts of the region suggest that the whole area was under the ocean in the Oligo-Miocene.
In the last 150 years three major earthquakes hit the city, at a magnitude of at least 7.5 on the Richter Scale, the last one took place in 1918, although many people are unaware that Sylhet lies on an earthquake prone zone.
Administration
Sylhet is divided into 6 metropolitan thanas (police station) and consists of 27 wards and 224 mahallas.
The thanas are:
* Kotwali Thana https:/ maps Kotwali+Model+Police+Station data
!3m2!1e3!4b1!4m5!3m4!1s0x3751aad463c28239:0x3a949568ed360a92!8m2!3d24.888602!4d91.8659377?hl
en&authuser=0 Google Maps
* Jalalabad Thana https:/ maps Jalalabad+Police+Station data
3m1!1e3!4m5!3m4!1s0x3750ff8c1a8ab597:0x778b0def79331480!8m2!3d24.9248876!4d91.8164134?hl
en&authuser=0 Google Maps
* Dakshin Surma Thana https:/ maps South+Surma+Police+Station data
!3m2!1e3!4b1!4m5!3m4!1s0x3751aae84ad04b73:0xa7500f1ea56e59cd!8m2!3d24.8674431!4d91.8587607?hl
en&authuser=0 Google Maps
* Mogla Bazar Thana https:/ maps Mogla+Bazar+Police+Station data
!3m1!1e3!4m5!3m4!1s0x3751abf4e0098c55:0x9251f03f0f1f0b93!8m2!3d24.8194184!4d91.9074259?hl
en&authuser=0 Google Maps
It is a small city with an area of 26.50 km2.
The rapid growth and expansion of Sylhet occurred during the colonial period.
Sylhet Municipality was established in 1878.
A devastating earthquake demolished almost the entire town on 12 June 1897 following which a modern and European model new town was built on the wreckage.
Many new roads were constructed in the late 1890s and Sylhet became really connected to the other parts of the country with the establishment of an extension line of Assam Bengal Railway in 1912-15.
From the beginning of the 20th century, the importance of Sylhet increased with the establishment of the tea industry.
In the 1950s and 1960s, rapid urbanisation took place in the town, fostered by the expatriate Sylhetis and the process is still ongoing.
On 10 April 2001, Sylhet was changed to a city corporation from a municipal board, and currently the city is administrated by the Sylhet City Corporation.
At present, Sylhet is the district-headquarters as well as the divisional headquarters of the districts of Sunamganj, Habiganj, Moulvibazar and Sylhet District.
The Sylhet City Corporation is responsible for the services that are provided within the city which includes traffic, roads, garbage collection, water supply, registrations and many others.
The corporation consists of the Mayor and 22 other commissioners, and focuses on the development of the city.
Military
Sylhet is strategically important for the Bangladesh Armed Forces.
The Bangladesh Army's 17th Infantry Division is based at Jalalabad Cantonment in Sylhet.
The cantonment is also home of the School of Infantry and Tactics (SI&T) and the 1st Para-commando Battalion, an elite commando unit of the Bangladesh Army.
Healthcare
Sylhet is also home to many hospitals that strategically provide healthcare to the community such as the Shahid Shamsuddin Hospital District Hospital, Sylhet MAG Osmani Medical College, Jalalabad Ragib-Rabeya Medical College, North East Medical College, Sylhet Women's Medical College, Parkview Medical College, Ibn Sina Hospital Sylhet Ltd, Noorjahan Hospital (pvt) Ltd, Oasis Hospital, Mount Adora Hospital, Square Medical Service, Popular Medical Service, Medinova Medical Service, Labaid Ltd and the Mohanagar Hospital as well as world's leading five star hospital such as the Al Haramain Hospital.
Presently Sylhet Medical University Established In The Sylhet City.
According to the Prime Minister's order to strictly monitor whether medical standards are being properly maintained in medical colleges, a medical university will be set up in each division.
According to the order, Chittagong and Rajshahi Medical University have already been established.
Sylhet Medical University is the 4th Medical University of the directive.
Demographics
According to the 2011 Bangladesh census, the city had a population of 531,663.
The population growth rate of the city is 1.73%, which has reduced from 1.93% in 1991.
As of 2001, It had average literacy rate of 69.73%.
The highest literacy rate was 84.24% in Ward 22 and the lowest was 48.15% in Ward 10 (2001).
The total number of households in the city was 55,514.
Sylheti is spoken by the vast majority of the people, while standard Bengali is the official language used by the state government and officials.
The majority of Sylhetis are Muslims (87.2%), other religious groups include Hindus (12.6%) and less than 0.2% of other religions, mainly Buddhists and Christians.
and there are significant numbers of people who also follow Sufi ideals, the most influential is the teachings of Maulana Abdul Latif who was from the village of Fultoli, Zakigang.
He was a descendant of Shah Kamal Quhafa, one of the disciples of Shah Jalal.
As of 1986, an estimated 95% of Bangladeshis living in the United Kingdom were from Sylhet Division.
They are concentrated in the boroughs of East London, having established themselves within the communities, notably in the vicinity of Brick Lane which has been dubbed as Banglatown.
Sylheti expatriates are known as "Londoni" in Sylhet.
Many have also emigrated to the United States, they are mainly spread out across the country but have a large concentration in New York City,buffalo, Detroit and Los Angeles.
Many Sylhetis have also emigrated to Canada, France, Australia, Spain, Germany, Sweden and other European countries.
Tens of thousands of Sylhetis are also working as guest workers in the Middle Eastern Gulf states.
Sylhet has a "Friendship Link" with the city of St Albans in the United Kingdom.
The link was established in 1988 when the District council supported a housing project in Sylhet as part of the International Year of Shelter for the Homeless.
Sylhet was chosen because it is the area of origin for the largest ethnic minority group in St Albans.
In July 1996, the mayor of Sylhet, Badar Uddin Ahmed Kamran, signed the twinning accord between Sylhet and the London Borough of Tower Hamlets (home to around 55,000 Sylhetis at the time), with the mayor of Tower Hamlets, Albert Jacobs, in London.
Sylhet has played a vital role in the Bangladeshi economy.
Several of Bangladesh's finance ministers have been Members of Parliament from the city of Sylhet.
Badar Uddin Ahmed Kamran was a longtime mayor of Sylhet.
Humayun Rashid Choudhury, a diplomat from Sylhet, served as President of the UN General Assembly and Speaker of the Bangladesh National Parliament.
In 2001, the municipality was upgraded to the Sylhet City Corporation.
It was made a metropolitan city in 2009.09.
In March 2009, the Mayor of Sylhet, Badar Uddin Ahmed Kamran, signed a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) to form another Friendship Link between Sylhet and the Metropolitan Borough of Rochdale, home to around 10,000 people with Sylhet heritage, with the Mayor of Rochdale Cllr Keith Swift at the Sylhet City Corporation
Economy
The Sylhet Metropolitan Area is one of Bangladesh's main business centers.
Sylhet's economy is closely linked with the Bangladeshi diaspora, especially the British Bangladeshi community.
The city receives a significant portion of the country's annual remittances, which have driven growth in real estate and construction.
A number of shopping centers, restaurants and hotels have opened as a result.
Sylhet also relies on religious tourism, with thousands of devotees visiting its Sufi shrines annually, as well as ecotourism in its broader natural hinterland.
Nature resorts have been built in the city's outskirts.
Several important Bangladeshi companies are based in Sylhet, including Jalalabad Gas Transmission and Distribution, Sylhet Gas Fields and Alim Industries.
Biman Bangladesh Airlines operates several flights from Sylhet to the United Kingdom and the Middle East.
Roads connect Sylhet with the Indian states of Meghalaya and Assam.
Sylhet's hinterland plays a vital role in the economy of Bangladesh.
It is home to the country's largest natural gas fields, sole crude oil field, largest tea plantations, rubber, palm oil, cane, agarwood The major sources of water to the city is the tube wells and the Surma River.
Tests of tube wells in Sylhet District by the Bangladesh University of Engineering and Technology in 1997 found that about 27.6% contained more arsenic than the acceptable limit set by Bangladesh of 50 micrograms per liter, and 49.2% contained more arsenic than the World Health Organization standard of 10 micrograms per liter.
There are about 331 registered restaurants in the city, only 15% maintain sanitary facilities and 85% have unhygienic conditions that are unsafe for the public.
Culture
Sylhet has a very diverse culture which is noticeably distinct from that of Bengali owing to the influx of multi-ethnic immigrants in ancient times.
There is a widely held misconception through which Sylhetis are usually seen as having a conservative mindset; a very inaccurate portrayal of Sylhetis and their culture, while in reality it's quite the opposite thanks to Sylheti culture's liberal and pro-plurality outlook.
Sylhet is religiously very diverse, and is noted for peaceful co-existence, harmony, and mutual respect between its inhabitants of different faiths since ancient times.
Sylhet has a distinct cultural and economic development, and linguistic differences , and given that Sylhet has, for most of its recent history, been a region of a larger entity.
As so many Sylhetis are resident abroad, Sylhet has a major flow of foreign currency from non-resident Bangladeshis.
The major holidays celebrated in Sylhet include traditional and religious celebrations, Eid E Miladun Nabi (S.A), Ramadan, Eid-ul-Fitr, Eid-ul-Adha, Durga Puja, Diwali, Holi, Christmas, Easter, Magha Purnima Cultural or nationalistic celebrations include the Language Movement Day, this is where wreaths are laid at the Shaheed Minar paying tribute to the martyrs, the Bangladeshi Independence Day, Victory Day celebrated with parades by school and academies, and the Pohela Baishakh-celebration of the Bengali New Year.
Marriages are practised in a traditional sylheti Muslim style, sini faan (engagement) with the gaaye halud (haldi or turmeric ceremony), mehendi (henna ceremony) akht (Nikah) and walima (reception) holy prayers.
The traditional dance of Sylhet is called Sylheti Dhamail.
Sports
Cricket is the most popular sport in Sylhet.
Bangladesh Premier League franchise Sylhet Sixers are based in Sylhet International Cricket Stadium (M.A.G. Osmani Stadium), which was built in 2007 and has a capacity of 18,500 spectators.
The Sylhet International Cricket Stadium was renovated in 2013 especially to host matches of 2014 ICC World Twenty20.
It is situated near lush green tea gardens on the city fringe.
In the National Cricket League Sylhet Division has not won any titles however did win in the One-Day Cricket League in 2001-02 season.
Notable players from Sylhet who have played for the Bangladesh national cricket team include Rajin Saleh, Enamul Haque Jr, Tapash Baisya, and Alok Kapali.
Chess player Rani Hamid was awarded the FIDE Women's International Master (WIM) title in 1985.
Transport
The main transport systems used in the city are cycle rickshaws, auto rickshaws (mainly known as baby-taxis or CNGs), buses, mini-buses and cars.
There are about 80,000 rickshaws running each day.
Bus service prices have increased as of 2008, up to 30% higher, prices ranges from Tk 4 to 15.95.
The N2 is the national highway that connects the city with country's capital and largest city Dhaka as well as with many other parts of the country.
The N2 highway is also part of AH1 and AH2- two longest routes of the Asian Highway Network.
Air
The city of Sylhet is served by Osmani International Airport, located at the north of the city.
It is Bangladesh's third busiest airport and became an international airport due to the demand of expatriate Bangladeshis and their descendants from the United Kingdom and the United States.
The main frequent airlines of the airport are Biman Bangladesh Airlines, Flydubai, United Airways, US-Bangla Airlines and Novoair.
The airport received its first international arrival on 3 November 2002, with Biman arriving from Kuwait via Abu Dhabi en route to Dhaka.
Meanwhile, it received first direct international arrival on 15 March 2017 as a direct flight of Dubai based carrier Flydubai landed at the airport.
Work started in 2006 to upgrade the airport to international standards, including a new terminal building, a jetway, a taxiway, and expansion of the runway to accommodate wide-bodied aircraft.
It was confirmed that in May 2007, Biman will be operating Hajj flights directly from the airport later in 2007.
Government will construct a 34,919 square-metre high-quality international passenger terminal building, cargo building, control tower, parking, taxiway and other important infrastructures to meet the growing demand in line with the increase of passengers and cargo transportation at the airport.
Rail
The Sylhet Railway Station is the main railway station providing trains on national routes operated by the state-run Bangladesh Railway.
Some important train that origins/terminates :
Towards Dhaka
Towards Chittagong
Towards Akahura
Education
There are two public universities in Sylhet: Shahjalal University of Science and Technology and Sylhet Agricultural University.
There are some prominent colleges in Sylhet such as Jalalabad Cantonment Public School and College, MAG Osmani Medical College, Sylhet, Sylhet Women's Medical College, North East Medical College, Sylhet Engineering College, Sylhet Cadet College, Murari Chand College, Institute of Health Technology, Sylhet, Scholarshome, Sylhet Science And Technology College and Sylhet Polytechnic Institute, Sylhet Government Women's College
Notable people
Politics
Arts
Charity
Twin towns and sister cities
Sylhet is twinned with:
