The First Fleet was the 11 ships that departed from Portsmouth, England, on 13 May 1787 to found the penal colony that became the first European settlement in Australia.
The Fleet consisted of two Royal Navy vessels, three store ships and six convict transports, carrying between 1,000 and 1,500 convicts, marines, seamen, civil officers and free people (accounts differ on the numbers), and a large quantity of stores.
From England, the Fleet sailed southwest to Rio de Janeiro, then east to Cape Town and via the Great Southern Ocean to Botany Bay, arriving over the period of 18 to 20 January 1788, taking 250 to 252 days from departure to final arrival.
History
Background and planning
Convicts were originally transported to the Thirteen Colonies in North America, but after the American War of Independence ended in 1783, the newly formed United States refused to accept further convicts.
On 6 December 1785, Orders in Council were issued in London for the establishment of a penal colony in New South Wales, on land claimed for Britain by explorer James Cook in his first voyage to the Pacific in 1770.
The First Fleet was commanded by Commodore Arthur Phillip, who was given instructions authorising him to make regulations and land grants in the colony.
The ships arrived at Botany Bay between 18 and 20 January 1788; HMS Supply arrived on 18 January, Alexander, Scarborough and Friendship arrived on 19 January, and the remaining ships on 20 January.
The cost to Britain of outfitting and despatching the Fleet was £84,000 (about £9.6 million as of 2015).
Ships
Naval escort
The First Fleet included two Royal Navy escort ships, the ten-gun sixth-rate vessel under the command of Captain John Hunter, and the armed tender commanded by Lieutenant Henry Lidgbird Ball.
Convict transports
Food and supply transports
Ropes, crockery, agricultural equipment and a miscellany of other stores were needed.
Items transported included tools, agricultural implements, seeds, spirits, medical supplies, bandages, surgical instruments, handcuffs, leg irons and a prefabricated wooden frame for the colony's first Government House.
The party had to rely on its own provisions to survive until it could make use of local materials, assuming suitable supplies existed, and grow its own food and raise livestock.
Scale models of all the ships are on display at the Museum of Sydney.
The models were built by ship makers Lynne and Laurie Hadley, after researching the original plans, drawings and British archives.
The replicas of the Supply, Charlotte, Scarborough, Friendship, Prince of Wales, Lady Penrhyn, Borrowdale, Alexander, Sirius, Fishburn and Golden Grove are made from Western Red or Syrian Cedar.
Nine Sydney harbour ferries built in the mid-1980s are named after First Fleet vessels.
The unused names are Lady Penrhyn and Prince of Wales.
People
The people of the fleet included seamen, marines and their families, government officials, and a large number of convicts, including women and children.
All had been tried and convicted in Great Britain and almost all of them in England.
However, many are known to have come to England from other parts of Great Britain and, especially, from Ireland; at least 14 are known to have come from the British colonies in North America; 12 are identified as black (born in Britain, Africa, the West Indies, North America, India or a European country or its colony).
Further identifications are made on the basis of the surname, for example as typically an Irish name.
The convicts had committed a variety of crimes, including theft, perjury, fraud, assault, and robbery, for which they had variously been sentenced to penal transportation for 7 years, 14 years, or the term of their natural life.
The six convict transports each had a detachment of marines on board.
Most of the families of the marines travelled aboard the Prince of Wales.
A number of people on the First Fleet kept diaries and journals of their experiences, including the surgeons, sailors, officers, soldiers, and ordinary seamen.
There are at least eleven known manuscript Journals of the First Fleet in existence as well as some letters.
The exact number of people directly associated with the First Fleet will likely never be established, as accounts of the event vary slightly.
A total of 1,420 people have been identified as embarking on the First Fleet in 1787, and 1,373 are believed to have landed at Sydney Cove in January 1788.
In her biographical dictionary of the First Fleet, Mollie Gillen gives the following statistics:
The following statistics were provided by Governor Phillip:
David Collins' book An Account of the English Colony in New South Wales gives the following details:
QTEMPLATE
The Alexander, of 453 tons, had on board 192 male convicts; 2 lieutenants, 2 sergeants, 2 corporals, 1 drummer, and 29 privates, with 1 assistant surgeon to the colony.
The Scarborough, of 418 tons, had on board 205 male convicts; 1 captain, 2 lieutenants, 2 sergeants, 2 corporals, 1 drummer, and 26 privates, with 1 assistant surgeon to the colony.
The Charlotte, of 346 tons, had on board 89 male and 20 female convicts; 1 captain, 2 lieutenants, 2 sergeants, 3 corporals, 1 drummer, and 35 privates, with the principal surgeon of the colony.
The Lady Penrhyn, of 338 tons, had on board 101 female convicts; 1 captain, 2 lieutenants, and 3 privates, with a person acting as a surgeon's mate.
The Prince of Wales, of 334 tons, had on board 2 male and 50 female convicts; 2 lieutenants, 3 sergeants, 2 corporals, 1 drummer, and 24 privates, with the surveyor-general of the colony.
The Friendship, … of 228 tons, had on board 76 male and 21 female convicts; 1 captain, 2 lieutenants, 2 sergeants, 3 corporals, 1 drummer, and 36 privates, with 1 assistant surgeon to the colony.
There were on board, beside these, 28 women, 8 male and 6 female children, belonging to the soldiers of the detachment, together with 6 male and 7 female children belonging to the convicts.
The Fishburn store-ship was of 378 tons, the Borrowdale of 272 tons, and the Golden Grove of 331 tons.
Golden Grove carried the chaplain for the colony, with his wife and a servant.
Not only these store-ships, but the men of war and transports were laden with provisions, implements of agriculture, camp equipage, clothing for the convicts, baggage, etc.
The Sirius carried as supernumeraries, the major commandant of the corps of marines embarked in the transports*
*This officer was also lieutenant-governor of the colony, the adjutant and quarter-master, the judge-advocate of the settlement, and the commissary; with one sergeant, three drummers, seven privates, four women, and a few artificers.
The chief surgeon for the First Fleet, John White, reported a total of 48 deaths and 28 births during the voyage.
The deaths during the voyage included one marine, one marine's wife, one marine's child, 36 male convicts, four female convicts, and five children of convicts.
Voyage
The First Fleet left Portsmouth, England on 13 May 1787.
The journey began with fine weather, and thus the convicts were allowed on deck.
The Fleet was accompanied by the armed frigate Hyena until it left English waters.
On 20 May 1787, one convict on the Scarborough reported a planned mutiny; those allegedly involved were flogged and two were transferred to Prince of Wales.
On 10 June they set sail to cross the Atlantic to Rio de Janeiro, While Phillip gave orders that the bilge-water was to be pumped out daily and the bilges cleaned, these orders were not followed on the Alexander and a number of convicts fell sick and died.
A convict and a marine were punished for passing forged quarter-dollars made from old buckles and pewter spoons.
The Fleet left Rio de Janeiro on 4 September to run before the westerlies to the Table Bay in southern Africa, which it reached on 13 October.
This was the last port of call, so the main task was to stock up on plants, seeds and livestock for their arrival in Australia.
The livestock taken on board from Cape Town destined for the new colony included two bulls, seven cows, one stallion, three mares, 44 sheep, 32 pigs, four goats and "a very large quantity of poultry of every kind".
Women convicts on the Friendship were moved to other transports to make room for livestock purchased there.
The convicts were provided with fresh beef and mutton, bread and vegetables, to build up their strength for the journey and maintain their health.
Assisted by the gales in the "Roaring Forties" latitudes below the 40th parallel, the heavily laden transports surged through the violent seas.
In the last two months of the voyage, the Fleet faced challenging conditions, spending some days becalmed and on others covering significant distances; the Friendship travelled 166 miles one day, while a seaman was blown from the Prince of Wales at night and drowned.
Water was rationed as supplies ran low, and the supply of other goods including wine ran out altogether on some vessels.
However, this "flying squadron" reached Botany Bay only hours before the rest of the Fleet, so no preparatory work was possible.
Supply reached Botany Bay on 18 January 1788; the three fastest transports in the advance group arrived on 19 January; slower ships, including Sirius, arrived on 20 January.
This was one of the world's greatest sea voyages - eleven vessels carrying about 1,487 people and stores
On 21 January, Phillip and a party which included John Hunter, departed the Bay in three small boats to explore other bays to the north.
Phillip discovered that Port Jackson, about 12 kilometres to the north, was an excellent site for a colony with sheltered anchorages, fresh water and fertile soil.
There was some cordial contact between the French and British officers, but Phillip and La Pérouse never met.
The French ships remained until 10 March before setting sail on their return voyage.
They were not seen again and were later discovered to have been shipwrecked off the coast of Vanikoro in the present-day Solomon Islands.
On 26 January 1788, the Fleet weighed anchor and sailed to Port Jackson.
The British flag was planted and formal possession taken.
This was done by Phillip and some officers and marines from the Supply, with the remainder of Supplys crew and the convicts observing from on board ship.
The remaining ships of the Fleet did not arrive at Sydney Cove until later that day.
First contact
The First Fleet encountered indigenous Australians when they landed at Botany Bay.
The Cadigal people of the Botany Bay area witnessed the Fleet arrive and six days later the two ships of French explorer La Pérouse, the Astrolabe and the Boussole, sailed into the bay.
When the Fleet moved to Sydney Cove seeking better conditions for establishing the colony, they encountered the Eora people, including the Bidjigal clan.
A number of the First Fleet journals record encounters with Aboriginal people.
Although the official policy of the British Government was to establish friendly relations with Aboriginal people, Between 1790 and 1810, Pemulwuy of the Bidjigal clan led the local people in a series of attacks against the British colonisers.
After January 1788
The ships of the First Fleet mostly did not remain in the colony.
Some returned to England, while others left for other ports.
Some remained at the service of the Governor of the colony for some months: some of these were sent to Norfolk Island where a second penal colony was established.
* 15 February - HMS Supply sails for Norfolk Island carrying a small party to establish a settlement.
* 5/6 May - Charlotte, Lady Penrhyn and Scarborough set sail for China.
* 14 July - Borrowdale, Alexander, Friendship and Prince of Wales set sail to return to England.
November, while HMS Sirius sails for Cape of Good Hope for supplies.
* 19 November - Fishburn and Golden Grove set sail for England.
This means that only HMS Supply now remains in Sydney cove.
* 23 December - carrying stores for the colony strikes an iceberg and is forced back to the Cape.
It never reaches the colony in New South Wales.
1790:
* 19 March - HMS Sirius is wrecked off Norfolk Island.
* 17 April - HMS Supply sent to Batavia, Java, for emergency food supplies.
* 3 June - Lady Juliana, the first of six vessels of the Second Fleet, arrives in Sydney cove.
The remaining five vessels of the Second Fleet arrive in the ensuing weeks.
* 19 September - HMS Supply returns to Sydney having chartered the Dutch vessel Waaksamheid to accompany it carrying stores.
Last survivors
On 26 January 1842, the Colonial Government in Sydney awarded a life pension of 1 shilling a day to three surviving members of the First Fleet.
The Sydney Gazette and New South Wales Advertiser reported, on Saturday 29 January 1842: "The Government have ordered a pension of one shilling per diem to be paid to the survivors of those who came by the first vessel into the Colony.
The number of these really 'old hands' is now reduced to three, of whom, two are now in the Benevolent Asylum, and the other is a fine hale old fellow, who can do a day's work with more spirit than many of the young fellows lately arrived in the Colony."
The names of the three recipients are not given.
William Hubbard: Hubbard was convicted in the Kingston Assizes in Surrey, England, on 24 March 1784 for theft.
He was transported to Australia on the Scarborough in the First Fleet.
He married Mary Goulding on 19 December 1790 in Rose Hill.
In 1803 he received a land grant of 70 acres at Mulgrave Place.
He died on 18 May 1843 at the Sydney Benevolent Asylum.
His age was given as 76 when he was buried at Christ Church St. Lawrence, Sydney on 22 May 1843.
John McCarthy: McCarthy was a Marine who sailed on the Friendship.
McCarthy was born in Killarney, County Kerry, Ireland, circa Christmas 1745.
He first served in the colony of New South Wales, then at Norfolk Island where he took up a land grant of 60 acres (Lot 110).
He married the first fleet convict Ann Beardsley on Norfolk Island in November 1791 after his discharge a month earlier.
In 1808, on the close of Norfolk Island settlement, he resettled in Van Diemen's Land and later took a land grant (80 acres at Melville) in lieu of the one forfeited on Norfolk Island.
The last few years of his life were spent at the home of his granddaughter and her husband, Mr. and Mrs. William H. Budd, at a place called Kinlochewe Inn near Donnybrook, Victoria.
McCarthy died on 24 July 1846, six months past his 100 birthday.
John Limeburner: The South Australian Register reported, in an article dated Wednesday 3 November 1847: "John Limeburner, the oldest colonist in Sydney, died in September last, at the advanced age of 104 years.
He helped to pitch the first tent in Sydney, and remembered the first display of the British flag there, which was hoisted on a swamp oak-tree, then growing on a spot now occupied as the Water-Police Court.
He was the last of those called the 'first-fleeters' (arrivals by the first convict ships) and, notwithstanding his great age, retained his faculties to the last."
John Limeburner was a convict on the Charlotte.
He was convicted on 9 July 1785 at New Sarum, Wiltshire of theft of a waistcoat, a shirt and stockings.
He married Elizabeth Ireland in 1790 at Rosehill and together they establish a 50-acre farm at Prospect.
He died at Ashfield in September 1847 and is buried at St John's, Ashfield.
John Jones: Jones was a Marine on the First Fleet and sailed on the Alexander.
He is listed in the N.S.W. 1828 Census as aged 82 and living at the Sydney Benevolent Asylum.
He is said to have died at the Benevolent Asylum in 1848.
Samuel King: King was a scribbler (a worker in a scribbling mill) before he became a Marine.
He was a Marine with the First Fleet on board the flagship .
He shipped to Norfolk Island on Golden Grove in September 1788, where he lived with Mary Rolt, a convict who arrived with the First Fleet on the Prince of Wales.
He received a grant of 60 acres (Lot No. 13) at Cascade Stream in 1791.
Mary Rolt returned to England on the Britannia in October 1796.
King was resettled in Van Diemen's Land, boarding the City of Edinburgh on 3 September 1808, and landed in Hobart on 3 October.
He married Elizabeth Thackery on 28 January 1810.
He died on 21 October 1849 at 86 years of age and was buried in the Wesleyan cemetery at Lawitta Road, Back River.
John Small: Convicted 14 March 1785 at the Devon Lent Assizes held at Exeter for Robbery King's Highway.
Sentenced to hang, reprieved to 7 years' transportation.
Arrived on the Charlotte in First Fleet 1788.
Certificate of freedom 1792.
Land Grant 1794, 30 acre "Small's Farm" at Eastern Farms (Ryde).
Married October 1788 Mary Parker also a First Fleet convict who arrived on Lady Penrhyn.
John Small died on 2 October 1850 at age of 90 years.
Elizabeth Thackery: Elizabeth "Betty" King (née Thackery) was tried and convicted of theft on 4 May 1786 at Manchester Quarter Sessions, and sentenced to seven years' transportation.
She sailed on the Friendship, but was transferred to the Charlotte at the Cape of Good Hope.
She was shipped to Norfolk Island on the in 1790 and lived there with James Dodding.
In August 1800 she bought 10 acres of land from Samuel King at Cascade Stream.
Elizabeth and James were relocated to Van Diemen's Land in December 1807 but parted company sometime afterwards.
On 28 January 1810 Elizabeth married "First Fleeter" Private Samuel King (above) and lived with him until his death in 1849.
Betty King died in New Norfolk, Tasmania on 7 August 1856, aged 89 years.
She is buried in the churchyard of the Methodist Chapel, Lawitta Road, Back River, next to her husband, and the marked grave bears a First Fleet plaque.
She was one of the first British women to land in Australia and was the last "First Fleeter" to die.
Legacy
Smallpox
Historians have disagreed over whether those aboard the First Fleet were responsible for introducing smallpox to Australia's indigenous population, and if so, whether this was the consequence of deliberate action.
In 1914, J. H. L. Cumpston, director of the Australian Quarantine Service put forward the hypothesis that smallpox arrived with British settlers.
Some researchers have argued that any such release may have been a deliberate attempt to decimate the indigenous population.
Hypothetical scenarios for such an action might have included: an act of revenge by an aggrieved individual, a response to attacks by indigenous people, or part of an orchestrated assault by the New South Wales Marine Corps, intended to clear the path for colonial expansion.
Seth Carus, a former Deputy Director of the National Defense University in the United States wrote in 2015 that there was a "strong circumstantial case supporting the theory that someone deliberately introduced smallpox in the Aboriginal population."
Other historians have disputed the idea that there was a deliberate release of smallpox virus and/or suggest that it arrived with visitors to Australia other than the First Fleet.
It has been suggested that live smallpox virus may have been introduced accidentally when Aboriginal people came into contact with variolous matter brought by the First Fleet for use in anti-smallpox inoculations.
In 2002, historian Judy Campbell offered a further theory, that smallpox had arrived in Australia through contact with fishermen from Makassar in Indonesia, where smallpox was endemic.
In 2011, Macknight stated: “The overwhelming probability must be that it smallpox was introduced, like the later epidemics, by Indonesian trepangers ... and spread across the continent to arrive in Sydney quite independently of the new settlement there."
There is a fourth theory, that the 1789 epidemic was not smallpox but chickenpox - to which indigenous Australians also had no inherited resistance - that happened to be affecting, or was carried by, members of the First Fleet.
This theory has also been disputed.
Commemoration Garden
After Ray Collins, a stonemason, completed years of research into the First Fleet, he sought approval from about nine councils to construct a commemorative garden in recognition of these immigrants.
Liverpool Plains Shire Council was ultimately the only council to accept his offer to supply the materials and construct the garden free of charge.
The site chosen was a disused caravan park on the banks of Quirindi Creek at Wallabadah, New South Wales.
In September 2002 Collins commenced work on the project.
Additional support was later provided by Neil McGarry in the form of some signs and the council contributed $28,000 for pathways and fencing.
Collins hand-chiseled the names of all those who came to Australia on the eleven ships in 1788 on stone tablets along the garden pathways.
The stories of those who arrived on the ships, their life, and first encounters with the Australian country are presented throughout the garden.
On 26 January 2005, the First Fleet Garden was opened as the major memorial to the First Fleet immigrants.
Previously the only other specific memorial to the First Fleeters was an obelisk at Brighton-Le-Sands, New South Wales.
The surrounding area has a barbecue, tables, and amenities.
