The Suez Canal ( ) is a sea-level waterway in Egypt, connecting the Mediterranean Sea to the Red Sea through the Isthmus of Suez.
Constructed by the Suez Canal Company between 1859 and 1869, it officially opened on 17 November 1869.
The canal offers watercraft a more direct route between the North Atlantic and northern Indian oceans via the Mediterranean and Red seas, thus avoiding the South Atlantic and southern Indian oceans and reducing the journey distance from the Arabian Sea to London, for example, by approximately .
It extends from the northern terminus of Port Said to the southern terminus of Port Tewfik at the city of Suez.
Its length is including its northern and southern access-channels.
In 2012, 17,225 vessels traversed the canal (an average of 47 per day).
The original canal featured a single-lane waterway with passing locations in the Ballah Bypass and the Great Bitter Lake.
It contains no lock system, with seawater flowing freely through it.
In general, the canal north of the Bitter Lakes flows north in winter and south in summer.
South of the lakes, the current changes with the tide at Suez.
The United Kingdom and France owned the canal until July 1956, when the President of Egypt, Gamal Abdel Nasser, nationalized it - an event which led to the Suez Crisis of October-November 1956.
The canal is owned and maintained by the Suez Canal Authority (SCA) of Egypt.
Under the Convention of Constantinople, it may be used "in time of war as in time of peace, by every vessel of commerce or of war, without distinction of flag".
At a cost of $8.4 billion, this project was funded with interest-bearing investment certificates issued exclusively to Egyptian entities and individuals.
The "New Suez Canal", as the expansion was dubbed, was opened with great fanfare in a ceremony on 6 August 2015.
On 24 February 2016, the Suez Canal Authority officially opened the new side channel.
This side channel, located at the northern side of the east extension of the Suez Canal, serves the East Terminal for berthing and unberthing vessels from the terminal.
As the East Container Terminal is located on the Canal itself, before the construction of the new side channel it was not possible to berth or unberth vessels at the terminal while the convoy was running.
Precursors
Ancient west-east canals were built to facilitate travel from the Nile River to the Red Sea.
One smaller canal is believed to have been constructed under the auspices of Senusret II or Ramesses II.)
may have started work on an ancient canal joining the Nile with the Red Sea (1897 BCE - 1839 BCE), when an irrigation channel was constructed around 1850 BCE that was navigable during the flood season, leading into a dry river valley east of the Nile River Delta named Wadi Tumilat.
In his Meteorology, Aristotle wrote:
One of their kings tried to make a canal to it (for it would have been of no little advantage to them for the whole region to have become navigable; Sesostris is said to have been the first of the ancient kings to try), but he found that the sea was higher than the land.
So he first, and Darius afterwards, stopped making the canal, lest the sea should mix with the river water and spoil it.
Strabo wrote that Sesostris started to build a canal, and Pliny the Elder wrote:
Next comes the Tyro tribe and, the harbour of the Daneoi, from which Sesostris, king of Egypt, intended to carry a ship-canal to where the Nile flows into what is known as the Delta; this is a distance of over 60 miles.
Later the Persian king Darius had the same idea, and yet again Ptolemy II, who made a trench 100 feet wide, 30 feet deep and about 35 miles long, as far as the Bitter Lakes.
In the second half of the 19th century, French cartographers discovered the remnants of an ancient north-south canal past the east side of Lake Timsah and ending near the north end of the Great Bitter Lake.
This proved to be the celebrated canal made by the Persian king
Darius I, as his stele commemorating its construction was found at the site.
came into being on 15 December 1858.
Construction (1859-1869)
Work started on the shore of the future Port Said on 25 April 1859.
The excavation took some 10 years using forced labour (corvée) of Egyptian workers during the first years.
Some sources estimate that over 30,000 people were working on the canal at any given period, that more than 1.5 million people from various countries were employed, and that thousands of labourers died, many of them from cholera and similar epidemics.
The British government had opposed the project from the outset to its completion.
As one of the diplomatic moves against the canal, it disapproved of the use of "slave labour" of forced workers.
The British Empire was the major global naval force and officially condemned the forced work and sent armed Bedouins to start a revolt among workers.
Involuntary labour on the project ceased, and the viceroy condemned the corvée, halting the project.
Angered by the British opportunism, de Lesseps sent a letter to the British government remarking on the British lack of remorse a few years earlier when forced workers died in similar conditions building the British railway in Egypt.
Initially international opinion was skeptical and Suez Canal Company shares did not sell well overseas.
Britain, Austria, and Russia did not buy a significant number of shares.
However, with assistance from the Cattaui banking family, and their relationship with James de Rothschild of the French House of Rothschild bonds and shares were successfully promoted in France and other parts of Europe.
All French shares were quickly sold in France.
A contemporary British skeptic claimed "One thing is sure... our local merchant community doesn't pay practical attention at all to this grand work, and it is legitimate to doubt that the canal's receipts... could ever be sufficient to recover its maintenance fee.
It will never become a large ship's accessible way in any case."
Inauguration (17 November 1869)
The canal opened under French control in November 1869.
The opening ceremonies began at Port Said on the evening of 15th November, with illuminations, fireworks, and a banquet on the yacht of the Khedive Isma'il Pasha of Egypt and Sudan.
The royal guests arrived the following morning: the French Empress Eugenie in the Imperial yacht L'Aigle; the Crown Prince of Prussia; and Prince Louis of Hesse.
In the afternoon there were blessings of the canal with both Muslim and Christian ceremonies, a temporary mosque and church having been built side by side on the beach.
In the evening there were more illuminations and fireworks.
The first day of the passage ended at Lake Timsah, 41 nautical miles south of Port Said.
The French ship Péluse anchored close to the entrance, then swung around and grounded, the ship and its hawser blocking the way into the lake.
The following boats had to anchor in the canal itself until the Péluse was hauled clear the next morning, making it difficult for them to join that night's celebration in Ismailia.
Except for the Newport.
Nares sent out a boat to carry out soundings, and was able to manouver around the Péluse to enter the lake and anchor there for the night.
Ismailia was the scene of more celebrations the following day, including a miltary "march past", illuminations and fireworks, and a ball at the Governer's Palace.
The convoy set off again on the morning of the 19th November, for the remainder of the trip to Suez
An Anchor Line ship, the S.S. Dido, became the first to pass through the Canal from South to North.
Initial difficulties (1869-1871)
Although numerous technical, political, and financial problems had been overcome, the final cost was more than double the original estimate.
The Khedive, in particular, was able to overcome initial reservations held by both British and French creditors by enlisting the help of the Sursock family, whose deep connections proved invaluable in securing much international support for the project.
After the opening, the Suez Canal Company was in financial difficulties.
The remaining works were completed only in 1871, and traffic was below expectations in the first two years.
De Lesseps therefore tried to increase revenues by interpreting the kind of net ton referred to in the second concession (tonneau de capacité) as meaning a ship's cargo capacity and not only the theoretical net tonnage of the "Moorsom System" introduced in Britain by the Merchant Shipping Act in 1854.
The ensuing commercial and diplomatic activities resulted in the International Commission of Constantinople establishing a specific kind of net tonnage and settling the question of tariffs in its protocol of 18 December 1873.
This was the origin of the Suez Canal Net Tonnage and the Suez Canal Special Tonnage Certificate, both of which are still in use today.
Company rule after opening
The canal had an immediate and dramatic effect on world trade.
Combined with the American transcontinental railroad completed six months earlier, it allowed the world to be circled in record time.
It played an important role in increasing European colonization of Africa.
The construction of the canal was one of the reasons for the Panic of 1873, because goods from the Far East were carried in sailing vessels around the Cape of Good Hope and were stored in British warehouses.
An inability to pay his bank debts led Said Pasha's successor, Isma'il Pasha, in 1875 to sell his 44% share in the canal for £4,000,000 ($19.2 million) equivalent to £432 million to £456 million ($540 million to $570 million) to the government of the United Kingdom.
French shareholders still held the majority.
Local unrest caused the British to invade in 1882 and take full control, although nominally Egypt remained part of the Ottoman Empire.
The British representative 1883 to 1907 was Evelyn Baring, 1st Earl of Cromer, who reorganized and modernized the government and suppressed rebellions and corruption, thereby facilitating increased traffic on the canal.
The Convention of Constantinople in 1888 declared the canal a neutral zone under the protection of the British, who had occupied Egypt and Sudan at the request of Khedive Tewfiq to suppress the Urabi Revolt against his rule.
The revolt went on from 1879 to 1882.
As a result of British involvement on the side of Khedive Tewfiq, Britain gained control of the canal in 1882.
The British defended the strategically important passage against a major Ottoman attack in 1915, during the First World War.
Under the Anglo-Egyptian Treaty of 1936, the UK retained control over the canal.
The canal was again strategically important in the 1939-1945 Second World War, and Italo-German attempts to capture it were repulsed during the North Africa Campaign, during which the canal was closed to Axis shipping.
In 1951 Egypt repudiated the treaty and in October 1954 the UK agreed to remove its troops.
Withdrawal was completed on 18 July 1956.
Suez Crisis
Because of Egyptian overtures towards the Soviet Union, the United Kingdom and the United States withdrew their pledge to support the construction of the Aswan Dam.
Egyptian President Gamal Abdel Nasser responded by nationalizing the canal on 26 July 1956 and transferring it to the Suez Canal Authority, intending to finance the dam project using revenue from the canal.
On the same day that the canal was nationalized Nasser also closed the Straits of Tiran to all Israeli ships.
This led to the Suez Crisis in which the UK, France, and Israel invaded Egypt.
According to the pre-agreed war plans under the Protocol of Sèvres, Israel invaded the Sinai Peninsula on 29 October, forcing Egypt to engage them militarily, and allowing the Anglo-French partnership to declare the resultant fighting a threat to stability in the Middle East and enter the war - officially to separate the two forces but in reality to regain the Canal and bring down the Nasser government.
To save the British from what he thought was a disastrous action and to stop the war from a possible escalation, Canadian Secretary of State for External Affairs Lester B. Pearson proposed the creation of the first United Nations peacekeeping force to ensure access to the canal for all and an Israeli withdrawal from the Sinai Peninsula.
On 4 November 1956, a majority at the United Nations voted for Pearson's peacekeeping resolution, which mandated the UN peacekeepers to stay in Sinai unless both Egypt and Israel agreed to their withdrawal.
The United States backed this proposal by putting pressure on the British government through the selling of sterling, which would cause it to depreciate.
Britain then called a ceasefire, and later agreed to withdraw its troops by the end of the year.
Pearson was later awarded the Nobel Peace Prize.
As a result of damage and ships sunk under orders from Nasser the canal was closed until April 1957, when it was cleared with UN assistance.
A UN force (UNEF) was established to maintain the free navigability of the canal, and peace in the Sinai Peninsula.
Arab-Israeli wars of 1967 and 1973
In May 1967, Nasser ordered the UN peacekeeping forces out of Sinai, including the Suez Canal area.
Israel objected to the closing of the Straits of Tiran to Israeli shipping.
The canal had been closed to Israeli shipping since 1949, except for a short period in 1951-1952.
After the 1967 Six-Day War, Israeli forces occupied the Sinai peninsula, including the entire east bank of the Suez Canal.
Unwilling to allow the Israelis to use the canal, Egypt immediately imposed a blockade which closed the canal to all shipping.
Fifteen cargo ships, known as the "Yellow Fleet", were trapped in the canal, and would remain there until 1975.
In 1973, during the Yom Kippur War, the canal was the scene of a major crossing by the Egyptian army into Israeli-occupied Sinai and a counter-crossing by the Israeli army to Egypt.
Much wreckage from this conflict remains visible along the canal's edges.
Mine clearing operations (1974-75)
After the Yom Kippur War the United States initiated Operation Nimbus Moon.
The amphibious assault ship USS Inchon (LPH-12) was sent to the Canal, carrying 12 RH-53D minesweeping helicopters of HM-12.
These partly cleared the canal between May and December 1974.
She was relieved by the LST USS Barnstable County (LST1197).
The British Royal Navy initiated Operation Rheostat and Task Group 65.2 provided for Operation Rheostat One (six months in 1974), the minehunters HMS Maxton, HMS Bossington, and HMS Wilton, the Fleet Clearance Diving Team (FCDT) and HMS Abdiel, a practice minelayer/MCMV support ship; and for Operation Rheostat Two (six months in 1975)
the minehunters HMS Hubberston and HMS Sheraton, and HMS Abdiel.
When the Canal Clearance Operations were completed, the canal and its lakes were considered 99% clear of mines.
The canal was then reopened by Egyptian President Anwar Sadat aboard an Egyptian destroyer, which led the first convoy northbound to Port Said in 1975.
At his side stood the Iranian Crown Prince Reza Pahlavi, delegated to represent his father, Mohammed Reza Pahlavi, the Shah of Iran.
The cruiser USS Little Rock was the only American naval ship in the convoy.
UN presence
The UNEF mandate expired in 1979.
Despite the efforts of the United States, Israel, Egypt, and others to obtain an extension of the UN role in observing the peace between Israel and Egypt, as called for under the Egypt-Israel Peace Treaty of 1979, the mandate could not be extended because of the veto by the Soviet Union in the UN Security Council, at the request of Syria.
Accordingly, negotiations for a new observer force in the Sinai produced the Multinational Force and Observers (MFO), stationed in Sinai in 1981 in coordination with a phased Israeli withdrawal.
It is there under agreements between the United States, Israel, Egypt, and other nations.
Bypass expansion
In the summer of 2014, months after taking office as President of Egypt, Abdel Fattah el-Sisi ordered the expansion of the Ballah Bypass from wide to wide for .
The project was called the New Suez Canal, as it would allow ships to transit the canal in both directions simultaneously.
The project cost more than $8 billion and was completed within one year.
Sisi declared the expanded channel open for business in a ceremony on 6 August 2015.
Timeline
* Circa 1799:
Napoleon Bonaparte conquers Egypt and orders a feasibility analysis.
This reports a supposed difference in sea levels and a high cost, so the project is put on hold.
* Circa 1840:
A second survey finds the first analysis incorrect.
A direct link between the Mediterranean Sea and the Red Sea is possible and not as expensive as previously estimated.
* 30 November 1854:
The former French consul in Cairo, Ferdinand Marie de Lesseps, obtains the first license for construction and subsequent operation from the Viceroy for a period of 99 years.
* 6 January 1856: de Lesseps is provided with a second, more detailed license.
* 15 December 1858: de Lesseps establishes the "Compagnie Universelle du Canal Maritime de Suez", with Said Pasha acquiring 22% of the Suez Canal Company; the majority is controlled by French private holders.
* 17 November 1869: The canal is opened, owned and operated by Suez Canal Company.
* 18 December 1873: The International Commission of Constantinople establishes the Suez Canal Net Ton and the Suez Canal Special Tonnage Certificate (as known today)
* 25 November 1875:
Britain becomes a minority share holder in the company, acquiring 44%, with the remainder being controlled by French business syndicates.
* 20 May 1882: Britain invades Egypt, with French assistance, and begins its occupation of Egypt.
* 25 August 1882: Britain takes control of the canal.
* 2 March 1888:
The Convention of Constantinople renews the guaranteed right of passage of all ships through the canal during war and peace; these rights were already part of the licenses awarded to de Lesseps, but are recognised as international law.
* 14 November 1936:
Following a new treaty, Britain theoretically pulls out of Egypt, but establishes the 'Suez Canal Zone' under its control.
* 13 June 1956: Suez Canal Zone is restored to Egyptian sovereignty, following British withdrawal and years of negotiations.
* 26 July 1956: Egypt nationalizes the company; its Egyptian assets, rights and obligations are transferred to the Suez Canal Authority, which compensates the previous owners at the established pre-nationalization price.
Egypt closes the canal to Israeli shipping as part of a broader blockade involving the Straits of Tiran and the Gulf of Aqaba.
* 31 October 1956 to 24 April 1957: the canal is blocked to shipping following the Suez Crisis, a conflict that leads to an Israeli, French and British occupation of the canal zone.
* 22 December 1956:
The canal zone is restored to Egyptian control, following French and British withdrawal, and the landing of UNEF troops.
* 5 June 1967 to 10 June 1975: the canal is blocked by Egypt, following the war with Israel; it becomes the front line during the ensuing War of Attrition and the 1973 war, remaining closed to international shipping, until general agreement was near.
* 1 January 2008: New rules of navigation passed by the Suez Canal Authority come into force.
* 6 August 2015:
The new canal extensions are opened.
File:Mittelholzer-suezkanal.jpg|Suez Canal in February 1934.
Air photograph taken by Swiss pilot and photographer Walter Mittelholzer
File:USS America (CV-66) in the Suez canal 1981.jpg|, an American aircraft carrier in the Suez Canal
File:SuezCanal4 byDanielCsorfoly.JPG|Container ship Hanjin Kaohsiung transiting the Suez Canal
Layout and operation
When built, the canal was long and deep.
After several enlargements, it is long, deep and wide.
It consists of the northern access channel of , the canal itself of and the southern access channel of .
The so-called New Suez Canal, functional since 6 August 2015, currently has a new parallel canal in the middle part, with its length over .
The current parameters of the Suez Canal, including both individual canals of the parallel section are: depth and width at least (that width measured at of depth).
Capacity
The canal allows passage of ships up to draft or 240,000 deadweight tons and up to a height of above water level and a maximum beam of under certain conditions.
The canal can handle more traffic and larger ships than the Panama Canal, as Suezmax dimensions are greater than both Panamax and New Panamax.
Some supertankers are too large to traverse the canal.
Others can offload part of their cargo onto a canal-owned boat to reduce their draft, transit, and reload at the other end of the canal.
Navigation
The canal has no locks because of the flat terrain, and the minor sea level difference between each end is inconsequential for shipping.
As the canal has no sea surge gates, the ports at the ends would be subject to the sudden impact of tsunamis from the Mediterranean Sea and Red Sea, according to a 2012 article in the Journal of Coastal Research.
There is one shipping lane with passing areas in Ballah-Bypass near El Qantara and in the Great Bitter Lake.
On a typical day, three convoys transit the canal, two southbound and one northbound.
The passage takes between 11 and 16 hours at a speed of around .
The low speed helps prevent erosion of the banks by ships' wakes.
By 1955, about two-thirds of Europe's oil passed through the canal.
Around 8% of world sea trade is carried via the canal.
In 2008, 21,415 vessels passed through the canal and the receipts totaled $5.381 billion,
File:SuezCanal ElBallah.JPG|Ships moored at El Ballah during transit
File:MEDCURR.GIF|Predominant currents in the Mediterranean Sea for June
Operation
Before August 2015, the canal was too narrow for free two-way traffic, so ships would pass in convoys and use bypasses.
The by-passes were out of (40%).
From north to south, they are: Port Said by-pass (entrances) , Ballah by-pass & anchorage, , Timsah by-pass , and the Deversoir by-pass (northern end of the Great Bitter Lake) .
The bypasses were completed in 1980.
Typically, it would take a ship 12 to 16 hours to transit the canal.
The canal's 24-hour capacity was about 76 standard ships.
In August 2014, Egypt chose a consortium that includes the Egyptian army and global engineering firm Dar Al-Handasah to develop an international industrial and logistics hub in the Suez Canal area, and began the construction of a new canal section from km 60 to km 95 combined with expansion and deep digging of the other 37 km of the canal.
This will allow navigation in both directions simultaneously in the 72 km long central section of the canal.
These extensions were formally opened on 6 August 2015 by President Al-Sisi.
File:Capesize bulk carrier at Suez Canal Bridge.
JPG|Post-deepening, a capesize bulk carrier approaches the Friendship Bridge
File:Bittersee suezkanal.
JPG|Northbound convoy waits in the Great Bitter Lake as southbound convoy passes, October 2014
Convoy sailing
Since the canal does not cater to unregulated two-way traffic, all ships transit in convoys on regular times, scheduled on a 24-hour basis.
Each day, a single northbound convoy starts at 04:00 from Suez.
At dual lane sections, the convoy uses the eastern route.
Synchronised with this convoy's passage is the southbound convoy.
It starts at 03:30 from Port Said and so passes the Northbound convoy in the two-lane section.
Canal crossings
From north to south, the crossings are:
The Suez Canal Bridge (), also called the Egyptian-Japanese Friendship Bridge, a high-level road bridge at El Qantara.
In Arabic, al qantara means "arch".
Opened in 2001, it has a clearance over the canal and was built with assistance from the Japanese government and by Kajima.
El Ferdan Railway Bridge () north of Ismailia () was completed in 2001 and is the longest swing-span bridge in the world, with a span of 340 m (1100 ft).
The previous bridge was destroyed in 1967 during the Arab-Israeli conflict.
The current bridge is no longer functional due to the expansion of the Suez Canal, as the parallel shipping lane completed in 2015 just east of the bridge lacks a structure spanning it.
Pipelines taking fresh water under the canal to Sinai, about north of Suez, at .
* Ahmed Hamdi Tunnel () south of the Great Bitter Lake () was built in 1983.
Because of leakage problems, a new water-tight tunnel was built inside the old one from 1992 to 1995.
The Suez Canal overhead powerline crossing () was built in 1999.
A railway on the west bank runs parallel to the canal for its entire length.
Six new tunnels for cars and trains are also planned across the canal.
Currently the Ahmed Hamdi is the only tunnel connecting Suez to the Sinai.
Alternative routes
Cape Agulhas
The main alternative is around Cape Agulhas, the southernmost point of Africa, commonly referred as the Cape of Good Hope route.
This was the only sea route before the canal was constructed, and when the canal was closed.
It is still the only route for ships that are too large for the canal.
In the early 21st century, the Suez Canal has suffered from diminished traffic due to piracy in Somalia, with many shipping companies choosing to take the long route instead.
Between 2008 and 2010, it is estimated that the canal lost 10% of traffic due to the threat of piracy, and another 10% due to the financial crisis.
An oil tanker going from Saudi Arabia to the United States has longer to go when taking the route south of Africa rather than the canal.
Before the canal's opening in 1869, goods were sometimes offloaded from ships and carried overland between the Mediterranean and the Red Sea.
Northern Sea Route
In recent years, the shrinking Arctic sea ice has made the Northern Sea Route feasible for commercial cargo ships between Europe and East Asia during a six-to-eight-week window in the summer months, shortening the voyage by thousands of miles compared to that through the Suez Canal.
According to polar climate researchers, as the extent of the Arctic summer ice pack recedes the route will become passable without the help of icebreakers for a greater period each summer.
The Bremen-based Beluga Group claimed in 2009 to be the first Western company to attempt using the Northern Sea Route without assistance from icebreakers, cutting 4000 nautical miles off the journey between Ulsan, Korea and Rotterdam, the Netherlands.
Negev desert railroad
Israel has declared that it will construct a railroad through the Negev desert to compete with the canal, with construction partly financed by China.
Environmental impact
The opening of the canal created the first salt-water passage between the Mediterranean Sea and the Red Sea.
Although the Red Sea is about higher than the eastern Mediterranean, the current between the Mediterranean and the middle of the canal at the Bitter Lakes flows north in winter and south in summer.
The current south of the Bitter Lakes is tidal, varying with the tide at Suez.
Construction of the canal was preceded by cutting a small fresh-water canal called Sweet Water Canal from the Nile delta along Wadi Tumilat to the future canal, with a southern branch to Suez and a northern branch to Port Said.
Completed in 1863, these brought fresh water to a previously arid area, initially for canal construction, and subsequently facilitating growth of agriculture and settlements along the canal.
Suez Canal Economic Zone
The Suez Canal Economic Zone, sometimes shortened to the Suez Canal Zone, describes the set of locations neighbouring the canal where customs rates have been reduced to zero in order to attract investment.
The zone comprises over 600 km2 within the governorates of Port Said, Ismailia and Suez.
Projects in the zone are collectively described as the Suez Canal Area Development Project (SCADP).
The plan focuses on development of East Port Said and the port of Ain Sokhna, and hopes to extend to four more ports at West Port Said, El-Adabiya, Arish and El Tor.
The zone incorporates the three "Qualifying Industrial Zones" at Port Said, Ismailia and Suez, a 1996 American initiative to encourage economic ties between Israel and its neighbours.
