Mount Hood, called Wy'east by the Multnomah tribe, is a potentially active stratovolcano in the Cascade Volcanic Arc.
It was formed by a subduction zone on the Pacific coast and rests in the Pacific Northwest region of the United States.
It is located about east-southeast of Portland, on the border between Clackamas and Hood River counties.
In addition to being Oregon's highest mountain, it is one of the loftiest mountains in the nation based on its prominence.
The height assigned to Mount Hood's snow-covered peak has varied over its history.
Modern sources point to three different heights: , a 1991 adjustment of a 1986 measurement by the U.S. National Geodetic Survey (NGS), based on a 1993 scientific expedition,
Mount Hood is considered the Oregon volcano most likely to erupt,
though based on its history, an explosive eruption is unlikely.
Still, the odds of an eruption in the next 30 years are estimated at between 3 and 7%, so the U.S. Geological Survey (USGS) characterizes it as "potentially active", but the mountain is informally considered dormant.
Establishments
Timberline Lodge is a National Historic Landmark located on the southern flank of Mount Hood just below Palmer Glacier, with an elevation of about .
The mountain has six ski areas:
Timberline, Mount Hood Meadows, Ski Bowl, Cooper Spur, Snow Bunny, and Summit.
They total over of skiable terrain; Timberline offers the only year-round lift-served skiing in North America.
Mount Hood is within the Mount Hood National Forest, which comprises of land, including four designated wilderness areas that total , and more than of hiking trails.
The most northwestern pass around the mountain is called Lolo Pass.
Native Americans crossed the pass while traveling between the Willamette Valley and Celilo Falls.
Name
The Multnomah name for Mount Hood was Wy'east.
In one version of the legend, the two sons of the Great Spirit Sahale fell in love with the beautiful maiden Loowit, who could not decide which to choose.
The two braves, Wy'east and Pahto, burned forests and villages in their battle over her.
Sahale became enraged and smote the three lovers.
Seeing what he had done, he erected three mountain peaks to mark where each fell.
He made beautiful Mount St. Helens for Loowit, proud and erect Mount Hood for Wy'east, and the somber Mount Adams for the mourning Pahto.
There are other versions of the legend.
In another telling, Wy'east (Hood) battles Pahto (Adams) for the fair La-wa-la-clough (St. Helens).
Or again Wy'east, the chief of the Multnomah tribe, competed with the chief of the Klickitat tribe.
Their great anger led to their transformation into volcanoes.
Their battle is said to have destroyed the Bridge of the Gods and thus created the great Cascades Rapids of the Columbia River.
The mountain was given its present name on October 29, 1792 by Lt. William Broughton, a member of Captain George Vancouver's exploration expedition.
Lt. Broughton observed its peak while at Belle Vue Point of what is now called Sauvie Island during his travels up the Columbia River, writing, "A very high, snowy mountain now appeared rising beautifully conspicuous in the midst of an extensive tract of low or moderately elevated land location of today's Vancouver, Washington lying S 67 E., and seemed to announce a termination to the river."
Lt. Broughton named the mountain after Samuel Hood, 1st Viscount Hood, a British Admiral at the Battle of the Chesapeake.
Two French explorers from the Hudson's Bay Company may have traveled into the Dog River area east of Mount Hood in 1818.
They reported climbing to a glacier on "Montagne de Neige" (Mountain of Snow), probably Eliot Glacier.
A second ammunition ship, AE-29, was commissioned in May 1971 and decommissioned in August 1999.
Volcanic activity
The glacially eroded summit area consists of several andesitic or dacitic lava domes; Pleistocene collapses produced avalanches and lahars (rapidly moving mudflows) that traveled across the Columbia River to the north.
The eroded volcano has had at least four major eruptive periods during the past 15,000 years.
The last three eruptions at Mount Hood occurred within the past 1,800 years from vents high on the southwest flank and produced deposits that were distributed primarily to the south and west along the Sandy and Zigzag rivers.
The last eruptive period took place around 220 to 170 years ago, when dacitic lava domes, pyroclastic flows and mudflows were produced without major explosive eruptions.
The prominent Crater Rock just below the summit is hypothesized to be the remains of one of these now-eroded domes.
This period includes the last major eruption of 1781 to 1782 with a slightly more recent episode ending shortly before the arrival of the explorers Lewis and Clark in 1805.
The latest minor eruptive event occurred in August 1907.
The glaciers on the mountain's upper slopes may be a source of potentially dangerous lahars when the mountain next erupts.
There are vents near the summit that are known for emitting gases such as carbon dioxide and sulfur dioxide.
Prior to the 1980 eruption of Mount St. Helens, the only known fatality related to volcanic activity in the Cascades occurred in 1934, when a climber suffocated in oxygen-poor air while exploring ice caves melted by fumaroles in Coalman Glacier on Mount Hood.
Seismic activity is monitored by the USGS Cascades Volcano Observatory in Vancouver, Washington, which issues weekly updates (and daily updates if significant eruptive activity is occurring at a Cascades volcano).
The most recent evidence of volcanic activity at Mount Hood consists of fumaroles near Crater Rock and hot springs on the flanks of the volcano.
Elevation
Mount Hood was first seen by European explorers in 1792 and is believed to have maintained a consistent summit elevation, varying by no more than a few feet due to mild seismic activity.
Elevation changes since the 1950s are predominantly due to improved survey methods and model refinements of the shape of the Earth (see vertical reference datum).
Despite the physical consistency, the estimated elevation of Mount Hood has varied substantially over the years.
Early explorers on the Columbia River estimated the elevation to be .
Two people in Thomas J. Dryer's 1854 expedition calculated the elevation to be and that the tree line was at about .
Two months later, a Mr. Belden claimed to have climbed the mountain during a hunting trip and determined it to be upon which "pores oozed blood, eyes bled, and blood rushed from their ears."
Sometime by 1866, Reverend G. H. Atkinson determined it to be .
A Portland engineer used surveying methods from a Portland baseline and calculated a height of between .
Many maps distributed in the late 19th century cited , though Mitchell's School Atlas gave as the correct value.
For some time, many references assumed Mount Hood to be the highest point in North America.
Many modern sources likewise list as the height.
However, numerous others place the peak's height one foot lower, at .
Finally, a height of has also been reported.
Glaciers
named glaciers or snow fields, the most visited of which is Palmer Glacier, partially within the Timberline Lodge ski area and on the most popular climbing route.
The glaciers are almost exclusively above the level, which also is about the average tree line elevation on Mount Hood.
More than 80 percent of the glacial surface area is above .
The glaciers and permanent snow fields have an area of and contain a volume of about .
Eliot Glacier is the largest glacier by volume at , and has the thickest depth measured by ice radar at .
The largest glacier by surface area is the Coe-Ladd Glacier system at .
The neo-glacial maximum extents formed in the early 18th century.
There are no trails to the summit.
Even the "easier" southside climbing route is a technical climb with crevasses, falling rocks, and often inclement weather.
Ropes, ice axes, crampons and other technical mountaineering gear are necessary.
Peak climbing season is generally from April to mid-June.
There are six main routes to approach the mountain with about 30 total variations for summiting.
The climbs range in difficulty from class 2 to class 5.9+ (for Acrophobia).
The most popular route, dubbed the south route, begins at Timberline Lodge and proceeds up Palmer Glacier to Crater Rock, the large prominence at the head of the glacier.
The route goes east around Crater Rock and crosses Coalman Glacier on the Hogsback, a ridge spanning from Crater Rock to the approach to the summit.
The Hogsback terminates at a bergschrund where Coalman Glacier separates from the summit rock headwall, and then to Pearly Gates, a gap in the summit rock formation, then right onto the summit plateau and the summit proper.
Technical ice axes, fall protection, and experience are now recommended in order to attempt the left chute variation or Pearly Gates ice chute.
The Forest Service is recommending several other route options due to these changes in conditions (e.g. "Old Chute", West Crater Rim, etc.).
Climbing accidents
As of May 2002, more than 130 people had died in climbing-related accidents since records have been kept on Mount Hood, the first in 1896.
Incidents in May 1986, December 2006, and December 2009 attracted intense national and international media interest.
Though avalanches are a common hazard on other glaciated mountains, most Mount Hood climbing deaths are the result of falls and hypothermia.
Despite a quadrupling of forest visitors since 1990, fewer than 50 people require rescue per year.
Only 3.4 percent of search and rescue missions in 2006 were for mountain climbers.
Hiking
The Timberline Trail, which circumnavigates the entire mountain and rises as high as 7,300 ft (2,200 m), was built in the 1930s by the Civilian Conservation Corps.
Typically, the hike is snow-free from late July until the autumn snows begin.
A portion of the Pacific Crest Trail is coincident with the Timberline Trail on the west side of Mount Hood.
The predecessor of the Pacific Crest Trail was the Oregon Skyline Trail, established in 1920, which connected Mount Hood to Crater Lake.
Gallery
