Foxes are small-to-medium-sized, omnivorous mammals belonging to several genera of the family Canidae.
Foxes have a flattened skull, upright triangular ears, a pointed, slightly upturned snout, and a long bushy tail (or brush).
Twelve species belong to the monophyletic "true foxes" group of genus Vulpes.
Approximately another 25 current or extinct species are always or sometimes called foxes; these foxes are either part of the paraphyletic group of the South American foxes, or of the outlying group, which consists of bat-eared fox, gray fox, and island fox.
Foxes live on every continent except Antarctica.
By far the most common and widespread species of fox is the red fox (Vulpes vulpes) with about 47 recognized subspecies.
The global distribution of foxes, together with their widespread reputation for cunning, has contributed to their prominence in popular culture and folklore in many societies around the world.
The hunting of foxes with packs of hounds, long an established pursuit in Europe, especially in the British Isles, was exported by European settlers to various parts of the New World.
Etymology
The word fox comes from Old English, which derived from Proto-Germanic *fuhsaz.
This in turn derives from Proto-Indo-European *puḱ-, meaning ’thick-haired; tail’.
Male foxes are known as dogs, tods or reynards, females as vixens, and young as cubs, pups, or kits, though the latter name is not to be confused with a distinct species called kit foxes.
Vixen is one of very few words in modern English that retains the Middle English southern dialect "v" pronunciation instead of "f" (i.e. northern English "fox" versus southern English "vox").
A group of foxes is referred to as a skulk, leash, or earth.
Phylogenetic relationships
Within the Canidae, the results of DNA analysis shows several phylogenetic divisions:
The fox-like canids, which include the kit fox (Vulpes velox), red fox (Vulpes vulpes), Cape fox (Vulpes chama), Arctic fox (Vulpes lagopus), and fennec fox (Vulpes zerda).
The wolf-like canids, (genus Canis, Cuon and Lycaon) including the dog (Canis lupus familiaris), gray wolf (Canis lupus), red wolf (Canis rufus), eastern wolf (Canis lycaon), coyote (Canis latrans), golden jackal (Canis aureus), Ethiopian wolf (Canis simensis), black-backed jackal (Canis mesomelas), side-striped jackal (Canis adustus), dhole (Cuon alpinus), and African wild dog (Lycaon pictus).
while the smallest species, the fennec fox, weighs just .
Fox-like features typically include a triangular face, pointed ears, an elongated rostrum, and a bushy tail.
Foxes are digitigrade, and thus, walk on their toes.
Unlike most members of the family Canidae, foxes have partially retractable claws.
Fox vibrissae, or whiskers, are black.
The whiskers on the muzzle, mystaciae vibrissae, average long, while the whiskers everywhere else on the head average to be shorter in length.
Whiskers (carpal vibrissae) are also on the forelimbs and average long, pointing downward and backward.
Red foxes, by contrast, have a typical auburn pelt, the tail normally ending with white marking.
A fox's coat color and texture may vary due to the change in seasons; fox pelts are richer and denser in the colder months and lighter in the warmer months.
To get rid of the dense winter coat, foxes moult once a year around April; the process begins from the feet, up the legs, and then along the back.
Behaviour
In the wild, the typical lifespan of a fox is one to three years, although individuals may live up to ten years.
Unlike many canids, foxes are not always pack animals.
Typically, they live in small family groups, but some (Arctic foxes) are known to be solitary.
The diet of foxes is largely made up of invertebrates such as insects, and small vertebrates such as reptiles and birds, and can include eggs and plants.
Many species are generalist predators, but some (such as the crab-eating fox) have more specialized diets.
Most species of fox consume around of food every day.
Foxes cache excess food, burying it for later consumption, usually under leaves, snow, or soil.
Foxes tend to use a pouncing technique where they crouch down to camouflage themselves in the terrain, then using their hind legs, leap up with great force to land on top of their targeted prey.
Sexual characteristics
The male fox's scrotum is held up close to the body with the testes inside even after they descend.
Like other canines, the male fox has a baculum, or penile bone.
The testes of red foxes are smaller than those of Arctic foxes.
Sperm formation in red foxes begins in August-September, with the testicles attaining their greatest weight in December-February.
Vixens are in heat for one to six days, making their reproductive cycle twelve months long.
As with other canines, the ova are shed during estrus without the need for the stimulation of copulating.
Once the egg is fertilized, the vixen enters a period of gestation that can last from 52 to 53 days.
Foxes tend to have an average litter size of four to five with an 80 percent success rate in becoming pregnant.
Litter sizes can vary greatly according to species and environmentthe Arctic fox, for example, can have up to eleven kits.
The vixen usually has six or eight mammae.
Each teat has 8 to 20 lactiferous ducts, which connect the mammary gland to the nipple, allowing for milk to be carried to the nipple.
Vocalization
The fox's vocal repertoire is vast:
:* Whine - Made shortly after birth.
Occurs at a high rate when kits are hungry and when their body temperatures are low.
Whining stimulates the mother to care for her young; it also has been known to stimulate the male fox into caring for his mate and kits.
:* Yelp - Made about 19 days later.
The kits' whining turns into infantile barks, yelps, which occur heavily during play.
:* Explosive call - At the age of about one month, the kits can emit an explosive call which is intended to be threatening to intruders or other cubs; a high pitch howl.
:* Combative call - In adults, the explosive call becomes an open-mouthed combative call during any conflict; a sharper bark.
Growl - An adult fox's indication to their kits to feed or head to the adult's location.
:* Bark - Adult foxes warn against intruders and in defense by barking.
In the case of domesticated foxes, the whining seems to remain in adult individuals as a sign of excitement and submission in the presence of their owners.
Due in part to their opportunistic hunting style and industriousness, foxes are commonly resented as nuisance animals.
On the other hand, foxes, while often considered pests themselves, have been successfully employed to control pests on fruit farms while leaving the fruit intact.
Island fox (Urocyon littoralis)
The island fox, though considered a near-threatened species throughout the world, is becoming increasingly endangered in its endemic environment of the California Channel Islands.
A population on an island is smaller than those on the mainland because of limited resources like space, food and shelter.
Island populations, therefore, are highly susceptible to external threats ranging from introduced predatory species and humans to extreme weather.
as well as predation by non-native golden eagles.
Since 1993, the eagles have caused the population to decline by as much as 95%.
On the Chilean mainland, the population is limited to Nahuelbuta National Park and the surrounding Valdivian rainforest.
A major problem the species faces, therefore, is their dwindling, limited habitat due to the cutting and burning of the unprotected forests.
Another problem they face is their inability to fight off diseases transmitted by the increasing number of pet dogs.
Many foxes adapt well to human environments, with several species classified as "resident urban carnivores" for their ability to sustain populations entirely within urban boundaries.
Foxes in urban areas can live longer and can have smaller litter sizes than foxes in non-urban areas.
Foxes have been introduced in numerous locations, with varying effects on indigenous flora and fauna.
In some countries, foxes are major predators of rabbits and hens.
Population oscillations of these two species were the first nonlinear oscillation studied, and led to the now-famous Lotka-Volterra equation.
Fox hunting
Fox hunting originated in the United Kingdom in the 16th century.
Hunting with dogs is now banned in the United Kingdom, though hunting without dogs is still permitted.
Red foxes were introduced into Australia in the early 19th century for sport, and have since become widespread through much of the country.
They have caused population decline among many native species and prey on livestock, especially new lambs.
Fox hunting is practiced as recreation in several other countries including Canada, France, Ireland, Italy, Russia, United States and Australia.
Domestication
There are many records of domesticated red foxes and others, but rarely of sustained domestication.
A recent and notable exception is the Russian silver fox, which resulted in visible and behavioral changes, and is a case study of an animal population modeling according to human domestication needs.
The current group of domesticated silver foxes are the result of nearly fifty years of experiments in the Soviet Union and Russia to domesticate the silver morph of the red fox.
This selective breeding resulted in physical and behavioral traits appearing that are frequently seen in domestic cats, dogs, and other animals, such as pigmentation changes, floppy ears, and curly tails.
Notably, the new foxes became more tame, allowing themselves to be petted, whimpering to get attention and sniffing and licking their caretakers.
Attacks on humans
In the United Kingdom, a number of cases of non-fatal attacks on humans were reported.
They often involved children, or if there were gaps in homes through which foxes could pass.
Urban foxes
Foxes are among the comparatively few mammals which have been able to adapt themselves to a certain degree to living in urban (mostly suburban) human environments.
Their omnivorous diet allows them to survive on discarded food waste, and their skittish and often nocturnal nature means that they are often able to avoid detection, despite their larger size.
Urban foxes, however, have been identified as threats to cats and small dogs, and for this reason there is often pressure to exclude them from these environments.
The San Joaquin kit fox is a highly endangered species that has, ironically, become adapted to urban living in the San Joaquin Valley and Salinas Valley of southern California.
Its diet includes mice, ground squirrels, rabbits, hares, bird eggs, and insects, and it has claimed habitats in open areas, golf courses, drainage basins, and school grounds.
Nine-tailed foxes appear in Chinese folklore, literature, and mythology, in which, depending on the tale can be a good or a bad omen.
The motif was eventually introduced from Chinese to Japanese and Korean cultures.
The constellation Vulpecula represents a fox.
Notes
