Felix Arvid Ulf Kjellberg ( , ; born 24 October 1989), known online as PewDiePie ( ), is a Swedish YouTuber, comedian, musician and gamer-commentator known for his YouTube video content, which mainly consists of Let's Play videos and comedic formatted shows.
Born in Gothenburg, Sweden, Kjellberg originally pursued a degree in industrial economics and technology management at Chalmers University of Technology in Gothenburg.
In 2010, during his time at the university, he registered a YouTube account under the name PewDiePie.
The following year, he dropped out of Chalmers after losing interest in his degree field.
After unsuccessfully applying for an apprenticeship with an advertising agency in Scandinavia, he then decided to focus on creating content for his YouTube channel.
In order to fund his videos, Kjellberg sold prints of his Photoshop art and worked at a hot dog stand.
He soon gathered a rapidly increasing online following, and in July 2012, his channel surpassed one million subscribers.
On 15 August 2013, Kjellberg became the most-subscribed user on YouTube, being briefly surpassed in late 2013 by YouTube Spotlight and several times in early 2019 by Indian record label T-Series before being fully overtaken by the company.
From 29 December 2014 to 14 February 2017, Kjellberg's channel was the most-viewed YouTube channel.
, the channel has received over 102 million subscribers and 23 billion video views, ranking as the second-most subscribed and eleventh-most viewed on the platform, as well as the most subscribed and viewed channel to be operated by a single individual.
Kjellberg's most noted YouTube content is his Let's Play commentaries, traditionally of horror video games and more recently, Minecraft, although he often produces other forms of comedic content.
His content has been praised as genuine and unfiltered, but also received as abrasive, and in some cases met with controversy.
As a result of an early-2017 controversy regarding allegedly antisemitic content in several of Kjellberg's videos, Maker Studios-the multi-channel network he was signed to-ended their partnership with him.
While he criticized the coverage of the situation and defended his content as jokes that were taken out of context, he conceded its offensiveness.
Kjellberg has raised money for charities, encouraging his audience to donate to charity drives.
Due to his popularity, his coverage of indie games has created an Oprah effect, boosting sales for titles he plays.
In 2016, Time named him one of "The World's 100 Most Influential People".
Kjellberg lives in Brighton and Hove with his wife, internet personality and fashion designer Marzia Kjellberg.
Early life and education
Kjellberg was born and raised in Gothenburg, Sweden.
His father is also a corporate executive.
in 2017, Kjellberg clarified that he left because of his lack of interest in his course, and perceived the idea of leaving university to pursue a YouTube career as "fucking stupid".
Kjellberg has also shared his enjoyment of Adobe Photoshop, wanting to work on photo manipulation art using the program rather than be in school.
His commentaries of horror games made up his best known content during this early stage, although he eventually expanded out of this niche while having his channel maintain a mostly gaming identity.
Variety details that "PewDiePie acts like he's spending time with a friend.
He begins each video introducing himself in a high-pitched, goofy voice, drawing out the vowels of his YouTube moniker, then delves into the videos."
Kjellberg often referred to his fan base as the "Bro Army" and addresses his audience as "bros".
Later on during his YouTube career, Kjellberg stopped referring to his fan base as the "Bro Army", and began frequently using the terms "Squad Fam", and later "9 year olds", in his videos.
Production and output
During the early portion of his YouTube career, Kjellberg refused to hire any editor or outside assistance to help with his video output; stating, "I want YouTube to be YouTube."
In October 2014, Swedish magazine Icon detailed that "he has no manager, no assistant, or friend to help out with work-related contacts."
In 2016, Kjellberg thanked two other content creators for "helping him out with videos".
In February 2017, Kjellberg stated in his My Response video, "I'm just a guy.
It's literally just me.
There's not a producer out there ...
there's no writer, there's no camera guy."
Fellow YouTuber Brad Smith, known for his work on the World of Orange channel,
Kjellberg has been noted by both himself and media outlets to put out videos with a high frequency, a practice he first scaled down in 2014.
Kjellberg has been frequently cited for making videos and statements expressing his feelings of burnout from frequently creating content for the platform, and its effect on his mental health.
In March 2017, Kjellberg commented that his channel was running on a daily output, stating, "there's a lot of challenges in doing daily content, ...
but I still really, really love the daily challenge-the daily grind-of just being like, 'hey, I'm gonna make a video today, no matter what.'
And sometimes it really works, and sometimes it doesn't."
In 2016, he examined his older videos and while noting the stylistic changes he had undergone, he expressed specific regret for his casual use of words like gay or retarded in a derogatory sense.
In December 2016, Kotakus Patricia Hernandez wrote about his stylistic changes, explaining that "over the last year, the PewDiePie channel has also had an underlying friction, as Kjellberg slowly distances himself from many of the things that made him famous.
He's doing fewer Let's Plays of horror games like Amnesia," and adding, "the PewDiePie of 2016 can still be immature, sure, but ...
a defining aspect of recent PewDiePie videos is existential angst, as he describes the bleak reality of making content for a machine he cannot fully control or understand."
In August 2017, Kjellberg called himself "just a guy making jokes on the Internet."
In September, Justin Charity of The Ringer stated, "PewDiePie isn't a comedian in any conventional sense," but described his "hosting style as loopy and irreverent in the extreme: He's a little bit stand-up, a little bit shock jock, a little bit 4chan bottom-feeder."
Kjellberg stated that the ability to make videos was more important to him than working in a prestigious career.
Some of his earliest videos featured commentaries of mainstream video games including Minecraft and Call of Duty, although he was particularly noted for his Let's Plays of |date
16 December 2015 |accessdate
11 April 2016 |url-status
live |archiveurl
https:/ web http:/ culture the-cult-of-pewdiepie-how-a-swedish-gamer-became-youtubes-biggest-star-20151216 |archivedate=8 April 2016
By December 2011, Kjellberg's channel had around 60,000 subscribers.
Around the time his channel earned 700,000 subscribers, Kjellberg spoke at Nonick Conference 2012.
In July 2012, the channel reached 1 million subscribers, In October, OpenSlate ranked Kjellberg's channel as the No. 1 YouTube channel.
That December, Kjellberg signed with Maker Studios, a multi-channel network (MCN) that drives the growth of the channels under it.
Shortly after, Kjellberg attracted criticism and controversy for the jokes, and in October 2012, he addressed the issue through a Tumblr post, writing, "I just wanted to make clear that I'm no longer making rape jokes, as I mentioned before I'm not looking to hurt anyone and I apologise if it ever did."
The Globe and Mail stated "unlike many young gamers, he listened when fans and critics alike pointed out their harmful nature, and resolved to stop making rape jokes."
Becoming the most-subscribed user (2013)
On 18 February 2013, the PewDiePie channel reached 5 million subscribers, In May, at the inaugural Starcount Social Stars Awards in Singapore, Kjellberg won the award for "Swedish Social Star".
Competing against Jenna Marbles, Smosh and Toby Turner, Kjellberg also won the award for "Most Popular Social Show".
In July 2013, he overtook Jenna Marbles to become the second most-subscribed YouTube user, and reached 10 million subscribers on 9 July 2013.
In August, Kjellberg signed with Maker's gaming sub-network, Polaris.
Polaris functioned as a relaunching of The Game Station, Maker's gaming network.
Kjellberg's subscriber count surpassed that of the leading channel, Smosh, on 15 August 2013.
Kjellberg received a certificate from Guinness World Records for becoming the most subscribed YouTuber.
On 1 November, Kjellberg's channel became the first to reach 15 million subscribers; the following day, the channel was surpassed by YouTube's Spotlight account at the top of the site's subscriber rankings.
In the same month, Kjellberg proclaimed his dislike of YouTube's new comment system and disabled the comment section on all of his videos.
On 22 December 2013, Kjellberg overtook the YouTube Spotlight channel to once again become the most-subscribed on YouTube.
Throughout 2012 and 2013, Kjellberg's channel was one of the fastest growing on YouTube, in terms of subscribers gained.
In 2013, the PewDiePie channel went from 3.5 million to just under 19 million subscribers, and by the end of 2013, it was gaining a new subscriber every 1.037 seconds.
Billboard reported that the PewDiePie channel gained more subscribers than any other channel in 2013.
Additionally, in the second half of 2013, the PewDiePie channel earned just under 1.3 billion video views.
Continued growth (2014-2015)
To this point, Kjellberg's commentaries were best known for featuring horror video games.
In 2014, however, he began to more actively play games that interested him, regardless of genre.
In March, Kjellberg updated his video production output, announcing he would be scaling down the frequency of uploads.
Later in the month, Kjellberg uploaded a video, announcing he would permanently disable comments on his YouTube videos.
On his decision, Kjellberg stated "I go to the comments and it's mainly spam, it's people self advertising, it's people trying to provoke...
just all this stuff that to me, it doesn't mean anything.
I don't care about it, I don't want to see it."
After disabling comments, Kjellberg continued interacting with his audience through Twitter and Reddit.
On 13 October, Kjellberg decided to allow comments on his videos once more, albeit only after approval.
However, Kjellberg expressed that he set toggled his comment settings this way so he can redirect people to instead comment on the forums of his website.
In a later video, Kjellberg claimed that disabling comments helped him become happier.
In September 2014, Kjellberg began streaming videos of his co-hosted series, BroKen, onto MLG.tv.
Kjellberg co-hosted the series with Kenneth Morrison, better known as CinnamonToastKen, who is also a video game commentator.
In October 2014, Kjellberg began hinting at the possibility that he might not renew his contract with Maker Studios upon its expiration in December 2014.
Reports that covered this information also added that Kjellberg expressed his frustrations with the studio's parent company, Disney.
Kjellberg mulled the option of launching his own network, rather than resign with Maker, although he has declined to provide in-depth details on the subject.
However, in light of news outlets reporting his disinterest with Maker, Kjellberg tweeted, "I feel like I was misquoted in the WSJ and I'm really happy with the work that Maker has been doing for me."
Kjellberg would ultimately continue creating videos under Maker.
His relationship with Maker developed into the network establishing an official PewDiePie website, app, and online store to sell merchandise, while Kjellberg promoted Maker's media interests and gave the network a share of his YouTube ad revenue.
According to Social Blade, a website which tracks YouTube channel statistics, on 29 December 2014, Kjellberg's channel surpassed emimusic's video view count, at over 7.2 billion views, to become the most-viewed channel on the website.
In early 2015, Nintendo launched its Creator Program, in order to share revenue with YouTube video creators who feature gameplay of their products in videos.
Kjellberg joined various gamers in criticising the programme.
Kjellberg called the programme a "slap in the face to the YouTube channels that do focus on Nintendo games exclusively".
Ultimately, the focal point of Kjellberg's concern and criticism was toward the approval of a video which Nintendo has to administer, and the potential of that approval process being motivated by biased intentions.
On 6 September, Kjellberg's YouTube account became the first to eclipse 10 billion video views.
YouTube Red, Revelmode, and style change (2015-2017)
During September 2015, Kjellberg teased about having a role in a series, stating that he was in Los Angeles for the show's shooting.
Although not many details were revealed at the time, it was later announced that the series would be titled Scare PewDiePie.
The series premiered the following February.
In January 2016, he announced a partnership with Maker Studios to produce Revelmode, a sub-network of Maker, that would showcase Kjellberg and his friends on YouTube in original series.
After the deal, the head of Maker Studios, Courtney Holt, stated, "we're thrilled to be doubling down with Felix."
Throughout 2016, Kjellberg's video style change became more apparent.
While producing fewer Let's Play videos about horror games, his style of humor also changed; he has commented that his shift to drier humour was not understood by younger viewers.
The name is derived from his friend and fellow YouTube video game commentator, Jacksepticeye.
Kjellberg expressed, "I find that a lot of people that work with YouTube, almost anyone, have no idea what it's like to work as a content creator, as someone who's built this for years and really cared about it."
On 8 December, Kjellberg's channel reached 50 million subscribers, becoming the first YouTube channel to do so.
After reaching the milestone, Kjellberg tweeted "will delete tomorrow 5 pm gmt," in reference to his channel, before later uploading a celebratory video featuring fireworks.
On 18 December 2016, he received a custom Play Button from YouTube as a reward for hitting 50 million subscribers.
Media controversies, streaming, and formatted shows (2017−2018)
In January 2017, Kjellberg began to receive criticism for his non-gaming videos.
According to International Business Times, one of the videos "appeared to show" him using a racial slur, which caused #PewdiepieIsOverParty to trend worldwide on Twitter.
A few days later, Kjellberg created further controversy, when he uploaded a video featuring him reviewing the website Fiverr, which allows people to sell a service for US$5.
In the video, Kjellberg shows the ridiculous acts people will do to make money on Fiverr by paying a duo to see if they will display the message "DEATH TO ALL JEWS" on a sign, and recorded his reaction to it.
He immediately apologised within the same video, stating he was not anti-Semitic and did not expect the duo to accept his request.
Kjellberg later explained that the video was done in jest and attempted to highlight the ridiculous things which can be provided as paid services on the Internet.
The publication reported he removed three of the videos, including the one from January 2017.
In his post, he also reiterated he does not support anti-Semitic groups.
On 13 February, the Disney-owned Maker Studios multi-channel network cut its ties with Kjellberg because of the aforementioned controversy and the additional videos containing allegedly anti-Semitic jokes.
Google also took action, dropping him from the Google Preferred advertising programme, as well as cancelling the Scare PewDiePie YouTube Red series.
Various media journalists and outlets joined the Wall Street Journal in criticising Kjellberg.
Many in the YouTube community, including Ethan Klein of h3h3Productions, a Jewish YouTube sketch comedian, who is also friends with Kjellberg, as well as YouTube news commentator Philip DeFranco, and popular gamers Markiplier and Jacksepticeye, as well as many others, defended Kjellberg and criticised the way media handled the incident.
On 16 February, Kjellberg himself responded in a video entitled My Response, in which he apologised to those who were offended by his previous videos and which he also criticised the reporting by the media.
He also states The Wall Street Journal framed his jokes as "posts" and took them out of context.
One of the examples Kjellberg gives of this includes one of his videos, in which he expresses frustration at people creating swastikas in his Tuber Simulator video game.
In March, Kjellberg confirmed that Revelmode no longer existed, in wake of the controversy surrounding the Wall Street Journals allegations of anti-Semitism toward him.
While announcing this, he revealed that he worked on the company for about 3 or 4 years.
On Netglow, he started streaming Best Club, a weekly live stream show.
In September 2017, Kjellberg drew criticism again when he used the racial slur "nigger" during an outburst at another player while live-streaming PlayerUnknown's Battlegrounds.
As a response to the incident, Campo Santo co-founder Sean Vanaman referred to Kjellberg as "worse than a closeted racist", announced that Campo Santo would file copyright strikes against Kjellberg's videos featuring the studio's game Firewatch, and encouraged other game developers to do the same.
Kjellberg later uploaded a short video apologising for the language he used during the live-stream, expressing "I'm disappointed in myself because it seems like I've learned nothing from all these past controversies, using the slur was not okay.
I'm really sorry if I offended, hurt or disappointed anyone with all of this.
Being in the position that I am, I should know better."
In 2018, Paul MacInnes of The Guardian wrote about Kjellberg's YouTube content; he noted that each week Kjellberg posted videos featuring one of three series formats, comparing this uploading pattern to television programming.
In late 2019 he discontinued Pew News due to criticism about his opinions on stories from his fans and said that 'the internet is now crazy'.
In May, Kjellberg attracted controversy for using the term "Twitch , "I'm gonna be honest with you, if this wasn't my job this would have pushed me off the Internet a very long time ago.
It makes me wonder maybe this is why women are so underrepresented on Twitch in general."
In a video uploaded in early December, Kjellberg gave a shoutout to several small content creators on YouTube, recommending his viewers to subscribe to them.
Among those creators was "E;R", who Kjellberg highlighted for a video essay on Netflix's Death Note.
Kjellberg addressed the issue, stating he was largely unaware of E;R's content contained outside of the Death Note video essay, and revoked his recommendation of E;R. On 17 December, Kjellberg posted a Pew News video entitled My Response S02E01, in which he criticized what he saw as the reporting of misinformation by the media and online personalities.
Kjellberg particularly criticized Vox Media's The Verge and Vox outlets, and denounced claims that he previously tweeted about the Charlottesville car attack.
In the diss track, Kjellberg made certain comments, which many considered to be covert racism, such as the line “Your language sounds like it come sic from a mumblerap community" addressing the Indian population in general.
Kjellberg also made allegations against T-Series using subscribing bots, but there was no proof as such, considering YouTube has a tough policy against fake engagement.
On the prospect of being surpassed by T-Series in terms of subscriber count, Kjellberg stated, "I don't really care about T-Series, ...
but I think if YouTube does shift in a way where it does feel more corporate, then something else will take its place."
Variety noted that many fellow YouTubers, including MrBeast and Markiplier, encouraged their viewers to subscribe to the PewDiePie channel.
Bhushan Kumar, the chairman and managing director of T-Series, commented "I am really not bothered about this race.
I don't even know why PewDiePie is taking this so seriously.
He's getting his people to push him, promote him.
We are not competing with him."
Online campaigns to subscribe to PewDiePie greatly assisted Kjellberg's subscriber count; his channel gained 6.62 million subscribers in December 2018 alone, compared to the 7 million subscribers gained in all of 2017.
On 22 February, Kjellberg went live playing on the popular gaming website Cool Math Games, the live broadcast resulted in the T-Series/PewDiePie subscriber gap being raised from 9,000 to 14,000.
On 12 March, Kjellberg uploaded an episode of his show Pew News in which he mentioned the 2019 Pulwama terrorist attack in which 40 Indian paramilitary troops were killed by terrorist organizations based in Pakistan.
Following the attack, T-Series removed several songs by Pakistani artists on its YouTube channel after being pressurised by political party MNS to isolate Pakistani artists, a course of action that Kjellberg disagreed with.
Kjellberg went on to make light of Pakistani users subscribing to his channel over T-Series in response to T-Series' removals.
The outlet Zee News reported that Kjellberg "faced strong criticism for his comments on the heightened tension between Pakistan and India in the March 12 issue of Pew News.
The heavy backlash forced the content creator to pull the segment from the clip."
Kjellberg also issued a clarification on Twitter, expressing that he was not attempting to speak on the broader India-Pakistan relations, but rather on the more specific context of T-Series removing artists' songs from its YouTube channel.
Various journalists covering the shooting reported that PewDiePie is not complicit with the shootings.
The New York Times suggested that Kjellberg's mention in the shootings was a ploy for the news media to attribute blame to PewDiePie and otherwise inflame political tensions.
On 27 March, T-Series surpassed Kjellberg in subscribers to become the most-subscribed channel on YouTube, after briefly gaining the title several times in early 2019.
On 31 March 2019, Kjellberg posted another diss track music video, ironically congratulating T-Series (this time an upbeat synth pop/hip-hop music video featuring YouTubers Roomie, Boyinaband, and MrBeast) titled "Congratulations".
Parts of the song's lyrics are sarcasm towards T-Series.
In the music video, Kjellberg mocks T-Series and the actions of the company, including how T-Series were founded to sell pirated songs and how they sent Kjellberg a cease and desist letter alleging that his actions and words were defamatory.
He also mentions the CEO's tax evasion scandal and #MeToo allegations.
The day after the video's upload, Kjellberg regained his lead over T-Series as the most subscribed channel.
On 11 April, T-Series started to seek court orders to remove PewDiePie's "diss tracks" from YouTube.
According to entertainment and law website IPRMENTLAW, T-Series sought out a court order from the Delhi High Court to remove PewDiePie's "Bitch Lasagna" and "Congratulations" from YouTube.
The alleged court order was ruled in favor of T-Series.
It was allegedly said that the complaint against Kjellberg claimed that his songs were "defamatory, disparaging, insulting, and offensive," and noted that comments on the videos were "abusive, vulgar, and also racist in nature."
Access to the music videos on YouTube was later blocked in India.
The following day, during a live stream showing a plane fly over New York City with a banner attached saying "Subscribe to PewDiePie", Kjellberg said that the event was "a nice little wrap up" to the Subscribe to PewDiePie meme.
Minecraft series and renewed focus on gaming (2019-present)
On 21 June 2019, Kjellberg launched Gaming Week, during which he would focus on uploading Let's Play videos every day for the first time in several years.
Among the games played were Minecraft, which he surprised himself enjoying; this resulted in Kjellberg largely centering his videos around Minecraft in the following months, with the content featured in his series Meme Review and LWIAY also becoming focused on the game.
Although Kjellberg had played Minecraft earlier in his YouTube career, he had very rarely played it in the following years due to his reluctance to join the trend of Minecraft YouTubers, whom he felt only played the game because of its popularity rather than for their own enjoyment.
This transition was largely successful for Kjellberg who received a large increase in views, achieving over 570 million views during the month of July (the most views received by the channel in a month since at least October 2016), and his daily number of new subscribers grew from 25,000 to 45,000 during that month.
YouTube tweeted a congratulatory post to note the occurrence, and rewarded him with a Red Diamond Play Button.
In October, Kjellberg stated in a video that his YouTube content, as well as content related to him on other websites such as Reddit, had been blocked in China.
He explained that this was due to his comments about the 2019 Hong Kong protests and an image of Chinese president Xi Jinping being compared to Winnie-the-Pooh shown in a previous video.
Walker, among other reporters and some casual gamers, have questioned the reasons for his popularity,
In response to his 2017 controversies, The Ringers Justin Charity commented, "PewDiePie's occasional, reactionary irreverence has become a core component of his appeal.
Likewise, for critics and fans who value inclusivity-and among outside observers who view PewDiePie's conduct as inexplicably frequent in the news-PewDiePie represents all that is wrong and alienating about games culture."
In 2015, Kjellberg was included on Times list of the 30 most influential people on the Internet, with the publication writing that his channel "broadcasts some of the most-watched programs in pop culture."
Later in 2015, Kjellberg was featured on the cover of Varietys "Famechangers" issue, with the magazine ranking him as the "#1 Famechanger", or "those whose influence stands head and shoulders above the rest".
The following year, Time included him on their Time 100 list, with South Park co-creator Trey Parker writing in his entry, "I know it might seem weird, especially to those of us from an older generation, that people would spend so much time watching someone else play video games ...
But I choose to see it as the birth of a new art form.
And I don't think anyone should underestimate its most powerful artist."
Forbes still included Kjellberg in the Gaming category of their June 2017 "Top Influencers" list.
Kjellberg has himself stated that he dislikes being called "famous", and has been referred to as "shy and quiet", and "much more reserved in real life," by a colleague who worked with him on Scare PewDiePie.
In a Rolling Stone article, Kjellberg admitted to being shocked by his fame; he recalled a gaming event near his hometown, stating "I remember there were five security guards yelling at a crowd to back up - it was out of control.
It was shocking to find myself in that situation, where I was that celebrity person."
Kjellberg also mentioned this event to Rolling Stone, stating, "I didn't even understand they were screaming for me at first."
His rise to fame has been used as "a great example of how the emerging society gives extensive opportunities to individuals with great ideas, courage, and, of course, a significant portion of luck as opposed to the old society."
Studies of the gaming community on YouTube have shown that 95% of gamers engage in watching online videos related to gaming, which has been linked to be an important reason for Kjellberg's popularity.
In a 2017 video, Kjellberg shared a screenshot of data provided by YouTube regarding his channel statistics, which suggested his largest demographic was among the 18-24 age group, followed by the 25-34 age group.
The fan base has been the target of criticism; in July 2018, Wired published an article, referring to Kjellberg's fan base as "toxic", stating that "it's not just that they've stuck with the Swedish gamer/alleged comedian as he peppered his videos with racial slurs, rape jokes, anti-Semitism, and homophobia for nearly a decade (though that's bad enough).
It's also that they insist that PewDiePie somehow isn't being hateful at all."
Relating to his responsibility to his audience, Kjellberg has stated, "many people see me as a friend they can chill with for 15 minutes a day," adding, "The loneliness in front of the computer screens brings us together.
But I never set out to be a role model; I just want to invite them to come over to my place."
Chris Reed of The Wall St. Cheat Sheet commented on the divisive opinions about Kjellberg, stating, "PewDiePie is not universally adored ... the great divide in opinion on PewDiePie seems to be largely generational.
Older people are less likely to subscribe to YouTube channels, or to pay much credence to YouTube personalities in general.
Many younger viewers, on the other hand, see him as endlessly entertaining and relatable."
When critiquing Kjellberg's early video game commentary content, Swedish columnist Lars Lindstrom commented positively, stating "that Felix Kjellberg having a comic talent is indisputable.
It is both amazingly awful and amazingly funny when a father bikes around with his son in the game Happy Wheels and both get crushed and bloody again and again and PewDiePie improvises absurd comments as the game continues.
The secret is that he really loves to play these games and that he has fun doing it."
Conversely, both Walker and Reed have commented positively on Kjellberg's intelligence.
Walker stated Kjellberg is "clearly" smart based on when he speaks directly to his audience, A Wired article covering the controversy was originally titled "PewDiePie Was Always Kinda Racist -
But Now He's a Hero to Nazis", although this was later changed to "PewDiePie's Fall Shows the Limits of 'LOL JK'.
Over a year after the controversy, MacInnes opined that Kjellberg "is funny, intelligent, innovative and highly charismatic ... to call him an alt-right agitator would perhaps be unfair as he has never publicly identified with the proto-fascist movement.
But he shares much of their culture and amplifies it across the world.
People should pay PewDiePie more attention."
Influence on video games
Kjellberg has been noted to support video games from indie developers, often playing through them in his videos.
For instance the developers of McPixel stated, "The largest force driving attention to McPixel at that time were 'Let's Play' videos.
Mostly by Jesse Cox and PewDiePie."
Kjellberg has also been confirmed to have positively influenced the sales of |date
10 October 2014 |accessdate
12 October 2014 |url-status
live |archiveurl
https:/ web http:/ youtube-games-star-pewdiepie-is-playing-for-global-dominance-32681 |archivedate=10 October 2014
In 2019, Kjellberg's Minecraft videos led a surge of interest towards the game, which saw an increase in players.
It also registered the largest-trending score on YouTube since January 2017 and surpassed Fortnite as the most-searched game on YouTube, with the searches for Minecraft on Google almost doubling since previous months.
Income
Kjellberg's earnings have been an often-reported topic by media publications.
However, this reporting has frustrated Kjellberg, who has said that he is "tired of talking about how much he makes."
After extensive media coverage of his earnings, Kjellberg expressed his frustration and suggested that they should rather look at the money he raised for charity.
In March 2014, Kjellberg made an estimated $140,000-$1.4 million from YouTube revenue, according to Social Blade.
In June 2014, The Wall Street Journal reported that Kjellberg earned $4 million in 2013; Kjellberg confirmed on Reddit that the figures were roughly around what he actually earned.
In July 2015, the Swedish newspaper Expressen reported that Kjellberg's production company, PewDie Productions AB, reported earnings of 63.7 million SEK ($7.5 million) in 2014.
The Guardian commented that the reason the media was so captivated by Kjellberg's earnings is that the topic "offers a rare insight into the money being made at the top end of YouTube stardom", adding "it's very rare for any YouTube creator to talk about their earnings publicly, not least because YouTube itself does not encourage it".
Kjellberg appeared at the top of Forbes October 2015 list of the richest YouTube stars with a reported $12 million earned in 2015.
In December 2016, Forbes named Kjellberg as the highest-earning YouTuber with his annual income reaching $15 million.
This was up 20% from 2015, largely due to his YouTube Red series Scare PewDiePie and his book This Book Loves You, which sold over 112,000 copies according to Nielsen Bookscan.
According to Forbes, Kjellberg's income dropped to $12 million in 2017, which made him the sixth highest-paid YouTuber during that year.
Forbes commented that Kjellberg's income would have been higher had he avoided the pushback from advertisers resulting from the controversies surrounding his videos in 2017.
Relationships with brands and sponsors
Beginning in April 2014 and spanning into August, Kjellberg, along with his girlfriend Marzia, began a marketing campaign for the Legendary Pictures film As Above, So Below.
Kjellberg's videos for the marketing campaign included a miniseries featuring him participating in the "Catacombs Challenge".
The challenge involved Kjellberg searching for three keys in the catacombs to open a container holding "the Philosopher's stone".
The couple's videos were able to earn nearly 20 million views.
Maker Studios, which both Kjellberg and Marzia are represented by, brokered the ad deal between the two and Legendary Pictures.
In the same month, a quote from him was used by Techland on Dying Light posters.
The quote, which read, "I love this game.
It's sooo awesome!", spread controversy as it came from a seemingly advertorial video, featuring him playing Dying Light.
In response to the issue, Kjellberg tweeted, "I love this game.
It's soooo awesome! - IGN."
While he entered partnerships early into his YouTube career, Kjellberg maintained that he worked with few brands and conducted few promotions.
Additionally, Kjellberg posted on Reddit, "I make more than I need from YouTube", adding, "with that freedom, but also to respect my fans for making that possible, I don't end up doing many endorsements."
On this topic, Kjellberg has expressed disappointment when a sizable portion of people misinterpret his intentions; he stated, "if I mention on Twitter that I find this or that Kickstarter project cool, people immediately start to ask what economical interests I might have in it."
In January 2019, Kjellberg announced a partnership with energy drink company G Fuel.
On 9 April 2019, PewDiePie announced that he would live-stream exclusively on DLive as part of a deal with the company and would live-stream weekly starting on 11 April.
Appearances in other media
Aside from his own YouTube channel, Kjellberg has made appearances in the videos of other YouTube creators and series.
In April 2013, he made a cameo in an episode of Epic Rap Battles of History, portraying Mikhail Baryshnikov.
In July 2013, Kjellberg starred alongside Anthony Padilla and Ian Hecox of Smosh, as well as Jenna Marbles, as guest judges on the second season of Internet Icon.
Kjellberg also appeared in YouTube's annual year-end Rewind series each year from 2013 to 2016.
On 3 June 2014, Sveriges Radio announced that Kjellberg was chosen to host his own episode of the Swedish radio show Sommar i P1.
Due to his international popularity, the episode was recorded in both Swedish and English.
The Swedish version was broadcast on 9 August 2014 in Sveriges Radio P1, and when the broadcast started the English version was published online.
The English version was made available on a dedicated server with extra capacity to avoid crashing the Sveriges Radio server.
The link to the Swedish version of the broadcast was shared over 3,500 times, and the link to the English version was shared about 49,000 times.
In December 2014, Kjellberg guest starred in two episodes of the 18th season of South Park, one of his favourite series.
The two episodes served as a two-part season finale.
The first part, titled "#REHASH" aired on 3 December, while the second part, titled "#HappyHolograms", aired on 10 December.
In the episodes, he parodied himself and other Let's Play commentators, who added commentary over Call of Duty gameplay in an overly expressive way.
In "#REHASH", the character Kyle wonders why his brother and his brother's friends favour watching others comment on events over experiencing events themselves.
In October of the same year, Kjellberg appeared as a guest on The Late Show with Stephen Colbert.
In February 2016, Kjellberg guest starred on Conan, playing Far Cry Primal as part of the show's Clueless Gamer segment.
Philanthropy
Kjellberg's popularity has allowed him to stir support for fundraising drives.
In February 2012, Kjellberg ran for King of the Web, an online contest.
He lost the overall title; however, he still became the "Gaming King of the Web" for the 1-15 February 2012 voting period.
During the following voting period, Kjellberg won and donated his cash winnings to the World Wildlife Fund.
Kjellberg also began a "Water Campaign" charity, where his fans could donate money to |accessdate
1 August 2018|url-status
live|archive-url
https:/ web https:/ felix-kjellberg/pewdiepie-winter-charity-drive|archive-date
25 April 2018
In celebration of reaching 25 million subscribers in June 2014, Kjellberg announced another charity drive for Save the Children.
It raised over $630,000, surpassing a $250,000 goal.
In an interview with the Swedish magazine Icon, he has expressed desire to continue these drives as time goes on, and also credited John and Hank Green as two individuals who gave him the idea of making unique videos for charity.
During the livestream, they helped raise money for RED, a charity committed to helping eliminate HIV/AIDS in Africa.
After the first day, the fundraiser raised over $200,000, after YouTube doubled their goal of $100,000, and at the end of the livestream, they had raised a total of over $1.3 million with help from the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation.
On 3 December 2018, Kjellberg announced that he had started a fundraiser on GoFundMe for Child Rights and You (CRY) in order to help Indian children, partially in response to racist comments left on his videos directed toward Indians.
Kjellberg also hosted a livestream on 4 December, donating all of its proceeds to CRY.
He raised over $200,000.
Anti-Defamation League donation controversy
In celebration of receiving his 100 million subscribers Play Button in September 2019, Kjellberg uploaded a video titled "Unboxing 100 MIL YouTube AWARD!!
", in which he announced that he was donating $50,000 to the Anti-Defamation League (ADL), an international Jewish non-governmental organisation.
Part of Kjellberg's fanbase criticized his decision, citing controversial actions and stances of the ADL.
Previously, the ADL had commended Disney for severing ties with Kjellberg following the controversy surrounding Kjellberg's content in early 2017.
The ADL said they had not been in contact with Kjellberg "beyond his public posts."
Two days after his initial announcement, Kjellberg announced in another video that he had decided to withdraw his donation.
He expressed that he was advised to donate to the ADL, and did not hand-pick an organization that he was passionate about, as he had usually done with past donations.
He continued, stating:
When I uploaded the video talking about the charity, it was very brief and people could tell something was off.
The whole Internet just didn't believe it, like 'why is he donating to this charity the ADL, look at his face.
Full conspiracy mode.'
And it was very interesting to watch that unfold.
To be fair, I saw it as an opportunity to put an end to these alt-right claims that have been thrown against me.
It wasn't to try to clear my name or save grace.
If it was, I would have done it years ago.
But after the Christchurch tragedy, I felt the responsibility to do something about it, because it's no longer just about me, it affected other people in a way.
And I'm not okay with that.
I've struggled to figure out how to do that, but this was not the right way to go about it.
I knew it wasn't perfect, but I also didn't know a lot of things that surfaced throughout this whole thing about the charity that hasn't fit at all, so I understand why people have concerns about it.
Kjellberg cited not hand-picking a charity organization due to his wedding and honeymoon causing his schedule to be busier than usual.
Additionally, he confirmed that he would still make a $50,000 donation to an organization at some point in the future, but after undergoing his usual process to select a suitable one.
Other ventures
On 24 September 2015, Kjellberg released his own video game |date
30 September 2016 |accessdate
7 October 2016 |url-status
live |archiveurl
https:/ web http:/ 2016 games |archivedate=7 October 2016
It was released as a free app on iOS and Android devices.
The game focuses on getting enough subscribers to dethrone Kjellberg as the king of YouTube.
The game reached the number one spot on the App Store within a few days of its release, while also experiencing its servers crashing due to its popularity.
The book was number one on The New York Times Best Seller list for two weeks in the Young Adult Paperback category.
On 31 October 2017, former Goat Simulator developer and lead designer Armin Ibrisagic announced his partnership with Kjellberg for his video game Animal Super Squad.
Personal life
Kjellberg married his long-time girlfriend Marzia Bisognin on 19 August 2019.
The two were introduced to each other through a friend of Bisognin’s in 2011, and after establishing an online relationship, Kjellberg flew to Italy to meet her.
Kjellberg explained that they moved to the UK in July 2013 for preference to live close to the sea and for better Internet connectivity.
He says he enjoys living in Brighton and Hove, as he is able to live in general anonymity.
The couple own two pugs named Edgar and Maya.
Filmography
Gameography
Discography
Awards
Publications
Notes
Further reading
