Fermentation is a metabolic process that produces chemical changes in organic substrates through the action of enzymes.
In biochemistry, it is narrowly defined as the extraction of energy from carbohydrates in the absence of oxygen.
In the context of food production, it may more broadly refer to any process in which the activity of microorganisms brings about a desirable change to a foodstuff or beverage.
The science of fermentation is known as zymology.
The term precision fermentation refers to fermentation using precision biology , and modern biotechnologies as genetic engineering, synthetic biology, metabolic engineering, systems biology, bioinformatics, and computational biology).
It is a process that allows us to program micro-organisms to produce almost any complex organic molecule.
Precision fermentation is particularly efficient for producing protein as well.
By producing it this way (in tightly-controlled environments, at optimized temperature), a feedstock efficiency of 40%-80% can be attained.
In microorganisms, fermentation is the primary means of producing ATP by the degradation of organic nutrients anaerobically.
Humans have used fermentation to produce foodstuffs and beverages since the Neolithic age.
For example, fermentation is used for preservation in a process that produces lactic acid found in such sour foods as pickled cucumbers, kimchi, and yogurt, as well as for producing alcoholic beverages such as wine and beer.
Fermentation also occurs within the gastrointestinal tracts of all animals, including humans.
Definitions
Below are some definitions of fermentation.
They range from informal, general usages to more scientific definitions.
# Preservation methods for food via microorganisms (general use).
Any process that produces alcoholic beverages or acidic dairy products (general use).
Any large-scale microbial process occurring with or without air (common definition used in industry).
Any energy-releasing metabolic process that takes place only under anaerobic conditions (becoming more scientific).
Any metabolic process that releases energy from a sugar or other organic molecule, does not require oxygen or an electron transport system, and uses an organic molecule as the final electron acceptor (most scientific).
Biological role
Along with photosynthesis and aerobic respiration, fermentation is a way of extracting energy from molecules, but it is the only one common to all bacteria and eukaryotes.
It is therefore considered the oldest metabolic pathway, suitable for an environment that does not yet have oxygen.
The basic mechanism for fermentation remains present in all cells of higher organisms.
Mammalian muscle carries out the fermentation that occurs during periods of intense exercise where oxygen supply becomes limited, resulting in the creation of lactic acid.
In invertebrates, fermentation also produces succinate and alanine.
Fermentative bacteria play an essential role in the production of methane in habitats ranging from the rumens of cattle to sewage digesters and freshwater sediments.
They produce hydrogen, carbon dioxide, formate and acetate and carboxylic acids; and then consortia of microbes convert the carbon dioxide and acetate to methane.
Acetogenic bacteria oxidize the acids, obtaining more acetate and either hydrogen or formate.
Finally, methanogens (which are in the domain Archea) convert acetate to methane.
Biochemical overview
Fermentation products contain chemical energy (they are not fully oxidized), but are considered waste products, since they cannot be metabolized further without the use of oxygen.
Fermentation normally occurs in an anaerobic environment.
In the presence of O2, NADH, and pyruvate are used to generate ATP in respiration.
This is called oxidative phosphorylation, and it generates much more ATP than glycolysis alone.
For that reason, fermentation is rarely utilized when oxygen is available.
However, even in the presence of abundant oxygen, some strains of yeast such as Saccharomyces cerevisiae prefer fermentation to aerobic respiration as long as there is an adequate supply of sugars (a phenomenon known as the Crabtree effect).
Some fermentation processes involve obligate anaerobes, which cannot tolerate oxygen.
Although yeast carries out the fermentation in the production of ethanol in beers, wines, and other alcoholic drinks, this is not the only possible agent: bacteria carry out the fermentation in the production of xanthan gum.
Products
Ethanol
In ethanol fermentation, one glucose molecule is converted into two ethanol molecules and two carbon dioxide molecules.
It is used to make bread dough rise: the carbon dioxide forms bubbles, expanding the dough into a foam.
The ethanol is the intoxicating agent in alcoholic beverages such as wine, beer and liquor.
Fermentation of feedstocks, including sugarcane, corn, and sugar beets, produces ethanol that is added to gasoline.
In some species of fish, including goldfish and carp, it provides energy when oxygen is scarce (along with lactic acid fermentation).
The figure illustrates the process.
Before fermentation, a glucose molecule breaks down into two pyruvate molecules.
The energy from this exothermic reaction is used to bind inorganic phosphates to ATP and convert NAD+ to NADH.
The pyruvates break down into two acetaldehyde molecules and give off two carbon dioxide molecules as a waste product.
The acetaldehyde is reduced into ethanol using the energy and hydrogen from NADH, and the NADH is oxidized into NAD+ so that the cycle may repeat.
The reaction is catalysed by the enzymes pyruvate decarboxylase and alcohol dehydrogenase.
undergoes a simple redox reaction, forming lactic acid.
It is unique because it is one of the only respiration processes to not produce a gas as a byproduct.
Overall, one molecule of glucose (or any six-carbon sugar) is converted to two molecules of lactic acid:
:C6H12O6 → 2 CH3CHOHCOOH
It occurs in the muscles of animals when they need energy faster than the blood can supply oxygen.
It also occurs in some kinds of bacteria (such as lactobacilli) and some fungi.
It is the type of bacteria that converts lactose into lactic acid in yogurt, giving it its sour taste.
These lactic acid bacteria can carry out either homolactic fermentation, where the end-product is mostly lactic acid, or Heterolactic fermentation, where some lactate is further metabolized and results in ethanol and carbon dioxide but hydrogen gas at a fairly high concentration can nevertheless be formed, as in flatus.
As an example of mixed acid fermentation, bacteria such as Clostridium pasteurianum ferment glucose producing butyrate, acetate, carbon dioxide, and hydrogen gas: The reaction leading to acetate is:
:C6H12O6 + 4 H2O &rarr; 2 CH3COO− + 2 HCO3− + 4 H+ + 4 H2
Glucose could theoretically be converted into just CO2 and H2, but the global reaction releases little energy.
Modes of operation
Most industrial fermentation uses batch or fed-batch procedures, although continuous fermentation can be more economical if various challenges, particularly the difficulty of maintaining sterility, can be met.
Batch
In a batch process, all the ingredients are combined and the reactions proceed without any further input.
Batch fermentation has been used for millennia to make bread and alcoholic beverages, and it is still a common method, especially when the process is not well understood.
However, it can be expensive because the fermentor must be sterilized using high pressure steam between batches.
Open
The high cost of sterilizing the fermentor between batches can be avoided using various open fermentation approaches that are able to resist contamination.
One is to use a naturally evolved mixed culture.
This is particularly favored in wastewater treatment, since mixed populations can adapt to a wide variety of wastes.
Thermophilic bacteria can produce lactic acid at temperatures of around 50 degrees Celsius, sufficient to discourage microbial contamination; and ethanol has been produced at a temperature of 70 °C.
This is just below its boiling point (78 °C), making it easy to extract.
Halophilic bacteria can produce bioplastics in hypersaline conditions.
Solid-state fermentation adds a small amount of water to a solid substrate; it is widely used in the food industry to produce flavors, enzymes and organic acids.
5000 BCE in India, Ayurveda mentions many Medicated Wines, 6000 BCE in Georgia, 3150 BCE in ancient Egypt, 3000 BCE in Babylon, 2000 BCE in pre-Hispanic Mexico, Fermented foods have a religious significance in Judaism and Christianity.
The Baltic god Rugutis was worshiped as the agent of fermentation.
In 1837, Charles Cagniard de la Tour, Theodor Schwann and Friedrich Traugott Kützing independently published papers concluding, as a result of microscopic investigations, that yeast is a living organism that reproduces by budding.
Schwann boiled grape juice to kill the yeast and found that no fermentation would occur until new yeast was added.
However, a lot of chemists, including Antoine Lavoisier, continued to view fermentation as a simple chemical reaction and rejected the notion that living organisms could be involved.
This was seen as a reversion to vitalism and was lampooned in an anonymous publication by Justus von Liebig and Friedrich Wöhler.
The turning point came when Louis Pasteur (1822-1895), during the 1850s and 1860s, repeated Schwann's experiments and showed that fermentation is initiated by living organisms in a series of investigations.
In 1860, he demonstrated that bacteria cause souring in milk, a process formerly thought to be merely a chemical change, and his work in identifying the role of microorganisms in food spoilage led to the process of , Pasteur published his famous paper on fermentation, "Etudes sur la Bière", which was translated into English in 1879 as "Studies on fermentation".
He defined fermentation (incorrectly) as "Life without air", but correctly showed that specific types of microorganisms cause specific types of fermentations and specific end-products.
Although showing fermentation to be the result of the action of living microorganisms was a breakthrough, it did not explain the basic nature of the fermentation process, or prove that it is caused by the microorganisms that appear to be always present.
Many scientists, including Pasteur, had unsuccessfully attempted to extract the fermentation enzyme from yeast.
Buechner's results are considered to mark the birth of biochemistry.
The "unorganized ferments" behaved just like the organized ones.
From that time on, the term enzyme came to be applied to all ferments.
It was then understood that fermentation is caused by enzymes that are produced by microorganisms.
In 1907, Buechner won the Nobel Prize in chemistry for his work.
Advances in microbiology and fermentation technology have continued steadily up until the present.
For example, in the 1930s, it was discovered that microorganisms could be mutated with physical and chemical treatments to be higher-yielding, faster-growing, tolerant of less oxygen, and able to use a more concentrated medium.
Strain selection and hybridization developed as well, affecting most modern food fermentations.
Etymology
The word "ferment" is derived from the Latin verb fervere, which means to boil.
It is thought to have been first used in the late 14th century in alchemy, but only in a broad sense.
It was not used in the modern scientific sense until around 1600.
