Reptiles are tetrapod animals in the class Reptilia, comprising today's turtles, crocodilians, snakes, amphisbaenians, lizards, tuatara, and their extinct relatives.
The study of these traditional reptile orders, historically combined with that of modern amphibians, is called herpetology.
Because some reptiles are more closely related to birds than they are to other reptiles (e.g., crocodiles are more closely related to birds than they are to lizards), the traditional groups of "reptiles" listed above do not together constitute a monophyletic grouping or clade (consisting of all descendants of a common ancestor).
For this reason, many modern scientists prefer to consider the birds part of Reptilia as well, thereby making Reptilia a monophyletic class, including all living Diapsids.
The earliest known proto-reptiles originated around 312 million years ago during the Carboniferous period, having evolved from advanced reptiliomorph tetrapods that became increasingly adapted to life on dry land.
Some early examples include the lizard-like Hylonomus and Casineria.
In addition to the living reptiles, there are many diverse groups that are now extinct, in some cases due to mass extinction events.
In particular, the Cretaceous-Paleogene extinction event wiped out the pterosaurs, plesiosaurs, ornithischians, and sauropods, as well as many species of theropods, including troodontids, dromaeosaurids, tyrannosaurids, and abelisaurids, along with many Crocodyliformes, and squamates (e.g. mosasaurids).
Modern non-avian reptiles inhabit all the continents except Antarctica, although some birds are found on the periphery of Antarctica.
Several living subgroups are recognized: Testudines (turtles and tortoises), 350 species; Rhynchocephalia (tuatara from New Zealand), 1 species; Squamata (lizards, snakes, and worm lizards), over 10,200 species;
Reptiles are tetrapod vertebrates, creatures that either have four limbs or, like snakes, are descended from four-limbed ancestors.
Unlike amphibians, reptiles do not have an aquatic larval stage.
Most reptiles are oviparous, although several species of squamates are viviparous, as were some extinct aquatic clades - the fetus develops within the mother, contained in a placenta rather than an eggshell.
As amniotes, reptile eggs are surrounded by membranes for protection and transport, which adapt them to reproduction on dry land.
Many of the viviparous species feed their fetuses through various forms of placenta analogous to those of mammals, with some providing initial care for their hatchlings.
Extant reptiles range in size from a tiny gecko, Sphaerodactylus ariasae, which can grow up to to the saltwater crocodile, Crocodylus porosus, which can reach in length and weigh over .
Classification
Research history
In the 13th century the category of reptile was recognized in Europe as consisting of a miscellany of egg-laying creatures, including "snakes, various fantastic monsters, lizards, assorted amphibians, and worms", as recorded by Vincent of Beauvais in his Mirror of Nature.
In the 18th century, the reptiles were, from the outset of classification, grouped with the amphibians.
Linnaeus, working from species-poor Sweden, where the common adder and grass snake are often found hunting in water, included all reptiles and amphibians in class "III - Amphibia" in his Systema Naturæ.
The terms "reptile" and "amphibian" were largely interchangeable, "reptile" (from Latin repere, "to creep") being preferred by the French.
Josephus Nicolaus Laurenti was the first to formally use the term "Reptilia" for an expanded selection of reptiles and amphibians basically similar to that of Linnaeus.
Today, the two groups are still commonly treated under the same heading as herptiles.
It was not until the beginning of the 19th century that it became clear that reptiles and amphibians are, in fact, quite different animals, and Pierre André Latreille erected the class Batracia (1825) for the latter, dividing the tetrapods into the four familiar classes of reptiles, amphibians, birds, and mammals.
The British anatomist Thomas Henry Huxley made Latreille's definition popular and, together with Richard Owen, expanded Reptilia to include the various fossil "antediluvian monsters", including dinosaurs and the mammal-like (synapsid) Dicynodon he helped describe.
This was not the only possible classification scheme: In the Hunterian lectures delivered at the Royal College of Surgeons in 1863, Huxley grouped the vertebrates into mammals, sauroids, and ichthyoids (the latter containing the fishes and amphibians).
He subsequently proposed the names of Sauropsida and Ichthyopsida for the latter two groups.
In 1866, Haeckel demonstrated that vertebrates could be divided based on their reproductive strategies, and that reptiles, birds, and mammals were united by the amniotic egg.
The terms "Sauropsida" ("lizard faces") and "Theropsida" ("beast faces") were used again in 1916 by E.S. Goodrich to distinguish between lizards, birds, and their relatives on the one hand (Sauropsida) and mammals and their extinct relatives (Theropsida) on the other.
Goodrich supported this division by the nature of the hearts and blood vessels in each group, and other features, such as the structure of the forebrain.
According to Goodrich, both lineages evolved from an earlier stem group, Protosauria ("first lizards") in which he included some animals today considered reptile-like amphibians, as well as early reptiles.
In 1956, D.M.S. Watson observed that the first two groups diverged very early in reptilian history, so he divided Goodrich's Protosauria between them.
He also reinterpreted Sauropsida and Theropsida to exclude birds and mammals, respectively.
Thus his Sauropsida included Procolophonia, Eosuchia, Millerosauria, Chelonia (turtles), Squamata (lizards and snakes), Rhynchocephalia, Crocodilia, "thecodonts" (paraphyletic basal Archosauria), non-ns.
In the late 19th century, a number of definitions of Reptilia were offered.
The traits listed by Lydekker in 1896, for example, include a single occipital condyle, a jaw joint formed by the quadrate and articular bones, and certain characteristics of the vertebrae.
The animals singled out by these formulations, the amniotes other than the mammals and the birds, are still those considered reptiles today.
Those four subclasses were:
* Anapsida - no fenestrae - cotylosaurs and Chelonia (turtles and relatives)
* Synapsida - one low fenestra - pelycosaurs and therapsids (the 'mammal-like reptiles')
* Euryapsida - one high fenestra (above the postorbital and squamosal) - protorosaurs (small, early lizard-like reptiles) and the marine sauropterygians and ichthyosaurs, the latter called Parapsida in Osborn's work.
* Diapsida - two fenestrae - most reptiles, including lizards, snakes, crocodilians, dinosaurs and pterosaurs
The composition of Euryapsida was uncertain.
Ichthyosaurs were, at times, considered to have arisen independently of the other euryapsids, and given the older name Parapsida.
Parapsida was later discarded as a group for the most part (ichthyosaurs being classified as incertae sedis or with Euryapsida).
However, four (or three if Euryapsida is merged into Diapsida) subclasses remained more or less universal for non-specialist work throughout the 20th century.
It has largely been abandoned by recent researchers: in particular, the anapsid condition has been found to occur so variably among unrelated groups that it is not now considered a useful distinction.
Phylogenetics and modern definition
By the early 21st century, vertebrate paleontologists were beginning to adopt phylogenetic taxonomy, in which all groups are defined in such a way as to be monophyletic; that is, groups include all descendants of a particular ancestor.
The reptiles as historically defined are paraphyletic, since they exclude both birds and mammals.
These respectively evolved from dinosaurs and from early therapsids, which were both traditionally called reptiles.
Birds are more closely related to crocodilians than the latter are to the rest of extant reptiles.
Colin Tudge wrote:
Mammals are a clade, and therefore the cladists are happy to acknowledge the traditional taxon Mammalia; and birds, too, are a clade, universally ascribed to the formal taxon Aves.
Mammalia and Aves are, in fact, subclades within the grand clade of the Amniota.
But the traditional class Reptilia is not a clade.
It is just a section of the clade , as is the proper way.
Instead, it is defined by a combination of the features it has and the features it lacks: reptiles are the amniotes that lack fur or feathers.
At best, the cladists suggest, we could say that the traditional Reptilia are 'non-avian, non-mammalian amniotes'.
Despite the early proposals for replacing the paraphyletic Reptilia with a monophyletic Sauropsida, which includes birds, that term was never adopted widely or, when it was, was not applied consistently.
When Sauropsida was used, it often had the same content or even the same definition as Reptilia.
In 1988, Jacques Gauthier proposed a cladistic definition of Reptilia as a monophyletic node-based crown group containing turtles, lizards and snakes, crocodilians, and birds, their common ancestor and all its descendants.
Because the actual relationship of turtles to other reptiles was not yet well understood at this time, Gauthier's definition came to be considered inadequate.
Phylogeny
The cladogram presented here illustrates the "family tree" of reptiles, and follows a simplified version of the relationships found by M.S. Lee, in 2013.
All genetic studies have supported the hypothesis that turtles are diapsids; some have placed turtles within archosauriformes, The cladogram below used a combination of genetic (molecular) and fossil (morphological) data to obtain its results.
The results place turtles as a sister clade to the archosaurs, the group that includes crocodiles, dinosaurs, and birds.
Evolutionary history
Origin of the reptiles
The origin of the reptiles lies about 310-320 million years ago, in the steaming swamps of the late Carboniferous period, when the first reptiles evolved from advanced reptiliomorphs.
The oldest known animal that may have been an amniote is Casineria (though it may have been a temnospondyl).
A series of footprints from the fossil strata of Nova Scotia dated to show typical reptilian toes and imprints of scales.
These tracks are attributed to Hylonomus, the oldest unquestionable reptile known.
It was a small, lizard-like animal, about long, with numerous sharp teeth indicating an insectivorous diet.
Other examples include Westlothiana (for the moment considered a reptiliomorph rather than a true amniote) and Paleothyris, both of similar build and presumably similar habit.
Rise of the reptiles
The earliest amniotes, including stem-reptiles (those amniotes closer to modern reptiles than to mammals), were largely overshadowed by larger stem-tetrapods, such as Cochleosaurus, and remained a small, inconspicuous part of the fauna until the Carboniferous Rainforest Collapse.
This sudden collapse affected several large groups.
Primitive tetrapods were particularly devastated, while stem-reptiles fared better, being ecologically adapted to the drier conditions that followed.
Primitive tetrapods, like modern amphibians, need to return to water to lay eggs; in contrast, amniotes, like modern reptiles - whose eggs possess a shell that allows them to be laid on land - were better adapted to the new conditions.
Amniotes acquired new niches at a faster rate than before the collapse and at a much faster rate than primitive tetrapods.
They acquired new feeding strategies including herbivory and carnivory, previously only having been insectivores and piscivores.
One of the best known early stem-reptiles is Mesosaurus, a genus from the Early Permian that had returned to water, feeding on fish.
Anapsids, synapsids, diapsids, and sauropsids
It was traditionally assumed that the first reptiles retained an anapsid skull inherited from their ancestors.
This type of skull has a skull roof with only holes for the nostrils, eyes and a pineal eye.
The discoveries of synapsid-like openings (see below) in the skull roof of the skulls of several members of Parareptilia (the clade containing most of the amniotes traditionally referred to as "anapsids"), including lanthanosuchoids, millerettids, bolosaurids, some nycteroleterids, some procolophonoids and at least some mesosaurs made it more ambiguous and it's currently uncertain whether the ancestral amniote had an anapsid-like or synapsid-like skull.
Soon after, another group evolved a similar trait, this time with a double opening behind each eye, earning them the name Diapsida ("two arches").
The rationale for this classification has been disputed, with some arguing that turtles are diapsids that evolved anapsid skulls in order to improve their armor.
All molecular studies have strongly upheld the placement of turtles within diapsids, most commonly as a sister group to extant archosaurs.
Permian reptiles
With the close of the Carboniferous, the amniotes became the dominant tetrapod fauna.
While primitive, terrestrial reptiliomorphs still existed, the synapsid amniotes evolved the first truly terrestrial megafauna (giant animals) in the form of pelycosaurs, such as Edaphosaurus and the carnivorous Dimetrodon.
In the mid-Permian period, the climate became drier, resulting in a change of fauna: The pelycosaurs were replaced by the therapsids.
The parareptiles, whose massive skull roofs had no postorbital holes, continued and flourished throughout the Permian.
The pareiasaurian parareptiles reached giant proportions in the late Permian, eventually disappearing at the close of the period (the turtles being possible survivors).
Most of the earlier parareptile and synapsid megafauna disappeared, being replaced by the true reptiles, particularly archosauromorphs.
These were characterized by elongated hind legs and an erect pose, the early forms looking somewhat like long-legged crocodiles.
The archosaurs became the dominant group during the Triassic period, though it took 30 million years before their diversity was as great as the animals that lived in the Permian.
The sister group to Archosauromorpha is Lepidosauromorpha, containing lizards and tuataras, as well as their fossil relatives.
Lepidosauromorpha contained at least one major group of the Mesozoic sea reptiles: the mosasaurs, which lived during the Cretaceous period.
The phylogenetic placement of other main groups of fossil sea reptiles - the ichthyopterygians (including ichthyosaurs) and the sauropterygians, which evolved in the early Triassic - is more controversial.
Different authors linked these groups either to lepidosauromorphs or to archosauromorphs, and ichthyopterygians were also argued to be diapsids that did not belong to the least inclusive clade containing lepidosauromorphs and archosauromorphs.
Cenozoic reptiles
The close of the Cretaceous period saw the demise of the Mesozoic era reptilian megafauna (see the Cretaceous-Paleogene extinction event).
Of the large marine reptiles, only sea turtles were left; and of the non-marine large reptiles, only the semi-aquatic crocodiles and broadly similar choristoderes survived the extinction, with the latter becoming extinct in the Miocene.
Of the great host of dinosaurs dominating the Mesozoic, only the small beaked birds survived.
This dramatic extinction pattern at the end of the Mesozoic led into the Cenozoic.
Mammals and birds filled the empty niches left behind by the reptilian megafauna and, while reptile diversification slowed, bird and mammal diversification took an exponential turn.
After the extinction of most archosaur and marine reptile lines by the end of the Cretaceous, reptile diversification continued throughout the Cenozoic.
Squamates took a massive hit during the KT-event, only recovering ten million years after it, but they underwent a great radiation event once they recovered, and today squamates make up the majority of living reptiles (> 95%).
Approximately 10,000 extant species of traditional reptiles are known, with birds adding about 10,000 more, almost twice the number of mammals, represented by about 5,700 living species (excluding domesticated species).
Morphology and physiology
Circulation
All squamates and turtles have a three-chambered heart consisting of two atria, one variably partitioned ventricle, and two aortas that lead to the systemic circulation.
The degree of mixing of oxygenated and deoxygenated blood in the three-chambered heart varies depending on the species and physiological state.
Under different conditions, deoxygenated blood can be shunted back to the body or oxygenated blood can be shunted back to the lungs.
This variation in blood flow has been hypothesized to allow more effective thermoregulation and longer diving times for aquatic species, but has not been shown to be a fitness advantage.
For example, Iguana hearts, like the majority of the squamates hearts, are composed of three chambers with two aorta and one ventricle, cardiac involuntary muscles.
The main structures of the heart are the sinus venosus, the pacemaker, the left atrium, the right atruim, the atrioventricular valve, the cavum venosum, cavum arteriosum, the cavum pulmonale, the muscular ridge, the ventricular ridge, pulmonary veins, and paired aortic arches.
Some squamate species (e.g., pythons and monitor lizards) have three-chambered hearts that become functionally four-chambered hearts during contraction.
This is made possible by a muscular ridge that subdivides the ventricle during ventricular diastole and completely divides it during ventricular systole.
Because of this ridge, some of these squamates are capable of producing ventricular pressure differentials that are equivalent to those seen in mammalian and avian hearts.
Crocodilians have an anatomically four-chambered heart, similar to birds, but also have two systemic aortas and are therefore capable of bypassing their pulmonary circulation.
Metabolism
Modern non-avian reptiles exhibit some form of cold-bloodedness (i.e. some mix of poikilothermy, ectothermy, and bradymetabolism) so that they have limited physiological means of keeping the body temperature constant and often rely on external sources of heat.
Due to a less stable core temperature than birds and mammals, reptilian biochemistry requires enzymes capable of maintaining efficiency over a greater range of temperatures than in the case for warm-blooded animals.
The optimum body temperature range varies with species, but is typically below that of warm-blooded animals; for many lizards, it falls in the 24°-35
°C (75°-95 °F) range, while extreme heat-adapted species, like the American desert iguana Dipsosaurus dorsalis, can have optimal physiological temperatures in the mammalian range, between 35° and 40 °C (95° and 104 °F).
While the optimum temperature is often encountered when the animal is active, the low basal metabolism makes body temperature drop rapidly when the animal is inactive.
As in all animals, reptilian muscle action produces heat.
In large reptiles, like leatherback turtles, the low surface-to-volume ratio allows this metabolically produced heat to keep the animals warmer than their environment even though they do not have a warm-blooded metabolism.
This form of homeothermy is called gigantothermy; it has been suggested as having been common in large dinosaurs and other extinct large-bodied reptiles.
The benefit of a low resting metabolism is that it requires far less fuel to sustain bodily functions.
By using temperature variations in their surroundings, or by remaining cold when they do not need to move, reptiles can save considerable amounts of energy compared to endothermic animals of the same size.
A crocodile needs from a tenth to a fifth of the food necessary for a lion of the same weight and can live half a year without eating.
Lower food requirements and adaptive metabolisms allow reptiles to dominate the animal life in regions where net calorie availability is too low to sustain large-bodied mammals and birds.
It is generally assumed that reptiles are unable to produce the sustained high energy output necessary for long distance chases or flying.
Higher energetic capacity might have been responsible for the evolution of warm-bloodedness in birds and mammals.
However, investigation of correlations between active capacity and thermophysiology show a weak relationship.
Most extant reptiles are carnivores with a sit-and-wait feeding strategy; whether reptiles are cold blooded due to their ecology is not clear.
Energetic studies on some reptiles have shown active capacities equal to or greater than similar sized warm-blooded animals.
Respiratory system
All reptiles breathe using lungs.
Aquatic turtles have developed more permeable skin, and some species have modified their cloaca to increase the area for gas exchange.
Even with these adaptations, breathing is never fully accomplished without lungs.
Lung ventilation is accomplished differently in each main reptile group.
In squamates, the lungs are ventilated almost exclusively by the axial musculature.
This is also the same musculature that is used during locomotion.
Because of this constraint, most squamates are forced to hold their breath during intense runs.
Some, however, have found a way around it.
Varanids, and a few other lizard species, employ buccal pumping as a complement to their normal "axial breathing".
This allows the animals to completely fill their lungs during intense locomotion, and thus remain aerobically active for a long time.
Tegu lizards are known to possess a proto-diaphragm, which separates the pulmonary cavity from the visceral cavity.
While not actually capable of movement, it does allow for greater lung inflation, by taking the weight of the viscera off the lungs.
Crocodilians actually have a muscular diaphragm that is analogous to the mammalian diaphragm.
The difference is that the muscles for the crocodilian diaphragm pull the pubis back, which brings the liver down, thus freeing space for the lungs to expand.
This type of diaphragmatic setup has been referred to as the "hepatic piston".
The airways form a number of double tubular chambers within each lung.
On inhalation and exhalation air moves through the airways in the same direction, thus creating a unidirectional airflow through the lungs.
A similar system is found in birds, monitor lizards and iguanas.
Most reptiles lack a secondary palate, meaning that they must hold their breath while swallowing.
Crocodilians have evolved a bony secondary palate that allows them to continue breathing while remaining submerged (and protect their brains against damage by struggling prey).
Skinks (family Scincidae) also have evolved a bony secondary palate, to varying degrees.
Snakes took a different approach and extended their trachea instead.
Their tracheal extension sticks out like a fleshy straw, and allows these animals to swallow large prey without suffering from asphyxiation.
Turtles and tortoises
How turtles and tortoises breathe has been the subject of much study.
To date, only a few species have been studied thoroughly enough to get an idea of how those turtles breathe.
The varied results indicate that turtles and tortoises have found a variety of solutions to this problem.
The difficulty is that most turtle shells are rigid and do not allow for the type of expansion and contraction that other amniotes use to ventilate their lungs.
Some turtles, such as the Indian flapshell (Lissemys punctata), have a sheet of muscle that envelops the lungs.
When it contracts, the turtle can exhale.
When at rest, the turtle can retract the limbs into the body cavity and force air out of the lungs.
When the turtle protracts its limbs, the pressure inside the lungs is reduced, and the turtle can suck air in.
Turtle lungs are attached to the inside of the top of the shell (carapace), with the bottom of the lungs attached (via connective tissue) to the rest of the viscera.
By using a series of special muscles (roughly equivalent to a diaphragm), turtles are capable of pushing their viscera up and down, resulting in effective respiration, since many of these muscles have attachment points in conjunction with their forelimbs (indeed, many of the muscles expand into the limb pockets during contraction).
Breathing during locomotion has been studied in three species, and they show different patterns.
Adult female green sea turtles do not breathe as they crutch along their nesting beaches.
They hold their breath during terrestrial locomotion and breathe in bouts as they rest.
North American box turtles breathe continuously during locomotion, and the ventilation cycle is not coordinated with the limb movements.
This is because they use their abdominal muscles to breathe during locomotion.
The last species to have been studied is the red-eared slider, which also breathes during locomotion, but takes smaller breaths during locomotion than during small pauses between locomotor bouts, indicating that there may be mechanical interference between the limb movements and the breathing apparatus.
Box turtles have also been observed to breathe while completely sealed up inside their shells.
Exposed parts of reptiles are protected by scales or scutes, sometimes with a bony base, forming armor.
In lepidosaurians, such as lizards and snakes, the whole skin is covered in overlapping epidermal scales.
Such scales were once thought to be typical of the class Reptilia as a whole, but are now known to occur only in lepidosaurians.
The scales found in turtles and crocodiles are of dermal, rather than epidermal, origin and are properly termed scutes.
In turtles, the body is hidden inside a hard shell composed of fused scutes.
Lacking a thick dermis, reptilian leather is not as strong as mammalian leather.
It is used in leather-wares for decorative purposes for shoes, belts and handbags, particularly crocodile skin.
Shedding.
Reptiles shed their skin through a process called ecdysis which occurs continuously throughout their lifetime.
In particular, younger reptiles tend to shed once every 5-6 weeks while adults shed 3-4 times a year.
Younger reptiles shed more because of their rapid growth rate.
Once full size, the frequency of shedding drastically decreases.
The process of ecdysis involves forming a new layer of skin under the old one.
Proteolytic enzymes and lymphatic fluid is secreted between the old and new layers of skin.
Consequently, this lifts the old skin from the new one allowing shedding to occur.
Snakes will shed from the head to the tail while lizards shed in a "patchy pattern".
There are numerous reasons why shedding fails and can be related to inadequate humidity and temperature, nutritional deficiencies, dehydration and traumatic injuries.
In all reptiles the urinogenital ducts and the anus both empty into an organ called a cloaca.
In some reptiles, a midventral wall in the cloaca may open into a urinary bladder, but not all.
It is present in all turtles and tortoises as well as most lizards, but is lacking in the monitor lizard, the legless lizards.
It is absent in the snakes, alligators, and crocodiles.
Many turtles, tortoises, and lizards have proportionally very large bladders.
Charles Darwin noted that the Galapagos tortoise had a bladder which could store up to 20% of its body weight.
Such adaptations are the result of environments such as remote islands and deserts where water is very scarce.
Other desert-dwelling reptiles have large bladders that can store a long-term reservoir of water for up to several months and aid in osmoregulation.
Turtles have two or more accessory urinary bladders, located lateral to the neck of the urinary bladder and dorsal to the pubis, occupying a significant portion of their body cavity.
Their bladder is also usually bilobed with a left and right section.
The right section is located under the liver, which prevents large stones from remaining in that side while the left section is more likely to have calculi.
Digestion
qrapizawreeh5kx51f3fdpdavglx5c2
