Grumpy Cat's Worst Christmas Ever is a 2014 made-for-television Christmas film that stars the Internet celebrity cat Tardar Sauce, also known as "Grumpy Cat".
The movie first aired on the Lifetime network on November 29, 2014.
It stars Megan Charpentier as a young girl who befriends and later adopts Grumpy Cat, only to discover that the two can communicate with one another.
It was directed by Tim Hill, who also co-wrote the screenplay for the film with Jeff Morris.
Plot
Grumpy Cat is a lonely and grumpy cat living in a pet shop located in a mall that is slated to be closed.
She is bitter at being constantly passed over for other animals in the store, but is surprised to find that she can communicate with Chrystal, an equally lonely 12-year-old girl who is shocked that Grumpy Cat can talk.
The two are initially at odds, but start to befriend each other, especially after a high-priced Leonberger dog is kidnapped from the pet shop for its value.
Cast
Production
The film was created to showcase Tardar Sauce, the subject of an Internet meme which first appeared in 2012.
Tim Hill, one of the writers, had previously directed .
When Plaza was cast to perform Grumpy Cat's voice, she was initially unfamiliar with it, but learned about the cat before production.
The film was shot in its entirety before Plaza recorded her lines.
She re-drafted around 90% of her dialogue, explaining,
Once I realized that the cat's mouth wasn't going to move, I just kind of went for it, and thought, 'Well, if it's just going to cut to the cat and I can say my line, then I can just comment on other things, too.'
The movie kind of has a Mystery Science Theater 3000 vibe to it, so it's like you're getting Grumpy's commentary throughout the whole thing, but then Grumpy is also starring in the story.
The film received mostly negative reviews.
On review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes, the film holds an approval rating of 27%, based on 11 reviews, and an average rating of 4.17 5, based on 286 audience reviews.
The A.V. Club and Entertainment Weekly both panned the film.
The A.V. Club called it "the largest turd in Lifetime's crap crown of original programming...so unforgiving, so psychologically trying, that the process alone leaves the viewer straining to hear the dialogue over the sound of the soul being crushed wholesale, bone and sinew wrenched apart at the joint."
The Guardian, MySA, and St. Louis Post Dispatch were more positive in their reviews, with the St. Louis Post Dispatch commenting that although the film was "terrible" they still enjoyed it overall.
The Hollywood Reporter also gave the film a positive review, stating "the Christmas miracle of this movie is that Grumpy Cat's Worst Christmas Ever isn't the worst Christmas movie ever," and praising the writing and Aubrey Plaza's voice acting.
