Roald Engelbregt Gravning Amundsen (, ; 16 July 1872 - ) was a Norwegian explorer of polar regions and a key figure of the Heroic Age of Antarctic Exploration.
He led the first expedition to traverse the Northwest Passage by sea, from 1903 to 1906, and the first expedition to the South Pole in 1911.
He led the first expedition proven to have reached the North Pole in 1926.
Polar treks
Belgian Antarctic Expedition
Amundsen joined the Belgian Antarctic Expedition as first mate.
This expedition, led by Adrien de Gerlache using the ship the RV Belgica, became the first expedition to overwinter in Antarctica.
At this time, Amundsen learned of the dissolution of the union between Norway and Sweden, and that he had a new king.
The explorer sent the new king, Haakon VII, news that his traversing the Northwest Passage "was a great achievement for Norway"., where she is now situated inside her own dedicated building at the museum.
South Pole Expedition
Amundsen next planned to take an expedition to the North Pole and explore the Arctic Basin.
Finding it difficult to raise funds, when he heard in 1909 that the Americans Frederick Cook and Robert Peary had claimed to reach the North Pole as a result of two different expeditions, he decided to reroute to Antarctica.
As a result, he participated little in the work outdoors, such as sleigh rides and hunting.
He, Hanssen, and Wisting, along with two other men, embarked on an expedition by dog sled to Nome, Alaska, more than away.
But they found that the ice was not frozen solid in the Bering Strait, and it could not be crossed.
They sent a telegram from Anadyr to signal their location.
After two winters frozen in the ice, without having achieved the goal of drifting over the North Pole, Amundsen decided to go to Nome to repair the ship and buy provisions.
Several of the crew ashore there, including Hanssen, did not return on time to the ship.
Amundsen considered Hanssen to be in breach of contract, and dismissed him from the crew.
During the third winter, Maud was frozen in the western Bering Strait.
She finally became free and the expedition sailed south, reaching Seattle, in the American Pacific Northwest in 1921 for repairs.
Amundsen returned to Norway, needing to put his finances in order.
He took with him two young indigenous girls, a four-year-old he adopted, Kakonita, and her companion Camilla.
When Amundsen went bankrupt two years later, however, he sent the girls to be cared for by Camilla's father, who lived in eastern Russia.
He decided to shift from the planned naval expedition to aerial ones, and arranged to charter a plane.
He divided the expedition team in two: one part, led by him, was to winter over and prepare for an attempt to fly over the pole.
The second team on Maud, under the command of Wisting, was to resume the original plan to drift over the North Pole in the ice.
The ship drifted in the ice for three years east of the New Siberian Islands, never reaching the North Pole.
It was finally seized by Amundsen's creditors as collateral for his mounting debt.
The attempt to fly over the Pole failed, too.
Amundsen and Oskar Omdal, of the Royal Norwegian Navy, tried to fly from Wainwright, Alaska, to Spitsbergen across the North Pole.
When their aircraft was damaged, they abandoned the journey.
To raise additional funds, Amundsen traveled around the United States in 1924 on a lecture tour.
Although he was unable to reach the North Pole, the scientific results of the expedition, mainly the work of Sverdrup, have proven to be of considerable value.
Much of the carefully collected scientific data was lost during the ill-fated journey of Peter Tessem and Paul Knutsen, two crew members sent on a mission by Amundsen.
The scientific materials were later retrieved by Russian scientist Nikolay Urvantsev from where they had been abandoned on the shores of the Kara Sea.
Legacy
Owing to Amundsen's numerous significant accomplishments in polar exploration, many places in both the Arctic and Antarctic are named after him.
The Amundsen-Scott South Pole Station, operated by the United States Antarctic Program, was jointly named in honour of Amundsen and his rival.
British novelist Roald Dahl was named after Amundsen, as was Nobel Prize laureate Roald Hoffmann.
The 1969 film The Red Tent tells the story of the Nobile expedition and Amundsen's disappearance.
Sean Connery plays the role of Amundsen.
Huntford's book was adapted into the TV serial The Last Place on Earth.
It aired in 1985 and featured Sverre Anker Ousdal as Amundsen.
On 15 February 2019, a biographic Norwegian film titled Amundsen, directed by Espen Sandberg, was released.
European-Inuit descendant claims
At least two Inuit people in Gjøa Haven with European ancestry have claimed to be descendants of Amundsen, from the period of their extended winter stay on King Williams Island from 1903 to 1905.
Accounts by members of the expedition told of their relations with Inuit women, and historians have speculated that Amundsen might also have taken a partner, although he wrote a warning against this.
Specifically, half-brothers Bob Konona and Paul Ikuallaq say that their father Luke Ikuallaq told them on his deathbed that he was the son of Amundsen.
Konona said that their father Ikuallaq was left out on the ice to die after his birth, as his European ancestry made him illegitimate to the Inuit, threatening their community.
His Inuit grandparents saved him.
In 2012, Y-DNA analysis, with the families' permission, showed that Ikuallaq was not a match to the direct male line of Amundsen.
Not all descendants claiming European ancestry have been tested for a match to Amundsen, nor has there been a comparison of Ikuallaq's DNA to that of other European members of Amundsen's crew.
Works by Amundsen
* List of people who disappeared mysteriously at sea
Citations
Sources
Further reading
* Stephen Bown.
The Last Viking: The Life of Roald Amundsen: conqueror of the South Pole.
London, Aurum Press, 2012)
* Torr Bowmann-Larsen.
Roald Amundsen.
* Garth Cameron.
From Pole to Pole: Roald Amundsen's Journey in Flight.
* Garth Cameron.
Umberto Nobile and the Arctic Search for the Airship Italia.
* Hugo Decleir.
Roald Amundsen's Belgica Diary: the first Scientific Expedition to the Antarctic.
* Roland Huntford.
The Last Place on Earth: Scott and Amundsen's Race to the South Pole. (1979)
* Rainier K. Langne.
Scott and Amundsen: Duel in the Ice.
