Radio is the technology of signaling and communicating using radio waves.
Radio waves are electromagnetic waves of frequency between 30 hertz (Hz) and 300 gigahertz (GHz).
They are generated by an electronic device called a transmitter connected to an antenna which radiates the waves, and received by a radio receiver connected to another antenna.
Radio is very widely used in modern technology, in radio communication, radar, radio navigation, remote control, remote sensing and other applications.
In radio communication, used in radio and television broadcasting, cell phones, two-way radios, wireless networking and satellite communication among numerous other uses, radio waves are used to carry information across space from a transmitter to a receiver, by modulating the radio signal (impressing an information signal on the radio wave by varying some aspect of the wave) in the transmitter.
In radar, used to locate and track objects like aircraft, ships, spacecraft and missiles, a beam of radio waves emitted by a radar transmitter reflects off the target object, and the reflected waves reveal the object's location.
In radio navigation systems such as GPS and VOR, a mobile receiver receives radio signals from navigational radio beacons whose position is known, and by precisely measuring the arrival time of the radio waves the receiver can calculate its position on Earth.
In wireless radio remote control devices like drones, garage door openers, and keyless entry systems, radio signals transmitted from a controller device control the actions of a remote device.
Applications of radio waves which do not involve transmitting the waves significant distances, such as RF heating used in industrial processes and microwave ovens, and medical uses such as diathermy and MRI machines, are not usually called radio.
The noun radio is also used to mean a broadcast radio receiver.
Radio waves were first identified and studied by German physicist Heinrich Hertz in 1886.
The first practical radio transmitters and receivers were developed around 1895-6 by Italian Guglielmo Marconi, and radio began to be used commercially around 1900.
To prevent interference between users, the emission of radio waves is strictly regulated by law, coordinated by an international body called the International Telecommunications Union (ITU), which allocates frequency bands in the radio spectrum for different uses.
Radio technology
Radio waves are radiated by electric charges undergoing acceleration.
They are generated artificially by time varying electric currents, consisting of electrons flowing back and forth in a metal conductor called an antenna.
In transmission, a transmitter generates an alternating current of radio frequency which is applied to an antenna.
The antenna radiates the power in the current as radio waves.
When the waves strike the antenna of a radio receiver, they push the electrons in the metal back and forth, inducing a tiny alternating current.
The radio receiver connected to the receiving antenna detects this oscillating current and amplifies it.
As they travel farther from the transmitting antenna, radio waves spread out so their signal strength (intensity in watts per square meter) decreases, so radio transmissions can only be received within a limited range of the transmitter, the distance depending on the transmitter power, antenna radiation pattern, receiver sensitivity, noise level, and presence of obstructions between transmitter and receiver.
An omnidirectional antenna transmits or receives radio waves in all directions, while a directional antenna or high gain antenna transmits radio waves in a beam in a particular direction, or receives waves from only one direction.
Radio waves travel through a vacuum at the speed of light, and in air at very close to the speed of light, so the wavelength of a radio wave, the distance in meters between adjacent crests of the wave, is inversely proportional to its frequency.
Radio communication
In radio communication systems, information is carried across space using radio waves.
At the sending end, the information to be sent is converted by some type of transducer to a time-varying electrical signal called the modulation signal.
The modulation signal may be an audio signal representing sound from a microphone, a video signal representing moving images from a video camera, or a digital signal consisting of a sequence of bits representing binary data from a computer.
The modulation signal is applied to a radio transmitter.
In the transmitter, an electronic oscillator generates an alternating current oscillating at a radio frequency, called the carrier wave because it serves to "carry" the information through the air.
The information signal is used to modulate the carrier, varying some aspect of the carrier wave, impressing the information on the carrier.
Different radio systems use different modulation methods:
*AM (amplitude modulation) - in an AM transmitter, the amplitude (strength) of the radio carrier wave is varied by the modulation signal.
*FM (frequency modulation) - in an FM transmitter, the frequency of the radio carrier wave is varied by the modulation signal.
*FSK (frequency shift keying) - used in wireless digital devices to transmit digital signals, the frequency of the carrier wave is shifted periodically between two frequencies that represent the two binary digits, 0 and 1, to transmit a sequence of bits.
*OFDM (orthogonal frequency division multiplexing) - a family of complicated digital modulation methods very widely used in high bandwidth systems such as WiFi networks, cellphones, digital television broadcasting, and digital audio broadcasting (DAB) to transmit digital data using a minimum of radio spectrum bandwidth.
It has higher spectral efficiency and more resistance to fading than AM or FM.
In OFDM, multiple radio carrier waves closely spaced in frequency are transmitted within the radio channel, with each carrier modulated with bits from the incoming bitstream so multiple bits are being sent simultaneously, in parallel.
At the receiver the carriers are demodulated and the bits are combined in the proper order into one bitstream.
Many other types of modulation are also used.
In some types a carrier wave is not transmitted but just one or both modulation sidebands.
The modulated carrier is amplified in the transmitter, and applied to a transmitting antenna which radiates the energy as radio waves.
The radio waves carry the information to the receiver location.
At the receiver, the radio wave induces a tiny oscillating voltage in the receiving antenna which is a weaker replica of the current in the transmitting antenna.
The service area covered by the provider is divided into small geographical areas called "cells", each served by a separate base station antenna and multichannel transceiver.
All the cell phones in a cell communicate with this antenna on separate frequency channels, assigned from a common pool of frequencies.
:The purpose of cellular organization is to conserve radio bandwidth by frequency reuse.
Low power transmitters are used so the radio waves used in a cell do not travel far beyond the cell, allowing the same frequencies to be reused in geographically separated cells.
When a user carrying a cellphone crosses from one cell to another, his phone is automatically "handed off" seamlessly to the new antenna and assigned new frequencies.
Cellphones have a highly automated full duplex digital transceiver using OFDM modulation using two digital radio channels, each carrying one direction of the bidirectional conversation, as well as a control channel that handles dialing calls and "handing off" the phone to another cell tower.
Existing 2G, 3G, and 4G networks use frequencies in the UHF and low microwave range, between 700 MHz and 3 GHz.
The cell phone transmitter adjusts its power output to use the minimum power necessary to communicate with the cell tower; 0.6 W when near the tower, up to 3 W when farther away.
Cell tower channel transmitter power is 50 W. Current generation phones, called smartphones, have many functions besides making telephone calls, and therefore have several other radio transmitters and receivers that connect them with other networks: usually a WiFi modem, a Bluetooth modem, and a GPS receiver.
**5G cellular network - next generation cellular networks which began deployment in 2019.
Their major advantage is much higher data rates than previous cellular networks, up to 10 Gbps; 100 times faster than the previous cellular technology, 4G LTE.
The higher data rates are achieved by using higher frequency radio waves in or near the millimeter wave band, around 28 and 39 GHz.
Since millimeter waves are absorbed by atmospheric gases they have shorter range than microwaves.
Therefore 5G cells will be the size of a city block, smaller than the cells in previous cellular networks which could be many miles across.
Instead of a large cell base station and antenna tower, 5G networks will have many small antennas attached to utility poles and buildings.
*Satellite phone (satphone) - a portable wireless telephone similar to a cell phone, connected to the telephone network through a radio link to an orbiting communications satellite instead of through cell towers.
They are more expensive than cell phones; but their advantage is that, unlike a cell phone which is limited to areas covered by cell towers, satphones can be used over most or all of the geographical area of the Earth.
In order for the phone to communicate with a satellite using a small omnidirectional antenna, first generation systems use satellites in low earth orbit, about above the surface.
With an orbital period of about 100 minutes a satellite can only be in view of a phone for about 4 - 15 minutes, so the call is "handed off" to another satellite when one passes beyond the local horizon.
Therefore large numbers of satellites, about 40 to 70, are required to ensure that at least one satellite is in view continuously from each point on Earth.
Other satphone systems use satellites in geostationary orbit in which only a few satellites are needed, but these cannot be used at high latitudes because of terrestrial interference.
*Cordless phone- a landline telephone in which the handset is portable and communicates with the rest of the phone by a short range full duplex radio link, instead of being attached by a cord.
Both the handset and the base station have low power FM radio transceivers operating in the UHF band that handle the short range bidirectional radio link.
*Land mobile radio system - short range mobile or portable half-duplex radio transceivers operating in the VHF or UHF band that can be used without a license.
They are often installed in vehicles, with the mobile units communicating with a dispatcher at a fixed base station.
Special systems with reserved frequencies are used by first responder services; police, fire, ambulance, and emergency services and other government services.
Other systems are made for use by commercial firms such as taxi and delivery services.
VHF systems use channels in the range 30-50 MHz and 150-172 MHz.
UHF systems use the 450-470 MHz band and in some areas the 470-512 MHz range.
In general, VHF systems have longer range than UHF but require longer antennas.
AM or FM modulation is mainly used, but digital systems such as DMR are being introduced.
Radiated power is typically limited to 4 watts.
However, this invention would not be widely adopted.
Following Heinrich Hertz's discovery of the existence of radio waves in 1886, a variety of terms were initially used for this radiation, including "Hertzian waves", "electric waves", and "ether waves".
The first practical radio communications systems, developed by Guglielmo Marconi in 1894-5, transmitted telegraph signals by radio waves, so radio communication was first called "wireless telegraphy".
Up until about 1910 the term "wireless telegraphy" also included a variety of other experimental systems for transmitting telegraph signals without wires, including electrostatic induction, electromagnetic induction and aquatic and earth conduction, so there was a need for a more precise term referring exclusively to electromagnetic radiation.
The first use of radio- in conjunction with electromagnetic radiation appears to have been by French physicist Édouard Branly, who in 1890 developed the coherer detector, which he called in French a , Electrical World and Engineer, May 10, 1902, page 811.
The radio- prefix was later used to form additional descriptive compound and hyphenated words, especially in Europe.
For example, in early 1898 the British publication The Practical Engineer included a reference to "the radiotelegraph" and "radiotelegraphy", The French text of both the 1903 and 1906 Berlin Radiotelegraphic Conventions includes the phrases "radiotélégraphique" and "radiotélégrammes".
The use of "radio" as a standalone word dates back to at least December 30, 1904, when instructions issued by the British Post Office for transmitting telegrams specified that "The word 'Radio'... is sent in the Service Instructions".
This practice was universally adopted, and the word "radio" introduced internationally, by the 1906 Berlin Radiotelegraphic Convention, which included a Service Regulation specifying that "Radiotelegrams shall show in the preamble that the service is 'Radio'".
The switch to "radio" in place of "wireless" took place slowly and unevenly in the English-speaking world.
Lee de Forest helped popularize the new word in the United States-in early 1907 he founded the DeForest Radio Telephone Company, and his letter in the June 22, 1907 Electrical World about the need for legal restrictions warned that "Radio chaos will certainly be the result until such stringent regulation is enforced".
The United States Navy would also play a role.
Although its translation of the 1906 Berlin Convention used the terms "wireless telegraph" and "wireless telegram", by 1912 it began to promote the use of "radio" instead.
The term started to become preferred by the general public in the 1920s with the introduction of broadcasting.
British Commonwealth countries continued to commonly use the term "wireless" until the mid-20th century, though the magazine of the British Broadcasting Corporation in the UK has been called Radio Times since its founding in the early 1920s.
In recent years "wireless" has gained renewed popularity as a more general term for devices communicating using electromagnetic radiation, either radio waves or light, due to the rapid growth of short-range computer networking, e.g., wireless local area networks Wi-Fi, and Bluetooth, as well as cell phones, to distinguish these uses from traditional "radio" communication, such as broadcasting.
History
:See History of radio, Invention of radio, Timeline of radio, History of broadcasting
