Central America (, , Centroamérica ) is a region found in the southern tip of North America and is sometimes defined as a subcontinent of the Americas.
This region is bordered by Mexico to the north, Colombia to the southeast, the Caribbean Sea to the east and the Pacific Ocean to the west and south.
Central America consists of seven countries: Belize, Costa Rica, El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras, Nicaragua and Panama.
The combined population of Central America is estimated to be between 41,739,000 (2009 estimate) On 15 September 1821, the Act of Independence of Central America was enacted to announce Central America's separation from the Spanish Empire and provide for the establishment of a new Central American state.
Some of New Spain's provinces in the Central American region (i.e. what would become Guatemala, Honduras, El Salvador, Nicaragua and Costa Rica) were annexed to the First Mexican Empire; however, in 1823 they seceded from Mexico to form the Federal Republic of Central America until 1838.
In 1838, Nicaragua, Honduras, Costa Rica and Guatemala became the first of Central America's seven states to become independent autonomous countries, followed by El Salvador in 1841, Panama in 1903 and Belize in 1981.
Despite the dissolution of the Federal Republic of Central America, there is anecdotal evidence that demonstrates that Nicaraguans, Hondurans, Costa Ricans, Guatemalans, Salvadorans, Panamanians and Belizeans continue to maintain a Central American identity.
For instance, Central Americans sometimes refer to their nations as if they were provinces of a Central American state.
It is not unusual to write "C.A." after the country's name in formal and informal contexts.
Governments in the region sometimes reinforce this sense of belonging to Central America in its citizens.
For example, automobile licence plates in many of the region's countries include the moniker, Centroamerica, alongside the country's name.
Different definitions
"Central America" may mean different things to various people, based upon different contexts:
The United Nations geoscheme for the Americas defines the region as all states of mainland North America south of the United States and specifically includes all of Mexico.
After more than two hundred years of social unrest, violent conflict, and revolution, Central America today remains in a period of political transformation.
Poverty, social injustice, and violence are still widespread.
Trade winds have a significant effect upon the climate of Central America.
Temperatures in Central America are highest just prior to the summer wet season, and are lowest during the winter dry season, when trade winds contribute to a cooler climate.
The highest temperatures occur in April, due to higher levels of sunlight, lower cloud cover and a decrease in trade winds.
Languages
The official language majority in all Central American countries is Spanish, except in Belize, where the official language is English.
Mayan languages constitute a language family consisting of about 26 related languages.
Guatemala formally recognized 21 of these in 1996.
Xinca and Garifuna are also present in Central America.
Ethnic groups
This region of the continent is very rich in terms of ethnic groups.
The majority of the population is mestizo, with sizable Mayan and White populations present, including Xinca and Garifuna minorities.
The immigration of Arabs, Jews, Chinese, Europeans and others brought additional groups to the area.
Religious groups
The predominant religion in Central America is Christianity (95.6%).
Beginning with the Spanish colonization of Central America in the 16th century, Roman Catholicism became the most popular religion in the region until the first half of the 20th century.
Since the 1960s, there has been an increase in other Christian groups, particularly Protestantism, as well as other religious organizations, and individuals identifying themselves as having no religion.
No timeline for implementation was discussed.
Central America already has several supranational institutions such as the Central American Parliament, the Central American Bank for Economic Integration and the Central American Common Market.
On 22 July 2011, President Mauricio Funes of El Salvador became the first president pro tempore to SICA.
El Salvador also became the headquarters of SICA with the inauguration of a new building.
In August 2018, El Salvador also severed ties with Taiwan to formally start recognizing the People's Republic of China as the sole China, a move many considered lacked transparency due to its abruptness and reports of the Chinese government's desires to invest in the department of La Union while also promising to fund the ruling party's reelection campaign.
Parliament
The Central American Parliament (also known as PARLACEN) is a political and parliamentary body of SICA.
The parliament started around 1980, and its primary goal was to resolve conflicts in Nicaragua, Guatemala, and El Salvador.
Although the group was disbanded in 1986, ideas of unity of Central Americans still remained, so a treaty was signed in 1987 to create the Central American Parliament and other political bodies.
Its original members were Guatemala, El Salvador, Nicaragua and Honduras.
The parliament is the political organ of Central America, and is part of SICA.
New members have since then joined including Panama and the Dominican Republic.
Costa Rica is not a member State of the Central American Parliament and its adhesion remains as a very unpopular topic at all levels of the Costa Rican society due to existing strong political criticism towards the regional parliament, since it is regarded by Costa Ricans as a menace to democratic accountability and effectiveness of integration efforts.
Excessively high salaries for its members, legal immunity of jurisdiction from any member State, corruption, lack of a binding nature and effectiveness of the regional parliament's decisions, high operative costs and immediate membership of Central American Presidents once they leave their office and presidential terms, are the most common reasons invoked by Costa Ricans against the Central American Parliament.
Economy
Signed in 2004, the Central American Free Trade Agreement (CAFTA) is an agreement between the United States, Costa Rica, El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras, Nicaragua, and the Dominican Republic.
The treaty is aimed at promoting free trade among its members.
Guatemala has the largest economy in the region.
They are also criticised for the working conditions of employees: insults and physical violence, abusive dismissals (especially of pregnant workers), working hours, non-payment of overtime.
According to Lucrecia Bautista, coordinator of themaquilas sector of the audit firm Coverco,labour law regulations are regularly violated in maquilas and there is no political will to enforce their application.
In the case of infringements, the labour inspectorate shows remarkable leniency.
It is a question of not discouraging investors.
"Trade unionists are subject to pressure, and sometimes to kidnapping or murder.
In some cases, business leaders have used the services of the maras.
Finally, black lists containing the names of trade unionists or political activists are circulating in employers' circles.
Costa Rica is the most visited nation in Central America.
Further reading
* http:/ 65 CentrAm.html Central America.
http:/ 65 web http:/ 61 C0200800.html American Heritage Dictionaries, Central America.
* http:/ perl The Columbia Gazetteer of the World Online.
New York: Columbia University Press.
* Hernández, Consuelo (2009).
Reconstruyendo a Centroamérica a través de la poesía.
Voces y perspectivas en la poesia latinoamericana del siglo XX.
Madrid: Visor.
