A forest is a large area dominated by trees.
Hundreds of more precise definitions of forest are used throughout the world, incorporating factors such as tree density, tree height, land use, legal standing and ecological function.
According to the widely used Food and Agriculture Organization definition, forests covered (15 million square miles) or approximately 30 percent of the world's land area in 2006.
Forests account for 75% of the gross primary production of the Earth's biosphere, and contain 80% of the Earth's plant biomass.
Net primary production is estimated at 21.9 gigatonnes carbon per year for tropical forests, 8.1 for temperate forests, and 2.6 for boreal forests.
Forests provide ecosystem services to humans and serve as tourist attractions.
Forests can also affect people's health.
Human activities, including harvesting forest resources, can negatively affect forest ecosystems.
Definition
Although the word forest is commonly used, there is no universally recognised precise definition, with more than 800 definitions of forest used around the world.
or was legally designated as a forest regardless of vegetation type.
There are three broad categories of forest definitions in use: administrative, land use, and land cover.
excluding savannas and woodlands in which trees have a lower canopy cover.
Other definitions consider savannas to be a type of forest, and include all areas with tree canopies over 10%.
The word forest (also forès) "forest, vast expanse covered by trees"; first introduced in English as the word for wild land set aside for hunting without the necessity in definition for the existence of trees.
Possibly a borrowing (probably via Frankish or Old High German) of the Medieval Latin word foresta "open wood", foresta was first used by Carolingian scribes in the Capitularies of Charlemagne to refer specifically to the king's royal hunting grounds.
The term was not endemic to Romance languages (e.g. native words for "forest" in the Romance languages evolved out of the Latin word silva "forest, wood" (English sylvan); cf. Italian, Spanish, Portuguese selva; Romanian silvă; Old French selve); and cognates in Romance languages, such as Italian foresta, Spanish and Portuguese floresta, etc. are all ultimately borrowings of the French word.
The exact origin of Medieval Latin foresta is obscure.
Some authorities claim the word derives from the Late Latin phrase forestam silvam, meaning "the outer wood"; others claim the term is a latinisation of the Frankish word *forhist "forest, wooded country", assimilated to forestam silvam (a common practice among Frankish scribes).
Frankish *forhist is attested by Old High German forst "forest", Middle Low German vorst "forest", Old English fyrhþ "forest, woodland, game preserve, hunting ground" , with the evolution of Archaeopteris.
Archaeopteris was a plant that was both tree-like and fern-like, growing to in height.
Archaeopteris quickly spread throughout the world, from the equator to subpolar latitudes.
Types
Forests can be classified in different ways and to different degrees of specificity.
One such way is in terms of the biome in which they exist, combined with leaf longevity of the dominant species (whether they are evergreen or deciduous).
Another distinction is whether the forests are composed predominantly of broadleaf trees, coniferous (needle-leaved) trees, or mixed.
* Boreal forests occupy the subarctic zone and are generally evergreen and coniferous.
* Temperate zones support both broadleaf deciduous forests (e.g., temperate deciduous forest) and evergreen coniferous forests (e.g., temperate coniferous forests and temperate rainforests).
Warm temperate zones support broadleaf evergreen forests, including laurel forests.
* Tropical and subtropical forests include tropical and subtropical moist forests, tropical and subtropical dry forests, and tropical and subtropical coniferous forests.
* Physiognomy classifies forests based on their overall physical structure or developmental stage (e.g. old growth vs. second growth).
* Forests can also be classified more specifically based on the climate and the dominant tree species present, resulting in numerous different forest types (e.g., Ponderosa pine/Douglas-fir forest).
The number of trees in the world, according to a 2015 estimate, is 3 trillion, of which 1.4 trillion are in the tropics or sub-tropics, 0.6 trillion in the temperate zones, and 0.7 trillion in the coniferous boreal forests.
The estimate is about eight times higher than previous estimates, and is based on tree densities measured on over 400,000 plots.
It remains subject to a wide margin of error, not least because the samples are mainly from Europe and North America.
Forests can also be classified according to the amount of human alteration.
Old-growth forest contains mainly natural patterns of biodiversity in established seral patterns, and they contain mainly species native to the region and habitat.
In contrast, secondary forest is regrowing forest following timber harvest and may contain species originally from other regions or habitats.
Different global forest classification systems have been proposed, but none has gained universal acceptance.
UNEP-WCMC's forest category classification system is a simplification of other more complex systems (e.g. UNESCO's forest and woodland 'subformations').
This system divides the world's forests into 26 major types, which reflect climatic zones as well as the principal types of trees.
These 26 major types can be reclassified into 6 broader categories: temperate needleleaf; temperate broadleaf and mixed; tropical moist; tropical dry; sparse trees and parkland; and forest plantations.
Tropical dry
Tropical dry forests are characteristic of areas in the tropics affected by seasonal drought.
The seasonality of rainfall is usually reflected in the deciduousness of the forest canopy, with most trees being leafless for several months of the year.
However, under some conditions, e.g. less fertile soils or less predictable drought regimes, the proportion of evergreen species increases and the forests are characterised as "sclerophyllous".
Thorn forest, a dense forest of low stature with a high frequency of thorny or spiny species, is found where drought is prolonged, and especially where grazing animals are plentiful.
On very poor soils, and especially where fire or herbivory are recurrent phenomena, savannas develop.
* acting as a carbon sink.
Therefore, they are necessary to stop climate change.
According to the Special Report on Global Warming of 1.5 ºC of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, to avoid temperature rise by more than 1.5 degrees above pre-industrial levels, there will need to be an increase in global forest cover equal to the land area of Canada (10 million km2), by the year 2050.
* aiding in regulating climate.
For example, a research from 2017, show that forests induce rainfall.
If the forest is cut, it can lead to drought.
* serving as a source of lumber and as recreational areas.
Some researchers state that forests do not only provide benefits, but can in certain cases also incur costs to humans.
Forests may impose an economic burden, diminish the enjoyment of natural areas, reduce the food producing capacity of grazing land and cultivated land, reduce biodiversity reduce available water for humans and wildlife, harbour dangerous or destructive wildlife, and act as reservoirs of human and livestock disease.
The management of forests is often referred to as forestry.
Forest management has changed considerably over the last few centuries, with rapid changes from the 1980s onwards culminating in a practice now referred to as sustainable forest management.
Forest ecologists concentrate on forest patterns and processes, usually with the aim of elucidating cause-and-effect relationships.
Foresters who practice sustainable forest management focus on the integration of ecological, social, and economic values, often in consultation with local communities and other stakeholders.
Humans have generally decreased the amount of forest worldwide.
Anthropogenic factors that can affect forests include logging, urban sprawl, human-caused forest fires, acid rain, invasive species, and the slash and burn practices of swidden agriculture or shifting cultivation.
The loss and re-growth of forest leads to a distinction between two broad types of forest, primary or old-growth forest and secondary forest.
There are also many natural factors that can cause changes in forests over time including forest fires, insects, diseases, weather, competition between species, etc.
In 1997, the World Resources Institute recorded that only 20% of the world's original forests remained in large intact tracts of undisturbed forest.
More than 75% of these intact forests lie in three countries-the boreal forests of Russia and Canada and the rainforest of Brazil.
In 2010, the United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization reported that world deforestation, mainly the conversion of tropical forests to agricultural land, had decreased over the past ten years but still continues at a high rate in many countries.
Globally, around 13 million hectares of forests were converted to other uses or lost through natural causes each year between 2000 and 2010 as compared to around 16 million hectares per year during the 1990s.
The study covered 233 countries and areas.
Brazil and Indonesia, which had the highest loss of forests in the 1990s, have significantly reduced their deforestation rates.
China instituted a ban on logging, beginning in 1998, due to the erosion and flooding that it caused.
In addition, ambitious tree planting programmes in countries such as China, India, the United States and Vietnam - combined with natural expansion of forests in some regions - have added more than seven million hectares of new forests annually.
As a result, the net loss of forest area was reduced to 5.2 million hectares per year between 2000 and 2010, down from 8.3 million hectares annually in the 1990s.
In 2015, a study for Nature Climate Change showed that the trend has recently been reversed, leading to an "overall gain" in global biomass and forests.
This gain is due especially to reforestation in China and Russia.
However new forests are not completely equivalent to old growth forests in terms of species diversity, resilience and carbon capture.
On September 7, 2015, the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations released a new study stating that, over the last 25 years, the global deforestation rate has decreased by 50% due to improved management of forests and greater government protection.
Smaller areas of woodland in cities may be managed as urban forestry, sometimes within public parks.
These are often created for human benefits; Attention Restoration Theory argues that spending time in nature reduces stress and improves health, while forest schools and kindergartens help young people to develop social as well as scientific skills in forests.
These typically need to be close to where the children live, for practical logistics.
Canada
Canada has about of forest land.
More than 90% of forest land is publicly owned and about 50% of the total forest area is allocated for harvesting.
These allocated areas are managed using the principles of sustainable forest management, which includes extensive consultation with local stakeholders.
About eight percent of Canada's forest is legally protected from resource development.
Much more forest land-about 40 percent of the total forest land base-is subject to varying degrees of protection through processes such as integrated land use planning or defined management areas such as certified forests.
Clearcutting, first used in the latter half of the 20th century, is less expensive, but devastating to the environment, and companies are required by law to ensure that harvested areas are adequately regenerated.
Most Canadian provinces have regulations limiting the size of clear-cuts, although some older clear-cuts can range upwards of in size which was cut over several years.
Latvia
Latvia has about 3,270,000 hectares (12,626 sq mi) of forest land which equates to 50.6% of Latvia's total area (24,938 sq mi).
1,510,000 hectares of forest land (46.3% of total forest land) is publicly owned and 1,750,000 hectares of forest land (53.7% of total forest land) is in private hands.
Latvia's forests have been steadily increasing over the years which is in contrast to many other nations, mostly due to the forestation of land not used for agriculture.
In 1935 there was only 1,757,000 hectares of forest, today this has increased by more than 150%.
Birch is the most common tree at 28.2% followed by pine (26,9%), spruce (18.3%), grey alder (9.7%), aspen (8,0%), black alder (5.7%), oak/ash (1.2%) and finally hardwood making up the rest (2.0%).
United States
In the United States, most forests have historically been affected by humans to some degree, though in recent years improved forestry practices have helped regulate or moderate large scale or severe impacts.
However, the United States Forest Service estimates a net loss of about 2 million hectares (4,942,000 acres) between 1997 and 2020; this estimate includes conversion of forest land to other uses, including urban and suburban development, as well as afforestation and natural reversion of abandoned crop and pasture land to forest.
However, in many areas of the United States, the area of forest is stable or increasing, particularly in many northern states.
The opposite problem from flooding has plagued national forests, with loggers complaining that a lack of thinning and proper forest management has resulted in large forest fires.
Land area
* Ancient woodland, an official classification of ancient forest in the United Kingdom.
* Kelp forest (A forest made mostly if not entirely of Kelp; an underwater forest)
* Old-growth forest (ancient forest, virgin forest, primary forest)
Primeval forest, a term often used interchangeably with old growth forest
* Taiga, a biome characterized by coniferous forests
