Urdu , is the 3rd most spoken language in the world, with approximately 329.1 million native speakers, and 697.4 million total speakers.
Origin
Urdu, like Hindi, is a form of Hindustani.
It evolved from the medieval (6th to 13th century)
Apabhraṃśa register of the preceding Shauraseni language, a Middle Indo-Aryan language that is also the ancestor of other modern Indo-Aryan languages.
Around 75% of Urdu words have their etymological roots in Sanskrit and Prakrit, and approximately 99% of Urdu verbs have their roots in Sanskrit and Prakrit.
Because Persian-speaking sultans ruled the Indian subcontinent for a number of centuries, Urdu was influenced by Persian and to a lesser extent, Arabic, which have contributed to about 25% of Urdu's vocabulary.
Although the word version ضرورت rather than the original Arabic ضرورة.
See: http:/ cgi-bin getobject.pl?c.5:1:5370.platts John T. Platts "A dictionary of Urdu, classical Hindi, and English" (1884)
Page 749.
Urdu also uses Persian pronunciation - for instance rather than pronouncing ض as the from Central Asia.
Urdu and Turkish borrowed from Arabic and Persian, hence the similarity in pronunciation of many Urdu and Turkish words.
In northern India (what is historically known as the region of Hindustan), Khariboli was the native language spoken there and it belongs to the Western Hindi language class of Central Indo-Aryan languages.
Mughal rulers brought with them to India the Persian language.
The Turko-Afghan Delhi Sultanate established Persian as its official language, a policy continued by the Mughal Empire, which extended over most of northern South Asia from the 16th to 18th centuries and cemented Persian influence on the developing Hindustani.
In cities such as Delhi, Khariboli began to acquire some Persian loanwords and continued to be called "Hindi" as well as "Urdu".
From the 13th century until the end of the 18th century Urdu was commonly known as Hindi.
The Perso-Arabic script form of this language underwent a standardisation process and further Persianization in the late Mughal period (18th century) and came to be known as Urdu, a name derived from the Turkic word ordu (army) or orda and is said to have arisen as the "language of the camp", or "Zaban-i-Ordu" (or natively "Lashkari Zaban").
As a literary language, Urdu took shape in courtly, elite settings.
The name Urdu was first used by the poet Ghulam Hamadani Mushafi around 1780.
Hindustani in Persian script was used by Muslims and Hindus, but was current chiefly in Muslim-influenced society.
The communal nature of the language lasted until it replaced Persian as the official language in 1837 and was made co-official, along with English.
Hindustani was promoted in British India by British policies to counter the previous emphasis on Persian.
This triggered a Hindu backlash in northwestern India, which argued that the language should be written in the native Devanagari script.
This literary standard called "Hindi" replaced Urdu as the official language of Bihar in 1881, establishing a sectarian divide of "Urdu" for Muslims and "Hindi" for Hindus, a divide that was formalised with the division of India and Pakistan after independence (though there are Hindu poets who continue to write in Urdu to this day, with post-independence examples including Gopi Chand Narang and Gulzar).
There have been attempts to "purify" Urdu and Hindi, by purging Urdu of Sanskrit words, and Hindi of Persian loanwords, and new vocabulary draws primarily from Persian and Arabic for Urdu and from Sanskrit for Hindi.
English has exerted a heavy influence on both as a co-official language.
Speakers and geographic distribution
There are over 100 million native speakers of Urdu in India and Pakistan together: there were 50.8 million Urdu speakers in India (4.34% of the total population) as per the 2011 census; approximately 16 million in Pakistan in 2006; and several hundred thousand in the United Kingdom, Saudi Arabia, United States, and Bangladesh (where it is called "Bihari").
However, Hindustani, of which Urdu is one variety, is spoken much more widely, forming the third most commonly spoken language in the world, after Mandarin and English.
Owing to interaction with other languages, Urdu has become localised wherever it is spoken, including in Pakistan.
Urdu in Pakistan has undergone changes and has incorporated and borrowed many words from regional languages, thus allowing speakers of the language in Pakistan to distinguish themselves more easily and giving the language a decidedly Pakistani flavour.
Similarly, the Urdu spoken in India can also be distinguished into many dialects like Dakhni (Deccan) of South India, and Khariboli of the Punjab region.
Because of Urdu's similarity to Hindi, speakers of the two languages can easily understand one another if both sides refrain from using specialised vocabulary.
The syntax (grammar), morphology, and the core vocabulary are essentially identical.
Thus linguists usually count them as one single language and contend that they are considered as two different languages for socio-political reasons.
In Pakistan, Urdu is mostly learned as a second or a third language as nearly 93% of Pakistan's population has a native language other than Urdu.
Despite this, Urdu was chosen as a token of unity and as a lingua franca so as not to give any native Pakistani language preference over the other.
Urdu is therefore spoken and understood by the vast majority in some form or another, including a majority of urban dwellers in such cities as Karachi, Lahore, Okara District, Sialkot, Rawalpindi, Islamabad, Multan, Faisalabad, Hyderabad, Peshawar, Quetta, Jhang, Sargodha and Skardu.
It is written, spoken and used in all provinces/territories of Pakistan although the people from differing provinces may have different indigenous languages, as from the fact that it is the "base language" of the country.
For this reason, it is also taught as a compulsory subject up to higher secondary school in both English and Urdu medium school systems.
This has produced millions of Urdu speakers from people whose native language is one of the other languages of Pakistan, who can read and write only Urdu.
It is absorbing many words from the regional languages of Pakistan.
Although most of the population is conversant in Urdu, it is the first language of only an estimated 7% of the population who are mainly Muslim immigrants (known as Muhajir in Pakistan) from different parts of South Asia.
The regional languages are also being influenced by Urdu vocabulary.
There are millions of Pakistanis whose native language is not Urdu, but because they have studied in Urdu medium schools, they can read and write Urdu along with their native language.
Most of the nearly five million Afghan refugees of different ethnic origins (such as Pashtun, Tajik, Uzbek, Hazarvi, and Turkmen) who stayed in Pakistan for over twenty-five years have also become fluent in Urdu.
With such a large number of people (s) speaking Urdu, the language has acquired a peculiar Pakistani flavour further distinguishing it from the Urdu spoken by native speakers and diversifying the language even further.
Many newspapers are published in Urdu in Pakistan, including the Daily Jang, Nawa-i-Waqt, Millat, among many others (see List of newspapers in Pakistan#Urdu language newspapers).
In India, Urdu is spoken in places where there are large Muslim minorities or cities that were bases for Muslim Empires in the past.
These include parts of Uttar Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh, Bihar, Telangana, Andhra Pradesh, Maharashtra (Marathwada), Karnataka and cities such as Lucknow, Delhi, Bareilly, Meerut, Saharanpur, Muzaffarnagar, Roorkee, Deoband, Moradabad, Azamgarh, Bijnor, Najibabad, Rampur, Aligarh, Allahabad, Gorakhpur, Agra, Kanpur, Badaun, Bhopal, Hyderabad, Aurangabad, Bangalore, Kolkata, Mysore, Patna, Gulbarga, Parbhani, Nanded, Kochi, Malegaon, Bidar, Ajmer, and Ahmedabad.
Some Indian schools teach Urdu as a first language and have their own syllabi and exams.
Indian madrasahs also teach Arabic as well as Urdu.
India has more than 3,000 Urdu publications, including 405 daily Urdu newspapers.
Newspapers such as Neshat News Urdu, Sahara Urdu, Daily Salar, Hindustan Express, Daily Pasban, Siasat Daily, The Munsif Daily and Inqilab are published and distributed in Bangalore, Malegaon, Mysore, Hyderabad, and Mumbai (see List of newspapers in India).
Outside South Asia, it is spoken by large numbers of migrant South Asian workers in the major urban centres of the Persian Gulf countries.
Urdu is also spoken by large numbers of immigrants and their children in the major urban centres of the United Kingdom, the United States, Canada, Germany, Norway, and Australia.
Along with Arabic, Urdu is among the immigrant languages with the most speakers in Catalonia.
Cultural identity and Islam
Colonial India
Religious and social atmospheres in early nineteenth century India played a significant role in the development of the Urdu register.
In addition to Islam, India was characterised by a number of other religions that represented different spiritual outlooks.
Hindi became the distinct register spoken by those who sought to construct a Hindu identity in the face of colonial rule.
As Urdu and Hindi became means of religious and social construction for Muslims and Hindus respectively, each register developed its own script.
According to Islamic tradition, Arabic, the language spoken by the prophet Muhammad and uttered in the revelation of the Qur'an, holds spiritual significance and power.
Because Urdu was intentioned as means of unification for Muslims in Northern India and later Pakistan, it adopted an Arabic script.
but Urdu is mostly understood and spoken all over Pakistan as a second or third language.
It is used in education, literature, office and court business.
It holds in itself a repository of the cultural and social heritage of the country.
Although English is used in most elite circles, and Punjabi has a plurality of native speakers, Urdu is the lingua franca and national language of Pakistan.
In practice English is used instead of Urdu in the higher echelons of government.
|accessdate
31 March 2018 |url-status
live |archiveurl
https:/ web https:/ pti-feed kamtapuri-rajbanshi-make-it-to-list-of-official-languages-in-1179890-2018-02-28 |archivedate
30 March 2018
In Jammu and Kashmir, section 145 of the Kashmir Constitution provides: "The official language of the State shall be Urdu but the English language shall unless the Legislature by law otherwise provides, continue to be used for all the official purposes of the State for which it was being used immediately before the commencement of the Constitution."
Dialects
Urdu has a few recognised dialects, including Dakhni, Rekhta, and Modern Vernacular Urdu (based on the Khariboli dialect of the Delhi region).
Dakhni (also known as Dakani, Deccani, Desia, Mirgan) is spoken in Deccan region of southern India.
It is distinct by its mixture of vocabulary from Marathi and Konkani, as well as some vocabulary from Arabic, Persian and Chagatai that are not found in the standard dialect of Urdu.
Dakhini is widely spoken in all parts of Maharashtra, Telangana, Andhra Pradesh and Karnataka.
Urdu is read and written as in other parts of India.
A number of daily newspapers and several monthly magazines in Urdu are published in these states.
In terms of pronunciation, the easiest way to recognise native speakers is by their pronunciation of the letter () as ().
Code switching
Many bilingual or multi-lingual Urdu speakers, being familiar with both Urdu and English, display code-switching (referred to as "Urdish") in certain localities and between certain social groups.
On 14 August 2015, the Government of Pakistan launched the Ilm Pakistan movement, with a uniform curriculum in Urdish.
Ahsan Iqbal, Federal Minister of Pakistan, said, "Now the government is working on a new curriculum to provide a new medium to the students which will be the combination of both Urdu and English and will name it Urdish."
Comparison with Modern Standard Hindi
Standard Urdu is often contrasted with Standard Hindi.
Apart from religious associations, the differences are largely restricted to the standard forms: Standard Urdu is conventionally written in the Nastaliq style of the Persian alphabet and relies heavily on Persian and Arabic as a source for technical and literary vocabulary, whereas Standard Hindi is conventionally written in Devanāgarī and draws on Sanskrit.
However, both have large numbers of Arabic, Persian and Sanskrit words, and most linguists consider them to be two standardised forms of the same language, and consider the differences to be sociolinguistic, though a few classify them separately.
Old Urdu dictionaries also contain most of the Sanskrit words now present in Hindi.
Mutual intelligibility decreases in literary and specialised contexts that rely on educated vocabulary.
Further, it is quite easy in a longer conversation to distinguish differences in vocabulary and pronunciation of some Urdu phonemes.
As a result of religious nationalism since the partition of British India and continued communal tensions, native speakers of both Hindi and Urdu frequently assert them to be distinct languages.
Urdu speakers by country
The following table shows the number of Urdu speakers in some countries.
Phonology
Consonants
;Notes
* Marginal and non-universal phonemes are in parentheses.
Vowels
;Note
* Marginal and non-universal vowels are in parentheses.
Vocabulary
Syed Ahmed Dehlvi, author of Farhang-e-Asifiya (which is considered to be the most reliable and comprehensive Urdu-to-Urdu dictionary), stated that Urdu vocabulary has a 75% core of Prakrit and Sanskrit-derived words, with approximately 25% of its vocabulary being Persian and Arabic loanwords.
Levels of formality
Urdu in its less formalised register has been referred to as a (, ), meaning "rough mixture".
The more formal register of Urdu is sometimes referred to as ( ), the "Language of the Exalted Camp", referring to the Imperial army or in approximate local translation Lashkari Zabān ( ) or simply just Lashkari.
The etymology of the word used in the Urdu language for the most part decides how polite or refined one's speech is.
For example, Urdu speakers would distinguish between pānī and āb, both meaning "water"; the former is used colloquially and has older Sanskrit origins, whereas the latter is used formally and poetically, being of Persian origin.
If a word is of Persian or Arabic origin, the level of speech is considered to be more formal and grand.
Similarly, if Persian or Arabic grammar constructs, such as the izafat, are used in Urdu, the level of speech is also considered more formal and grand.
If a word is inherited from Sanskrit, the level of speech is considered more colloquial and personal.
Writing system
Urdu is written right-to left in an extension of the Persian alphabet, which is itself an extension of the Arabic alphabet.
Urdu is associated with the Nastaʿlīq style of Persian calligraphy, whereas Arabic is generally written in the Naskh or Ruq'ah styles.
Nasta’liq is notoriously difficult to typeset, so Urdu newspapers were hand-written by masters of calligraphy, known as kātib or khush-nawīs, until the late 1980s.
One handwritten Urdu newspaper, The Musalman, is still published daily in Chennai.
A highly Persianized and technical form of Urdu was the lingua franca of the law courts of the British administration in Bengal, Bihar, and the North-West Provinces & Oudh.
Until the late 19th century, all proceedings and court transactions in this register of Urdu were written officially in the Persian script.
In 1880, Sir Ashley Eden, the Lieutenant-Governor of Bengal abolished the use of the Persian alphabet in the law courts of Bengal and Bihar and ordered the exclusive use of Kaithi, a popular script used for both Urdu and Hindi.
Kaithi's association with Urdu and Hindi was ultimately eliminated by the political contest between these languages and their scripts, in which the Persian script was definitively linked to Urdu.
More recently in India, Urdu speakers have adopted Devanagari for publishing Urdu periodicals and have innovated new strategies to mark Urdu in Devanagari as distinct from Hindi in Devanagari.
Such publishers have introduced new orthographic features into Devanagari for the purpose of representing the Perso-Arabic etymology of Urdu words.
One example is the use of अ (Devanagari a) with vowel signs to mimic contexts of (‘ain), in violation of Hindi orthographic rules.
For Urdu publishers, the use of Devanagari gives them a greater audience, whereas the orthographic changes help them preserve a distinct identity of Urdu.
Literature
Urdu has become a literary language only in recent centuries, as Persian was formerly the idiom of choice for the Muslim courts of North India.
However, despite its relatively late development, Urdu literature boasts of some world-recognised artists and a considerable corpus.
Prose
Urdu afsana is a kind of Urdu prose in which many experiments have been done by short story writers from Munshi Prem Chand, Sadat Hasan Manto, Rajindra Singh Bedi, Ismat Chughtai, Krishan Chandra to Naeem Baig.
and Rahman Abbas.
Religious
Urdu holds the largest collection of works on Islamic literature and Sharia.
These include translations and interpretation of the Qur'an as well as commentary on Hadith, Fiqh, history, and Sufism.
A great number of classical texts from Arabic and Persian have also been translated into Urdu.
Relatively inexpensive publishing, combined with the use of Urdu as a lingua franca among Muslims of South Asia, has meant that Islam-related works in Urdu far outnumber such works in any other South Asian language.
Popular Islamic books are also written in Urdu.
A treatise on astrology was penned in Urdu by Pandit Roop Chand Joshi in the twentieth century.
The book, known as Lal Kitab, is widely popular in North India among astrologers.
Literary
Secular prose includes all categories of widely known fiction and non-fiction work, separable into genres.
The dāstān, or tale, a traditional story that may have many characters and complex plotting.
This has now fallen into disuse.
The afsāna or short story is probably the best-known genre of Urdu fiction.
The best-known afsāna writers, or afsāna nigār, in Urdu are Munshi Premchand, Saadat Hasan Manto, Rajinder Singh Bedi, Krishan Chander, Qurratulain Hyder (Qurat-ul-Ain Haider), Ismat Chughtai, Ghulam Abbas, Rashid ul Khairi and Ahmad Nadeem Qasimi till Rahman Abbas.
Towards the end of last century Paigham Afaqui's novel Makaan appeared with a reviving force for Urdu novel resulting into writing of novels getting a boost in Urdu literature and a number of writers like Ghazanfer, Abdus Samad, Sarwat Khan and Musharraf Alam Zauqi have taken the move forward.
However, Rahman Abbas has emerged as the most influential Urdu Novelist in the 21st century and he has raised the art of story-telling to a new level.
Munshi Premchand, became known as a pioneer in the afsāna, though some contend that his were not technically the first as Sir Ross Masood had already written many short stories in Urdu.
Novels form a genre of their own, in the tradition of the English novel.
Other genres include saférnāma (travel story), mazmoon (essay), sarguzisht (account/narrative), inshaeya (satirical essay), murasela (editorial), and khud navvisht (autobiography).
Poetry
Urdu has been one of the premier languages of poetry in South Asia for two centuries, and has developed a rich tradition in a variety of poetic genres.
The Ghazal in Urdu represents the most popular form of subjective music and poetry, whereas the Nazm exemplifies the objective kind, often reserved for narrative, descriptive, didactic or satirical purposes.
Under the broad head of the Nazm we may also include the classical forms of poems known by specific names such as Masnavi (a long narrative poem in rhyming couplets on any theme: romantic, religious, or didactic), Marsia , or Qasida (a panegyric written in praise of a king or a nobleman), for all these poems have a single presiding subject, logically developed and concluded.
However, these poetic species have an old world aura about their subject and style, and are different from the modern Nazm, supposed to have come into vogue in the later part of the nineteenth century.
Probably the most widely recited, and memorised genre of contemporary Urdu poetry is nāt-panegyric poetry written in praise of Muhammad.
Nāt can be of any formal category, but is most commonly in the ghazal form.
The language used in Urdu nāt ranges from the intensely colloquial to a highly persified formal language.
The great early 20th century scholar Ala Hazrat, Ahmed Raza Khan Barelvi, who wrote many of the most well known nāts in Urdu (the collection of his poetic work is Hadaiq-e-Baqhshish), epitomised this range in a ghazal of nine stanzas (bayt) in which every stanza contains half a line each of Arabic, Persian, formal Urdu, and colloquial Hindi.
Another important genre of Urdu prose are the poems commemorating the martyrdom of Husayn ibn Ali at the Battle of Karbala, called noha () and marsia.
Anees and Dabeer are famous in this regard.
Terminologies
(, verse, couplets): It consists of two hemistiches (lines) called (); first hemistich (line) is called () and the second is called () ().
Each verse embodies a single thought or subject (singular) .
In the Urdu poetic tradition, most poets use a pen name called the .
This can be either a part of a poet's given name or something else adopted as an identity.
The traditional convention in identifying Urdu poets is to mention the at the end of the name.
Thus Ghalib, whose official name and title was Mirza Asadullah Beg Khan, is referred to formally as Mirza Asadullah Khan Ghalib, or in common parlance as just Mirza Ghalib.
Because the can be a part of their actual name, some poets end up having that part of their name repeated, such as Faiz Ahmad Faiz.
The word is derived from Arabic, meaning "ending".
This is because in the ghazal form, the poet would usually incorporate his or her pen name into the final couplet () of each poem as a type of "signature".
Urdu poetry example
This is Ghalib's famous couplet in which he compares himself to his great predecessor, the master poet Mir:
Transliteration
Translation
:You are not the only master of Rekhta, Ghalib
: (They) say that in the past there also was someone (named) Mir.
Sample text
The following is a sample text in Urdu, of the the Universal Declaration of Human Rights (by the United Nations):
Urdu text
Transliteration (ALA-LC)
IPA transcription
:: .
Gloss (word-for-word)
: : All humans free, and rights and dignity * ('s) consideration from equal born are.
Them to conscience and intellect endowed is.
This for, they one another
Translation (grammatical)
: : All human beings are born free and equal in dignity and rights.
They are endowed with reason and conscience.
Therefore, they should act towards one another in a spirit of brotherhood.
Note: * ('s) represents a possessive case that, when written, is preceded by the possessor and followed by the possessed, unlike the English "of".
Notes
Further reading
* Ahmad, Rizwan.
https:/ web http:/ NWAV Papr172.pdf "Voices people write:
Examining Urdu in Devanagari"
Alam, Muzaffar.
"The Pursuit of Persian: Language in Mughal Politics."
In Modern Asian Studies, vol.
32, no. 2.
(May 1998), pp.
* Asher, R. E. (Ed.).
The Encyclopedia of language and linguistics.
Oxford: Pergamon Press. .
Azad, Muhammad Husain.
Aab-e hayat (Lahore: Naval Kishor Gais Printing Works) 1907 in Urdu; (Delhi: Oxford University Press) 2001.
In English translation
* Azim, Anwar.
Urdu a victim of cultural genocide.
In Z. Imam (Ed.), Muslims in India (p. 259).
* Bhatia, Tej K. 1996.
Colloquial Hindi: The Complete Course for Beginners.
London, UK & New York, NY: Routledge.
(Book), 0415110882 (Cassettes), 0415110890 (Book & Cassette Course)
* Bhatia, Tej K. and Koul Ashok.
"Colloquial Urdu: The Complete Course for Beginners."
London: Routledge.
(Book); (cassette); (book and casseettes course)
* Chatterji, Suniti K. 1960.
Indo-Aryan and Hindi (rev. 2nd ed.).
Calcutta: Firma K.L. Mukhopadhyay.
* Dua, Hans R. 1992.
"Hindi-Urdu as a pluricentric language".
In M. G. Clyne (Ed.), Pluricentric languages: Differing norms in different nations.
Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter. .
* Dua, Hans R. 1994a.
Hindustani.
In Asher, 1994; pp. 1554.
* Dua, Hans R. 1994b.
Urdu.
In Asher, 1994; pp.
* Durrani, Attash, Dr. 2008.
Pakistani Urdu.
Islamabad:
National Language Authority, Pakistan.
* Hassan, Nazir and Omkar N. Koul 1980.
Urdu Phonetic Reader.
Mysore: Central Institute of Indian Languages.
* Kelkar, A. R. 1968.
Studies in Hindi-Urdu: Introduction and word phonology.
Poona: Deccan College.
* Khan, M. H. 1969.
Urdu.
In T. A. Sebeok (Ed.), Current trends in linguistics (Vol. 5).
The Hague: Mouton.
* King, Christopher R. 1994.
One Language, Two Scripts: The Hindi Movement in Nineteenth Century North India.
Bombay: Oxford University Press.
* Koul, Ashok K. 2008.
Urdu Script and Vocabulary.
Delhi: Indian Institute of Language Studies.
* Koul, Omkar N. 1994.
Hindi Phonetic Reader.
Delhi: Indian Institute of Language Studies.
* Koul, Omkar N. 2008.
Modern Hindi Grammar.
Springfield: Dunwoody Press.
* Ohala, M. 1972.
Topics in Hindi-Urdu phonology.
(PhD dissertation, University of California, Los Angeles).
* http:/ itc pritchett index.html?urdu "A Desertful of Roses", a site about Ghalib's Urdu ghazals by Dr. Frances W. Pritchett, Professor of Modern Indic Languages at Columbia University, New York, NY, USA.
* Phukan, S. 2000.
The Rustic Beloved: Ecology of Hindi in a Persianate World, The Annual of Urdu Studies, vol 15, issue 5, pp. 1-30
* The Comparative study of Urdu and Khowar.
Badshah Munir Bukhari National Language Authority Pakistan 2003.
* Rai, Amrit.
A house divided: The origin and development of Hindi-Hindustani.
Delhi: Oxford University Press. .
* Snell, Rupert Teach yourself Hindi:
A complete guide for beginners.
Lincolnwood, IL: NTC
* Pimsleur, Dr. Paul, https:/ web http:/ title.aspx?titleId=555460 "Free Urdu Audio Lesson"
* http:/ myl King2001.pdf The poisonous potency of script: Hindi and Urdu, ROBERT D. KING
