Sir Quentin Saxby Blake, CBE, FCSD, FRSL, RDI (born 16 December 1932) is an English cartoonist, illustrator and children's writer.
He is known best for illustrating books written by Roald Dahl.
For his lasting contribution as a children's illustrator he won the biennial, international Hans Christian Andersen Award in 2002, the highest recognition available to creators of children's books.
Early life
Blake was born in 1932 in Sidcup, Kent, and was evacuated to the West Country during World War II.
He attended Holy Trinity Lamorbey Church of England Primary School and Chislehurst and Sidcup Grammar School, where his English teacher, J. H. Walsh, influenced him into literature.
His artistic development during his school years was helped by contact with the painter and cartoonist Alfred Jackson, the husband of Blake's Latin teacher, who encouraged his first submissions to Punch, resulting in his first publication at the age of 16.
In the sixth form, the school's art teacher, the painter Stanley Simmonds recognized Blake's talents and provided support and exposure to the work of other artists.
He read English Literature at Downing College, Cambridge, under F. R. Leavis, from 1953 to 1956, received his postgraduate teaching diploma from the University of London, and later studied part-time at the Chelsea School of Art and later Camberwell College of Art.
He has since denied that studying at the University of Cambridge contributed to his artistic or creative talent.
He gained a teaching diploma at the Institute of Education.
Career
During the 1960s, Blake taught English at the Lycée Français de Londres which cemented his long association with France and culminated in the award of the Legion of Honour.
He taught at the Royal College of Art for over twenty years, where he was head of the Illustration department from 1978 to 1986.
Blake illustrated The Wonderful Button by Evan Hunter, published by Abelard-Schuman in 1961.
Blake gained a reputation as a loyal, reliable and humorous illustrator of more than 300 children's books, including some written by Joan Aiken, Elizabeth Bowen, Sylvia Plath, Roald Dahl, Nils-Olof Franzén, William Steig, and Dr. Seuss.
He illustrated the first Seuss book that Seuss did not illustrate himself, Great Day for Up! (1974).
By 2006, Blake had illustrated 323 books, of which he had written 35 and Dahl had written 18.
He is patron of the Blake Society, Downing College's arts and humanities society.
He is also a patron of "The Big Draw" which aims to get people drawing throughout the United Kingdom, and of https:/ web http:/ books/search.php Bibliography The Nightingale Project, a charity that puts art into hospitals.
Since 2006 he has produced work for several hospitals and mental health centres in the London area, a children's hospital (hopital Armand Trousseau) in Paris, and a maternity hospital in Angers, France.
These projects are detailed in Blake's 2012 book Quentin Blake: Beyond the Page, which describes how, in his seventies, his work has increasingly appeared outside the pages of books, in public places such as hospitals, theatre foyers, galleries and museums.
In 2007, he designed a huge mural on fabric, suspended over and thus disguising a ramshackle building immediately opposite an entrance to St Pancras railway station.
The rendering of an "imaginary welcoming committee" greets passengers arriving on the Eurostar high-speed railway.
Blake is the designer of Ben, the logo of the shop chain Ben's Cookies.
Blake designed several illustrations for the story time segments for the Scottish TV series Squeak!
Quentin Blake is a supporter of and ambassador for the indigenous rights NGO Survival International.
In 2009, he said, "For me, Survival is important for two reasons; one is that I think it’s right that we should give help and support to people who are threatened by the rapacious industrial society we have created; and the other that, more generally, it gives an important signal about how we all ought to be looking after the world.
Its message is the most fundamental of any charity I'm connected with."
Blake is a Trustee of The House of Illustration, a centre in London for exhibitions, educational events and activities related to the art of illustration.
He was also the subject of the first exhibition at this venue, entitled Inside Stories", which opened in July 2014.
In 2015, he illustrated a book by Beatrix Potter, The Tale of Kitty-in-Boots, which was published in 2016.
Personal life
Blake has never married and has no children.
Selected works
The following books were both written and illustrated by Blake:
Lester at the Seaside (William Collins, Sons, 1975)
* Mister Magnolia (Cape, 1980) -winner of the Kate Greenaway Medal
For Mister Magnolia, which he also wrote, Blake won the 1980 Kate Greenaway Medal from the Library Association, recognising the year's best children's book illustration by a British subject.
Blake was created a Knight Bachelor in the 2013 New Year Honours for his services to illustration.
In March 2014 he was awarded the insignia of a Chevalier de la Légion d'honneur at a ceremony at the Institut Français in London.
Notes
* D. Martin, "Quentin Blake", in Douglas Martin, The Telling Line: Essays On Fifteen Contemporary Book Illustrators (Julia MacRae Books, 1989), pp. 243-263
* Quentin Blake, "Research from an illustrator's point of view", in Research in Illustration: Conference Proceedings Part II (Brighton Polytechnic) (1981), pp. 25-61
