The common hippopotamus ( ; Hippopotamus amphibius), or hippo, is a large, mostly herbivorous, semiaquatic mammal and ungulate native to sub-Saharan Africa.
It is one of only two extant species in the family Hippopotamidae, the other being the pygmy hippopotamus (Choeropsis liberiensis or Hexaprotodon liberiensis).
The name comes from the ancient Greek for "river horse" ().
After the elephant and rhinoceros, the common hippopotamus is the third-largest type of land mammal and the heaviest extant artiodactyl.
Despite their physical resemblance to pigs and other terrestrial even-toed ungulates, the closest living relatives of the Hippopotamidae are cetaceans (whales, dolphins, porpoises, etc.) from which they diverged about 55 million years ago.
Common hippos are recognisable by their barrel-shaped torsos, wide-opening mouths revealing large canine tusks, nearly hairless bodies, columnar legs and large size; adults average and for males and females respectively.
Despite its stocky shape and short legs, it is capable of running over short distances.
The common hippo inhabits rivers, lakes and mangrove swamps, where territorial bulls preside over a stretch of river and groups of five to thirty females and young.
During the day, they remain cool by staying in the water or mud; reproduction and childbirth both occur in water.
They emerge at dusk to graze on grasses.
While hippos rest near each other in the water, grazing is a solitary activity and hippos are not territorial on land.
The hippo is among the most dangerous animals in the world as it is highly aggressive and unpredictable.
They are threatened by habitat loss and poaching for their meat and ivory canine teeth.
Etymology
The Latin word "hippopotamus" is derived from the ancient Greek , hippopotamos, from , hippos, "horse", and , potamos, "river", meaning "horse of the river".
In English, the plural is "hippopotamuses", but "hippopotami" is also used; "hippos" can be used as a short plural.
Hippos are gregarious, living in groups of up to thirty animals.
A group is called a pod, herd, dale, or bloat.
Taxonomy and origins
Classification
The hippopotamus is the type genus of the family Hippopotamidae.
The pygmy hippopotamus belongs to a different genus in Hippopotamidae, either Choeropsis or Hexaprotodon.
Hippopotamidae are sometimes known as hippopotamids.
Sometimes, the subfamily Hippopotaminae is used.
Further, some taxonomists group hippos and anthracotheres in the superfamily Anthracotheroidea.
Genetic analyses have tested the existence of three of these putative subspecies.
A study examining mitochondrial DNA from skin biopsies taken from 13 sampling locations, considered genetic diversity and structure among hippo populations across the continent.
The authors found low, but significant, genetic differentiation among H. a. amphibius, H. a. capensis, and H. a. kiboko.
Neither H. a. tschadensis nor H. a. constrictus has been tested.
Evolution
Until 1909, naturalists grouped hippos with pigs, based on molar patterns.
Several lines of evidence, first from blood proteins, then from molecular systematics and the fossil record, show that their closest living relatives are cetaceans - whales, dolphins and porpoises.
The common ancestor of hippos and whales branched off from Ruminantia and the rest of the even-toed ungulates; the cetacean and hippo lineages split soon afterwards.
The most recent theory of the origins of Hippopotamidae suggests that hippos and whales shared a common semiaquatic ancestor that branched off from other artiodactyls around .
One branch would evolve into cetaceans, possibly beginning about , with the protowhale Pakicetus and other early whale ancestors collectively known as Archaeoceti, which eventually underwent aquatic adaptation into the completely aquatic cetaceans.
Merycopotamus, Libycosaurus and Hippopotamidae can be considered to form a clade, with Libycosaurus being more closely related to hippos.
Their common ancestor would have lived in the Miocene, about .
Hippopotamidae are therefore deeply nested within the family Anthracotheriidae.
Hippopotamidae are believed to have evolved in Africa; the oldest known hippopotamid is the genus Kenyapotamus, which lived in Africa from 16 to .
While hippopotamid species spread across Asia and Europe, no hippos have ever been discovered in the Americas, although various anthracothere genera emigrated into North America during the early Oligocene.
From 7.5 to , an ancestor to the modern hippo, Archaeopotamus, lived in Africa and the Middle East.
While the fossil record of hippos is still poorly understood, the two modern genera, Hippopotamus and Choeropsis (sometimes Hexaprotodon), may have diverged as far back as .
Taxonomists disagree whether or not the modern pygmy hippopotamus is a member of Hexaprotodon - an apparently paraphyletic genus, also embracing many extinct Asian hippopotamuses, that is more closely related to Hippopotamus - or of Choeropsis, an older and basal genus.
Fossil evidence indicates many Malagasy hippos were hunted by humans, a likely factor in their eventual extinction.
Three species of hippopotamus, the European hippopotamus (Hippopotamus antiquus), Hippopotamus major and Hippopotamus gorgops, ranged throughout continental Europe and the British Isles.
All three species became extinct before the last glaciation.
Ancestors of European hippos found their way to many islands of the Mediterranean Sea during the Pleistocene.
The Pleistocene also saw a number of dwarf species evolve on several Mediterranean islands, including Crete (Hippopotamus creutzburgi), Cyprus (the Cyprus dwarf hippopotamus, Hippopotamus minor), Malta (Hippopotamus melitensis), and Sicily (Hippopotamus pentlandi).
Of these, the Cyprus dwarf hippo survived until the end of the Pleistocene or early Holocene.
Evidence from an archaeological site, Aetokremnos, continues to cause debate on whether or not the species was encountered, and was driven to extinction, by man.
very large males can reach and exceptional males weighing have been reported.
Male hippos appear to continue growing throughout their lives while females reach maximum weight at around age 25.
Hippos have barrel-shaped bodies with short legs and long muzzles.
The jaw hinge is located far back enough to allow the animal to open its mouth at almost 180°.
The bite force of an adult female has been measured as .
Hippo teeth sharpen themselves as they grind together.
The lower canines and lower incisors are enlarged, especially in males, and grow continuously.
The incisors can reach , while the canines reach up to .
The canines and incisors are used for combat and play no role in feeding.
Hippos rely on their broad horny lips to grasp and pull grasses which are then ground by the molars.
Nevertheless, this natural sunscreen cannot prevent the animal's skin from cracking if it stays out of water too long.
A hippo's lifespan is typically 40-50 years.
until her death in 2012 at the age of 61.
Distribution and status
Hippopotamus amphibius was widespread in North Africa and Europe during the Eemian and late Pleistocene until about 30,000 years ago.
Archaeological evidence exists of its presence in the Levant, dating to less than 3,000 years ago.
The species was common in Egypt's Nile region during antiquity, but has since been extirpated.
Pliny the Elder writes that, in his time, the best location in Egypt for capturing this animal was in the Saite nome; the animal could still be found along the Damietta branch after the Arab Conquest in 639.
Reports of the slaughter of the last hippo in Natal Province were made at the end of the 19th century.
Hippos are still found in the rivers and lakes of the northern Democratic Republic of the Congo, Uganda, Tanzania and Kenya, north through to Ethiopia, Somalia and Sudan, west to The Gambia, and south to South Africa.
Genetic evidence suggests that common hippos in Africa experienced a marked population expansion during or after the Pleistocene, attributed to an increase in water bodies at the end of the era.
These findings have important conservation implications as hippo populations across the continent are currently threatened by loss of access to fresh water.
The hippo population declined most dramatically in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
By 2005, the population in Virunga National Park had dropped to 800 or 900 from around 29,000 in the mid-1970s.
The poachers are believed to be Mai-Mai rebels, poorly paid Congolese soldiers, and local militia groups.
Reasons for poaching include the belief that hippos are harmful to society, as well as financial gain.
The sale of hippo meat is illegal, but black-market sales are difficult for Virunga National Park officers to track.
Hippo meat is considered a delicacy in some areas of central Africa and the teeth have become a valued substitute for elephant ivory.
Invasive potential
In the late 1980s, Colombian drug lord Pablo Escobar kept four hippos in a private menagerie at his residence in Hacienda Nápoles, east of Medellín, Colombia, after buying them in New Orleans.
They were deemed too difficult to seize and move after Escobar's death, and hence left on the untended estate.
By 2007, the animals had multiplied to 16 and had taken to roaming the area for food in the nearby Magdalena River.
As of early 2014, 40 hippos have been reported to exist in Puerto Triunfo, Antioquia from the original four belonging to Escobar.
As of 2018 the growing population was estimated at 50-70.
Without management the population size is likely to more than double in next decade.
The National Geographic Channel produced a documentary about them titled Cocaine Hippos.
A report published in a Yale student magazine noted that local environmentalists are campaigning to protect the animals, although there is no clear plan for what will happen to them.
In 2018, National Geographic published an article on the hippos, citing disagreement among environmentalists on whether they were having a positive or negative impact, but that conservationists and locals - particularly those in the tourism industry - were mostly in support of their continued presence.
In the U.S., Representative Robert F. Broussard of Louisiana introduced the "American Hippo bill" in 1910 to authorise the importation and release of hippopotamus into the bayous of Louisiana.
Broussard argued that the hippos would eat the invasive water hyacinth that was clogging the rivers and also produce meat to help solve the American meat crisis.
The chief collaborators and proponents of Broussard's bill were Major Frederick Russell Burnham and Captain Fritz Duquesne.
Former President Theodore Roosevelt backed the plan, as did the U.S. Department of Agriculture, The Washington Post, and The New York Times which praised the taste of hippo as "lake cow bacon".
Like almost any herbivore, they consume other plants if presented with them, but their diet in nature consists almost entirely of grass, with only minimal consumption of aquatic plants.
Hippos have (albeit rarely) been filmed eating carrion, usually close to the water.
There are other reports of meat-eating, and even cannibalism and predation.
The stomach anatomy of a hippo is not suited to carnivory, and meat-eating is likely caused by aberrant behaviour or nutritional stress.
A 2015 study concluded that hippo dung provides nutrients from terrestrial material for fish and aquatic invertebrates, while a 2018 study found that their dung can be toxic to aquatic life in large quantities, due to absorption of dissolved oxygen in water bodies.
Because of their size and their habit of taking the same paths to feed, hippos can have a significant impact on the land across which they walk, both by keeping the land clear of vegetation and depressing the ground.
Over prolonged periods, hippos can divert the paths of swamps and channels.
Adult hippos move at speeds up to in water; typically resurfacing to breathe every three to five minutes.
The young have to breathe every two to three minutes.
As with fish and turtles on a coral reef, hippos occasionally visit cleaning stations and signal, by opening their mouths wide, their readiness for being cleaned of parasites by certain species of fishes.
This is an example of mutualism, in which the hippo benefits from the cleaning while the fish receive food.
Hippos coexist with a variety of large predators.
Nile crocodiles, lions and spotted hyenas are known to prey on young hippos.
Lions occasionally prey on adults at Gorongosa National Park and calves are taken at Virunga.
Crocodiles are frequent targets of hippo aggression, probably because they often inhabit the same riparian habitats; crocodiles may be either aggressively displaced or killed by hippos.
In turn, beyond cases of killing the seldom unguarded hippo calf, very large Nile crocodiles have been verified to occasionally prey on "half-grown" hippos and anecdotally perhaps adult female hippos.
Aggregations of crocodiles have also been seen to dispatch still-living bull hippos that have been previously injured in mating battles with other bulls.
Social spacing
Studying the interaction of male and female hippos has long been complicated because hippos are not sexually dimorphic; thus females and young males are almost indistinguishable in the field.
Although hippos lie close to each other, they do not seem to form social bonds except between mothers and daughters, and they are not social animals.
The reason they huddle close together is unknown.
"Yawning" serves as a threat display.
Hippos will also express threat and alarm with exhalations.
A study of endocrine systems revealed that female hippos may begin puberty as early as three or four years.
Males reach maturity at around 7.5 yr.
A study of hippo reproductive behaviour in Uganda showed that peak conceptions occurred during the end of the wet season in the summer, and peak births occurred toward the beginning of the wet season in late winter.
This is because of the female's oestrous cycle; as with most large mammals, male hippo spermatozoa is active year-round.
Studies of hippos in Zambia and South Africa also showed evidence of births occurring at the start of the wet season.
Hippos and humans
The earliest evidence of human interaction with hippos comes from butchery cut marks on hippo bones at Bouri Formation dated around 160,000 years ago.
Later rock paintings and engravings showing hippos being hunted have been found in the mountains of the central Sahara dated 4,000-5,000 years ago near Djanet in the Tassili n'Ajjer Mountains.
The hippo was also known to the Greeks and Romans.
The Greek historian Herodotus described the hippo in The Histories (written circa 440 BC) and the Roman naturalist Pliny the Elder wrote about the hippo in his encyclopedia Naturalis Historia (written circa 77 AD).
The Yoruba people called the hippo erinmi, which means "elephant of the water".
Zulu warriors preferred to be as brave as a hippo, since even lions were not considered to match its courage.
They would chant their chief: "Een-gonyama Gonyama!
Invooboo!
Yah-bo!
Yah-bo! Invooboo!" which translates as "He is a lion.
Yes, he is better than a lion - he is a hippopotamus."
Attacks on humans
The hippo is considered to be very aggressive and has frequently been reported as charging and attacking boats.
Small boats can be capsized by hippos and passengers can be injured or killed by the animals or drown.
In one case in Niger, a boat was capsized by a hippo and 13 people were killed.
As hippos will often engage in raiding nearby crops if the opportunity arises, humans may also come in conflict with them on these occasions, with potential for fatalities on both sides.
Hippos in zoos
Hippos have long been popular zoo animals.
The first zoo hippo in modern history was Obaysch, who arrived at the London Zoo on 25 May 1850, where he attracted up to 10,000 visitors a day and inspired a popular song, the "Hippopotamus Polka".
Hippos generally breed well in captivity; birth rates are lower than in the wild, but this is attributed to zoos wanting to limit births, since hippos are relatively expensive to maintain.
Like many zoo animals, hippos were traditionally displayed in concrete exhibits.
In the case of hippos, they usually had a pool of water and patch of grass.
In the 1980s, zoo exhibits increasingly reflected native habitats.
The Toledo Zoo Hippoquarium, features a 360,000 gallon pool.
In 1987, the Toledo Zoo saw the first underwater birth by a captive hippo.
The exhibit was so popular, the hippos became the logo of the Toledo Zoo.
Cultural depictions
A red hippo represented the Ancient Egyptian god Set; the thigh is the "phallic leg of Set", symbolising virility.
Set's consort Tawaret was also seen as part hippo and was a goddess of protection in pregnancy and childbirth, because ancient Egyptians recognised the protective nature of a female hippo toward her young.
The Ijaw people of the Niger Delta wore masks of aquatic animals like the hippo when practicing their water spirit cults and hippo ivory was used in the divination rituals of the Yoruba.
The Behemoth from the Book of Job, 40:15-24 is thought to be based on a hippo.
Hippos have been the subjects of various African folktales.
According to a San story; when the Creator assigned each animal its place in nature, the hippos wanted to live in the water, but were refused out of fear that they might eat all the fish.
After begging and pleading, the hippos were finally allowed to live in the water on the conditions that they would eat grass instead of fish and would fling their dung so that it can be inspected for fish bones.
In a Ndebele tale, the hippo originally had long, beautiful hair, but was set on fire by a jealous hare and had to jump into a nearby pool.
The hippo lost most of his hair and was too embarrassed to leave the water.
Ever since Obaysch inspired the "Hippopotamus Polka", hippos have been popular animals in Western culture for their rotund appearance that many consider comical.
or the tale of Owen and Mzee, a hippo and tortoise which developed an intimate bond; have amused people who have bought hippo books, merchandise, and many stuffed hippo toys.
Hippos were mentioned in the novelty Christmas song "I Want a Hippopotamus for Christmas" that became a hit for child star Gayla Peevey in 1953.
They also feature in the songs "The Hippopotamus" and "Hippo Encore" by Flanders and Swann, with the famous refrain "Mud, Mud, Glorious Mud".
They even inspired a popular board game, Hungry Hungry Hippos.
Hippos have also been popular cartoon characters, where their rotund frames are used for humorous effect.
For example, the Disney film Fantasia featured a ballerina hippo dancing to the opera La Gioconda,
The "Happy Hippos" characters were created in 1987 by the French designer André Roche to be hidden in the "Kinder Surprise egg" of the Italian chocolate company Ferrero SpA.
