Mostar (, , ) is a city and the administrative center of Herzegovina-Neretva Canton of the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina, an entity of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Mostar is situated on the Neretva River and is the fifth-largest city in the country.
Mostar was named after the bridge keepers (mostari) who in the medieval times guarded the Stari Most (Old Bridge) over the Neretva.
The Old Bridge, built by the Ottomans in the 16th century, is one of Bosnia and Herzegovina's most visited landmarks, and is considered an exemplary piece of Islamic architecture in the Balkans.
History
Human settlements on the river Neretva, between the Hum Hill and the Velež Mountain, have existed since prehistory, as witnessed by discoveries of fortified enceintes and cemeteries.
Evidence of Roman occupation was discovered beneath the present town.
As far as medieval Mostar goes, although the Christian basilicas of late antiquity remained in use, few historical sources were preserved and not much is known about this period.
The name of Mostar was first mentioned in a document dating from 1474, taking its name from the bridge-keepers (mostari); this refers to the existence of a wooden bridge from the market on the left bank of the river which was used by traders, soldiers, and other travelers.
During this time it was also the seat of a kadiluk (district with a regional judge).
Since Mostar was on the trade route between the Adriatic and the mineral-rich regions of central Bosnia, the settlement began to spread to the right bank of the river.
The earliest documentary reference to Mostar as a settlement dates from 3 April 1452, when Ragusans from Dubrovnik wrote to their fellow countrymen in the service of Serbian Despot Đorđe Branković to say that Vladislav Hercegović had turned against his father Stjepan and occupied the town of Blagaj and other places, including “Duo Castelli al ponte de Neretua.”.
In 1468 the region came under Ottoman rule
The town was fortified between the years 1520 and 1566, and the wooden bridge rebuilt in stone.
and at long and high, quickly became a wonder in its own time.
Later becoming the city's symbol, the Old Bridge was designed by Mimar Hayruddin,
Austria-Hungary took control over Bosnia and Herzegovina in 1878 and ruled the country until the aftermath of World War I in 1918, when it became part of the State of Slovenes, Croats and Serbs and then Yugoslavia.
During this period, Mostar was recognized as the unofficial capital of Herzegovina.
The first church in the city of Mostar, a Serbian Orthodox Church, was built in 1834 during Ottoman rule.
In 1881 the town became the seat of the Roman Catholic Diocese of Mostar-Duvno and in 1939, it became a part of the Banovina of Croatia.
During World War II, Mostar was also an important city in the fascist Independent State of Croatia.
After World War II, Mostar developed industries producing plastics, tobacco, bauxite, wine, aircraft and aluminium.
Several dams (Grabovica, Salakovac, Mostar) were built in the region to harness the hydroelectric power of the Neretva.
The city was a major industrial and tourist center and prospered economically during the time of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia.
After Bosnia and Herzegovina declared independence from Yugoslavia in April 1992, the town was besieged by the Yugoslav People's Army (JNA), following clashes between the JNA and Croat forces.
The Croats were organized into the Croatian Defence Council (HVO) and were joined by a sizable number of Bosniaks.
The JNA artillery periodically shelled neighbourhoods outside of their control from early April.
On 7 June the Croatian Army (HV) launched an offensive code named Operation Jackal, the objective of which was to relieve Mostar and break the JNA siege of Dubrovnik.
The offensive was supported by the HVO, which attacked the Army of Republika Srpska (VRS) positions around Mostar.
By 12 June the HVO secured the western part of the city and by 21 June the VRS was completely pushed out from the eastern part.
Numerous religious buildings and most of the city's bridges were destroyed or severely damaged during the fighting.
Among them were the Catholic Cathedral of Mary, Mother of the Church, the Franciscan Church and Monastery, the Bishop's Palace and 12 out of 14 mosques in the city.
After the VRS was pushed from the city, the Serbian Orthodox Žitomislić Monastery and the Cathedral of the Holy Trinity were demolished.
Throughout late 1992, tensions between Croats and Bosniaks increased in Mostar.
In early 1993 the Croat-Bosniak War escalated and by mid-April 1993 Mostar had become a divided city with the western part dominated by HVO forces and the eastern part controlled by the Army of the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina (ARBiH).
Fighting broke out in May when both sides of the city came under intense artillery fire.
The city was divided along ethnic lines, with a number of offensives taking place, resulting in a series of stalemates.
The Croat-Bosniak conflict ended with the signing of the Washington Agreement in 1994, and the Bosnian War ended with the Dayton Agreement in 1995.
Around 2,000 people died in Mostar during the war.
Architecture
Mostar has architecturally noteworthy buildings in a wide range of styles.
Historicist architectural styles reflected cosmopolitan interest and exposure to foreign aesthetic trends and were artfully merged with indigenous styles.
Examples include the Italianate Franciscan church, the Ottoman Muslibegovića house, the Dalmatian Ćorović House and an Orthodox church which was built as gift from the Sultan.
The Ottomans used monumental architecture to affirm, extend and consolidate their colonial holdings.
Administrators and bureaucrats - many of them indigenous people who converted from Christianity to Islam - founded mosque complexes that generally included Koranic schools, soup kitchens or markets.
Out of the thirteen original mosques dating from the 16th and 17th centuries, seven have been lost during the 20th century for ideological reasons or by bombardment.
One of the two 19th-century Orthodox churches has also disappeared, while the early 20th-century synagogue, after suffering severe damage in the World War II, has been converted into a theatre.
Several Ottoman inns also survived, along with other buildings from this period of Mostar's history, such as fountains and schools.
The Cejvan Cehaj Mosque, built in 1552, is the oldest mosque in Mostar.
Later a madrasah (Islamic school) was built on the same compound.
The Old Bazaar, Kujundziluk is named after the goldsmiths who traditionally created and sold their wares on this street, and still sells authentic paintings and copper or bronze carvings of the Stari Most, pomegranates (the natural symbol of Herzegovina) or the stećaks (medieval tombstones).
The Koski Mehmed Paša Mosque, built in 1617 is open to visitors.
Visitors may enter the mosque and take photos free of charge.
The minaret is also open to the public and is accessible from inside the mosque.
Just around the corner from the mosque is the Tepa Market.
This has been a busy marketplace since Ottoman times.
It now sells mostly fresh produce grown in Herzegovina and, when in season, the figs and pomegranates are extremely popular.
Local honey is also a prominent specialty, being produced all around Herzegovina.
Reconstruction
Since the end of the wider war in 1995, great progress has been made in the reconstruction of the city of Mostar.
The city was under direct monitoring from a European Union envoy, several elections were held and each nation was accommodated with regard to political control over the city.
Over 15 million dollars has been spent on restoration.
A monumental project to rebuild the Old Bridge, which was destroyed during the Bosnian War, to the original design, and restore surrounding structures and historic neighbourhoods was initiated in 1999 and mostly completed by Spring 2004.
The money for this reconstruction was donated by Spain (who had a sizable contingent of peacekeeping troops stationed in the surrounding area during the conflict), the United States, Turkey, Italy, the Netherlands, and Croatia.
A grand opening was held on 23 July 2004 under heavy security.
In parallel with the restoration of the Old Bridge, the Aga Khan Trust for Culture and the World Monuments Fund, with funding provided by the World Bank, undertook a five-year-long restoration and rehabilitation effort in historic Mostar.
Realizing early on that the reconstruction of the bridge without an in-depth rehabilitation of the surrounding historic neighbourhoods would be devoid of context and meaning, they shaped the programme in such a way as to establish a framework of urban conservation schemes and individual restoration projects that would help regenerate the most significant areas of historic Mostar, and particularly the urban tissue around the Old Bridge.
The project also resulted in the establishment of the Stari Grad Agency which has an important role in overseeing the ongoing implementation of the conservation plan, as well as operating and maintaining a series of restored historic buildings (including the Old Bridge complex) and promoting Mostar as a cultural and tourist destination.
The official inauguration of the Stari grad Agency coincided with the opening ceremony of the Bridge.
In July 2005, UNESCO inscribed the Old Bridge and its closest vicinity onto the World Heritage List.
Culture
Dani Matice Hrvatske is one of city's significant cultural events and it is commonly sponsored by the Croatian Government and the Government of the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Mostar Summer is another umbrella event which includes Šantić Poetry Evenings, Mostar Summer Festival and Festival of Bosnia and Herzegovina choirs/ensembles.
The city is a home of music festival called Melodije Mostara (Mostar Melodies) which has been held annually since 1995.
Theatre festivals include Mostarska Liska (organized by the National Theatre Mostar) and The Mostar Spring (organized by the Matica hrvatska Mostar).
Mostar Art institutions include:
* Birthplace of Svetozar Ćorović (Aleksa Šantić House)
Mostar cuisine is balanced between Western and Eastern influences.
Traditional Mostar food is closely related to Turkish, Middle Eastern and other Mediterranean cuisines.
However, due to years of Austrian rule and influence, there are also many culinary influences from Central Europe.
Some of the dishes include ćevapčići, burek, sarma, japrak, musaka, dolma, sujuk, sač, đuveč, and sataraš.
Local desserts include baklava, hurmašice, sutlijaš, tulumbe, tufahije, and šampita.
Economy
Mostar's economy relies heavily on the aluminum and metal industry, banking services and telecommunication sector.
The city is the seat of some of the country's largest corporations.
Along with Sarajevo and Banja Luka, it is the largest financial center in Bosnia and Herzegovina, with two out of three largest banks in the country having their headquarters in Mostar.
Bosnia and Herzegovina has three national electric, postal and telecommunication service corporations; one of them in each group has its seat in Mostar (electric utility provider Elektroprivreda HZHB, postal service company Hrvatska Pošta Mostar and HT Mostar, the third largest telecommunication company in the country).
These three companies (along with banks and aluminium factory) make a vast portion of overall economic activity in the city.
Prior to the 1992-1995 Bosnian War, Mostar relied on other important companies which had been closed, damaged or downsized.
They included SOKO (military aircraft factory), Fabrika duhana Mostar (tobacco industry), and Hepok (food industry).
In 1981, Mostar's GDP per capita was 103% of the Yugoslav average.
Aluminum manufacturing company Aluminij Mostar is the sole remaining large company that was prominent during the former Yugoslavia.
It is one of the country's largest exporter companies and it has a number of international partners.
It is one of the most influential companies in the region as well.
The city of Mostar alone has direct income of €40 million annually from Aluminij.
The Aluminij Mostar was closed and set into bankrupcy in 2019 due to a dispute with electricity provider and prices.
Considering the fact that three dams are situated on the city of Mostar’s territory, the city has a solid base for further development of production.
There is also an ongoing project for the possible use of wind power and building of windmills.
The private sector has seen a notable increase in small and medium enterprises over the past couple of years contributing to the positive business climate.
Mostar also hosts the annual International Economic Fair Mostar ("Međunarodni sajam gospodarstva Mostar") which was first held in 1997.
Demographics
In 2013 the city of Mostar had a total population of 105,797 according to the census results.
Ethnic groups
Its population consists of the following ethnic groups: Croats (48.4%);
Bosniaks (44.1%) and Serbs (4.1%).
The city of Mostar has the largest population of Croats in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
As in many other cities, its demographic profile was significantly altered after the Bosnian War; in case of Mostar, most of the Serbs left the city.
According to the official data of the local elections of 2008, among 6 city election districts, three western ones (Croat-majority) had 53,917 registered voters, and those three on the east (Bosniak-majority) had 34,712 voters.
The ethnic composition of the city of Mostar:
Settlements
The City of Mostar (aside from city proper) includes 56 villages and suburbs.
They are:
After the Bosnian War, following the Dayton Agreement, the villages of Kamena, Kokorina and Zijemlje were separated from Mostar to form the new municipality of Istočni Mostar (East Mostar), in the Republika Srpska.
Climate
Mostar, and Herzegovina area in general, enjoy a modified Mediterranean climate, with cool, humid winters and hot, drier summers.
In the summer months, occasional temperatures above are not uncommon, with a record temperature of .
The coldest month is January, averaging about , and the warmest month is July, averaging about .
Mostar experiences a relatively dry season from June to September.
The remainder of the year is wet and mild.
The Köppen Climate Classification subtype for this climate is Cfa, which in this case is an "Humid subtropical climate with hot summers and Mediterranean tendency" (close to Csa subtype).
Mostar is the sunniest city in the country with an average of 2291 solar hours a year.
Snow is relatively rare and it usually melts within a few hours or days.
During the 2012 European cold wave, Mostar experienced unusually cold weather with freezing temperatures lasting for days and a record snow depth of .
City government
The City of Mostar has the status of a municipality.
The city government is led by the Mayor.
The current Mayor of Mostar is Ljubo Bešlić (HDZ).
The City Council is composed of 35 representatives, coming from the following political parties:
2008 constitutional crisis
According to the constitution, imposed by High Representative Paddy Ashdown on January 28, 2004 after local politicians failed to reach an agreement, the mayor of Mostar has to be elected by the city council with a two-thirds majority.
Ashdown abolished the six municipalities that were divided equally among Bosniaks and Croats and replaced them with six electoral units, ridding Mostar of duplicate institutions and costs.
In the process Ashdown also reduced the number of elected officials from 194 to 35.
High-schools include sixteen vocational schools and three gymnasiums.
All public schools in Mostar, both elementary and secondary education, are divided between Croat curriculum and Federal (unofficially Bosniak) curriculum schools.
This ethnic division of schools was emplaced during the very first year of the Bosnian war and it continues, with some modifications, to this day.
Today, the schools in Mostar and throughout Bosnia and Herzegovina are a site of struggle between ethno-national political elites in ways that reveals the precarious position of youth in the volatile nation building processes A partial exception to divided education is Gimnazija Mostar (also known as "Stara gimnazija") that implemented joint school administration and some joint student courses.
However, Croat and Bosniak students in Gimanzija Mostar continue to have most courses according to the “national” curriculum, among them the so-called national subjects - history, literature, geography, and religion.
The country's higher education reform and the signing of the Bologna Process have forced both universities to put aside their rivalry to some extent and try to make themselves more competitive on a regional level.
University of Mostar is the second largest university in the country and the only Croatian language university in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
It was founded in 1977 as the University "Džemal Bijedić" of Mostar, but changed name in 1992.
The origin of the university can be traced back to the Herzegovina Franciscan Theological School, which was founded in 1895 and closed in 1945, was the first higher education institution in Mostar.
Today's University seal shows the building of the Franciscan Monastery.
University Džemal Bijedić of Mostar was founded in 1993.
It employs around 250 professors and staff members.
According to the Federal Office of Statistics, Džemal Bijedić University had 2,522 students enrolled during the 2012/2013 academic year.
school year, the University of Mostar had 10,712 students enrolled at eleven faculties making it the largest university in the city.
In 2011 rugby union football club RK Herceg was founded.
It competes in national leagues of Bosnia & Herzegovina and in regional league Adria Sevens.
Another popular sport in Mostar is swimming.
There are three swimming teams in Mostar and those are PK Velež, KVS Orka and APK Zrinjski.
Best Bosnian swimmer Amina Kajtaz is from Mostar.
Mostar has plenty talented swimmers but city only have one 25 meters pool and one 12.5 meters pool.
Tourism
Mostar is an important tourist destination in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Mostar International Airport serves the city as well as the railway and bus stations which connect it to a number of national and international destinations.
Mostar's old town is an important tourist destination with the Stari Most being its most recognizable feature.
Some noteworthy sites include Bishop’s Ordinariate building, the remains of an early Christian basilica at Cim, a hamam (Ottoman public bath), clock tower (sahat-kula), Synagogue (1889) and Jewish Memorial Cemetery, Nesuh-aga Vučjaković Mosque, Hadži-Kurt Mosque or Tabačica, Metropolitan's Palace (1908), Karagöz Bey Mosque (1557), Cathedral of the Holy Trinity (1873), Catholic Church and Franciscan Monastery, Ottoman Residences (16th-19th century), Crooked Bridge, Tara and Halebija Towers.
The World War II Partisan cemetery in Mostar, designed by the architect Bogdan Bogdanović, is another important symbol of the city.
Its sacrosanct quality is derived from the unity of nature (water and greenery) with the architectural expression of the designer; the monument was inscribed on the list of National Monuments in 2006.
The Catholic pilgrimage site of Međugorje is also nearby as well as the Tekija Dervish Monastery in Blagaj, 13th-century town of Počitelj, Blagaj Fort (Stjepan-grad), Kravica waterfall, seaside town of Neum, Roman villa rustica from the early fourth century Mogorjelo, Stolac with its stećak necropolis and the remains of an ancient Greek town of Daorson.
Nearby sites also include the nature park called Hutovo Blato, archeological site Desilo, Lake Boračko as well as Vjetrenica cave, the largest and most important cave in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Notable people
* Muhamed Mujić, footballer, Olympic and European championship silver medalist
* Ivan Ćurković, footballer and President of the Olympic Committee of Serbia
* Dražen Dalipagić, basketball, Olympic, World and European champion
* Zoran Mandlbaum, leader of the Jewish Community of Mostar
* List of twin towns and sister cities in Bosnia and Herzegovina
;Citations
;Literature
Further reading
