The Paris Opera Ballet () is a French ballet company that is an integral part of the Paris Opera and the oldest national ballet company.
Together with the Royal Ballet in London, the Bolshoi Ballet in Moscow and the Mariinsky Ballet in Saint Petersburg, it is regarded as one of the four most prominent ballet companies in the world.
Since August 2016, the company has been under the direction of Aurélie Dupont, the Directrice de la Danse.
The ballet company consists of 154 dancers, among them 17 Danseurs Étoiles.
The principal dancers give 180 dance performances each year, primarily at the Palais Garnier.
Just as prestigious as the Paris Opera Ballet is its dance school, the Paris Opera Ballet School (French: École de danse de l'Opéra national de Paris), considered to be one of the world's best dance schools.
Its former pupils have won a record of 20 Benois de la Danse awards.
The school celebrated its tercentennial in 2013.
The competition for admission to both institutions is extremely fierce.
For a dancer to enter the Paris Opera Ballet, it is almost compulsory to be admitted to the Paris Opera Ballet School, to pass the annual competitive examinations in May, and to attend at least the final two classes.
History
Naming
The Paris Opera Ballet has always been an integral part of the Paris Opera, which was founded in 1669 as the Académie d'Opéra (Academy of Opera), although theatrical dance did not become an important component of the Paris Opera until 1673, after it was renamed the Académie royale de musique (Royal Academy of Music) and placed under the leadership of Jean-Baptiste Lully.
The Paris Opera has had many different official names during its long history, but since 1994, it has been called the Opéra national de Paris (Paris National Opera).
Background
The Paris Opera Ballet had its origins in the earlier dance institutions, traditions and practices of the court of Louis XIV.
Of particular importance were the series of comédies-ballets created by Molière with, among others, the choreographers and composers Pierre Beauchamps and Jean-Baptiste Lully.
The first was Les Fâcheux in 1661 and the most important, Le Bourgeois gentilhomme in 1670.
Many of these were also performed by Molière's company at the public Théâtre du Palais-Royal in Paris, which was later to become the first permanent home of the opera company and the opera ballet.
Also in 1661, Louis XIV had founded the Académie Royale de Danse (Royal Academy of Dance) in an effort "to improve the quality of dance instruction for court entertainments".
Members of the academy, as well as the dance teachers who were certified by it, and their students, participated in the creation of the ballets for the court, Molière, and later the opera.
In 1680, Beauchamps became the chancellor (director) of the Académie Royale de Danse.
Although the Académie Royale de Danse and the Opera were closely connected, the two institutions remained separate, and the former disappeared with the fall of the monarchy in 1789.
Founding and early history
On 28 June 1669, Louis XIV granted a privilege to the poet Pierre Perrin giving him a monopoly to form a separate academy for the performance of opera in French.
The first production of the company founded by Perrin, the Académie d'Opéra (Academy of Opera), was Pomone, which was first performed on 3 March 1671 at the Jeu de Paume de la Bouteille and included ballets choreographed by Anthoine des Brosses.
In 1672, Lully purchased Perrin's privilege and also obtained new letters patent limiting the use of musicians and dancers by other French companies.
With Anthoine des Brosses and Lully as choreographers and Carlo Vigarani as stage designer, Lully's company, now called the Académie Royale de Musique, produced Lully's first opera, Les fêtes de l'Amour et de Bacchus (a pastorale) in November 1672 at the Jeu de Paume de Béquet.
This work consisted primarily of excerpts from Lully's prior court ballets connected with new entrées choreographed by des Brosses.
A crucial difference, however, from the previous court ballets was that the members of the court no longer participated, and all of the dancers were professionals.
Lully's next production, Cadmus et Hermione (27 April 1673), the first tragédie lyrique (with a libretto by Philippe Quinault), also premiered at the Jeu de Paume de Béquet and was choreographed by Anthoine des Brosses.
The ballets for these works were created by Beauchamps, des Brosses, and d'Olivet. Jean-Baptiste Dubos explains that Beauchamps and des Brosses were responsible for the ballets ordinaires, while d'Olivet specialized in ballet-pantomime:
Lully paid such great attention to the ballets mentioned here that he engaged for their choreography a 'maître de danse particulier' named d'Olivet.
It was he, and not des Brosses or Beauchamps, whom Lully engaged for the 'ballets ordinaires', who composed the ballets of the infernal scenes of Psyché and Alceste.
It was also d'Olivet who composed the ballet of the old men in Thesée, of the baneful dreams in Atys, and of the tremblers in Isis.
This last was composed solely of pantomimic gestures by men seized with cold, and he did not introduce a single usual dance step into it.
Initially the dancers of the Paris Opera Ballet were all male.
Mademoiselle de la Fontaine (1665-1738) became the first professional ballerina when she danced in the premiere of Lully's ballet Le Triomphe de l'Amour on 21 January 1681.
Pierre Beauchamps continued to collaborate with Lully at the Paris Opera until Lully's death in 1687.
In 1820, Pierre Gardel was succeeded as ballet master by Jean-Louis Aumer, who was however highly criticized for using too much mime and failing to use choreography which furthered plot or character.
During his three decades as director of the Paris Opéra Ballet, Lifar led the company through the turbulent times of World War II and the German occupation of France.
Lifar brought the Paris Opéra Ballet to America and performed to full houses at the New York City Center.
Audiences were enthusiastic and had great admiration for the company of dancers.
In 1983, Rudolf Nureyev was appointed director of the Paris Opera Ballet, where, as well as directing, he continued to dance and to promote younger dancers.
The top female ballet dancer at that time, if not of all times, was Sylvie Guillem, who was nominated principal dancer at the age of 19 by Rudolf Nureyev in 1984.
They were a mythical dance couple.
The years of Nureyev marked a golden era of the Paris Opera Ballet.
Transition
There were turbulent times for the company with Benjamin Millepied, director of the Paris Opera Ballet from November 2014 until he quit on 15 July 2016.
There were two stumbling blocks with Millepied, a French dancer and choreographer, who left France in 1993 at the age of 16, got his main professional education as a dancer and choreographer in the United States and came back to France in 2014 as newly-appointed director of the Paris Opera Ballet.
The first one was that Millepied wanted the Paris Opera Ballet dancers to interpret La Bayadère, a classic ballet choreographed by Rudolf Nureyey in 1993, like a contemporary ballet.
To achieve this goal, he had already hired guest principal dancers to present La Bayadère.
The other stumbling block was that Millepied had broken the hierarchy of the "Danseurs Étoiles" dancing the leading roles, as he had chosen for the cast of his first contemporary ballet creation "Clear, Loud, Bright, Forward" (the first one in his time as director) out of the 154 danseurs a "dream team" of 16 dancers which he considered to be the fittest to put to practice his ideas and visions .
Karl Paquette, principal dancer, said in an interview that he had never felt as bad in his 30 years at the Paris Opera Ballet as he had the past 6 months.
Stéphane Bullion, principal dancer, added that it was clear that things could not be straightened out.
“He leaves too soon, but others leave too late.”
Lissner added, “I think that the two jobs, director of dance and a choreographer who is more and more in demand, not just at the Opera, raised a certain number of questions.”
Aurélie Dupont
Aurélie Dupont took over the direction of the ballet company on 1 August 2016.
She was Danseuse Étoile from 1994 to 2015.
Dupont was the inspiration behind the Cédric Klapisch film about the star, considered the grande dame of the Paris Opera Ballet.
Hierarchy
The hierarchy of the Paris Opera Ballet is very strict.
For a dancer, it is virtually compulsory to enter first the Paris Opera Ballet School.
"You cannot get into the company if you have not done the school" (Mathilde Froustey
To become a regular member of the Paris Opera Ballet as "Quadrille" (fifth and lowest rank in the hierarchy), you have to pass the annual competitive examination in November.
Promotion to the next rank depends exclusively on success in the following annual competitive examinations ("les concours internes de promotion") in front of a board of judges.
To achieve the highest rank as Danseur Étoile (only by nomination) you have to perform in leading roles as "Premier Danseur" for many years before you are nominated due to outstanding excellence and merit.
Small scandals and the lost generation
As the Paris Opera Ballet has a large quantity of first-class French dancers, there are hard times for those who have not been promoted to the highest ranks as dancers or have not been appointed afterwards to positions for which they would have been extremely qualified.
In November 2014 Benjamin Millepied, a former principal dancer of the New York City Ballet and French, took over the direction of the company and promised a change: "They asked for a change and they will get a change."
When Benjamin Millepied nominated for the first (and only) time a "Danseuse étoile", Laura Hecquet was chosen.
Laura Hecquet and Mathilde Froustey were described in the press as "the lost generation" of dancers working up the ranks who have become soloist (Sujet) but have been unlucky for years as far as climbing up the last step of the career ladder is concerned.
The Paris Opera Ballet School has churned out some of the most famous dancers of all time, such as Sylvie Guillem and Laurent Hilaire.
In January 2013 Stéphane Lissner the new director of the Paris Opera (in the hierarchy above the Paris Opera Ballet's director) appointed Benjamin Millepied.
Hilaire announced in May 2014 his departure and quit the company in July.
The Paris Opera Ballet's new director Benjamin Millepied on his part stayed only two seasons and was followed in August by Aurélie Dupont, who was as Danseuse Ètoile the Grand-dame of the Paris Opera Ballet.
François Alu, Premier Danseur since 2013 and 23 years old, is regarded for his technique particularly stunning jumps and dazzling pirouettes and his dance style as the next principal dancer to be nominated.
Now, this isn't amazing news, well-known for at least two years.
François Alu was called by the critic Laura Capelle in her review of 10 January 2013 for DanceTabs as "Wunderkind" (child prodigy).
Sylvie Guillem who was nominated Danseuse Étoile even at the age of 19 by Rudolf Nureyev, director of that time, told about Nureyev that he was excellent in this regard
Paris Opera Ballet School
The Paris Opera Ballet School (French: École de danse de l'Opéra national de Paris) is one of the most preeminent dance schools in the world.
It has six classes for boys and girls separately named sixième division to première division.
In 1987, the Paris Opera Ballet School moved from the Palais Garnier (where most of the Paris Opera ballets take place) to a new building located 10 kilometres west of the centre of Paris, in Nanterre.
The new dance school building was designed by Christian de Portzamparc.
Since 1995, the Paris Opera Ballet School has been a boarding school.
Nowadays, from 8 a.m. until noon, all pupils attend school classes leading to the obtention of the French baccalauréat (the bac), the general qualification for university entrance in France.
Among the dancers of the Paris Opera Ballet, 95 percent have attended the Paris Opera Ballet School.
To describe it differently, for a young dancer to be accepted in the Paris Opera corps de ballet, it is virtually obligatory to enter the Paris Opera Ballet School and attend at least the final two classes (deuxième et première division).
More than 90 percent of the candidates do not pass the entrance examination.
Even some of the dancers who have later become premiers danseurs (first soloists) or danseurs étoiles (principal dancers) of the Paris Opera Ballet passed the entrance examination only on the second attempt, or were accepted only as fee-paying pupils.
Choreographers
Choreographers associated with the Paris Opera Ballet and works created for the Paris Opera Ballet are:
Dancers
There are five ranks of dancers in the Paris Opera Ballet; from highest to lowest they are: Danseur Étoile, premier danseur, sujet, coryphée, and quadrille.
Promotions to the higher rank depend on success in the annual competitive examinations, except for danseurs étoiles who are nominated by the Director of the Opera, on a proposal from the Director of the Ballet.
Étoiles
The maximum number of active danseurs étoiles within the company, originally limited to four, has progressively increased over time and is nowadays set at eighteen.
The title is conferred for life and is therefore kept after retirement, which is set at a maximum age of 42, like for all other dancers of the Paris Opera Ballet.
Notable former dancers
Sources
* Astier, Régine (1998a).
"Académie Royale de Danse" in Cohen 1998, vol.
pp. 3-5.
* Astier, Régine (1998b).
"Beauchamps, Pierre" in Cohen 1998, vol. 1., pp. 396-397.
* Babsky, Monique (1998).
"Aumer, Jean-Louis" in Cohen 1998, vol. 1, pp. 201-203.
* Christout, Marie-Françoise (1998).
"Paris Opera Ballet" in Cohen 1998, vol. 5, pp. 86-100.
* Cohen, Selma Jeanne, editor (1998).
International Encyclopedia of Dance (6 volumes).
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
(hardcover).
(2004 paperback edition).
* Craine, Debra; Mackrell, Judith (2000).
The Oxford Dictionary of Dance.
Oxford: Oxford University Press. .
* Guest, Ivor (2006).
The Paris Opéra Ballet.
Alton, Hampshire: Dance Books. .
* La Gorce, Jérôme de (2002).
Jean-Baptiste Lully (in French).
Paris: Fayard. .
* Pitou, Spire (1983).
The Paris Opéra: An Encyclopedia of Operas, Ballets, Composers, and Performers.
Genesis and Glory, 1671-1715.
Westport, Connecticut: Greenwood Press. .
* Powell, John S. (1995).
"Pierre Beauchamps, Choreographer to Molière's Troupe de Roy", Music & Letters, vol. 76, no. 2 (May), pp.
* Powell, John S. (2008).
"Pierre Beauchamps and the Public Theatre", pp. 117-135 in Dance, Spectacle, and the Body Politic, edited by Jennifer Nevile.
Bloomington: Indiana University Press. .
http:/ ~john-powell PierreBeauchampsAndThePublicTheater.pdf Online pdf.
* Powell, John S. (2010).
"Performance Practices at the Théâtre de Guénégaud and the Comédie-Française: Evidence from Charpentier's Mélanges autographes", pp. 161-183 in New Perspectives on Marc-Antoine Charpentier, edited by Shirley Thompson.
Farnham, Surrey: Ashgate. .
