James Harold Wilson, Baron Wilson of Rievaulx, (11 March 1916 - 24 May 1995) was a British Labour politician who served as Prime Minister of the United Kingdom from 1964 to 1970 and 1974 to 1976.
Entering Parliament in 1945, Wilson was appointed a parliamentary secretary in the Attlee ministry and rose quickly through the ministerial ranks; he became Secretary for Overseas Trade in 1947 and was elevated to Cabinet shortly thereafter as President of the Board of Trade.
In opposition to the next Conservative government, he served as Shadow Chancellor (1955&ndash;1961) and Shadow Foreign Secretary (1961&ndash;1963).
Hugh Gaitskell, then Labour leader, died suddenly in 1963 and Wilson was elected leader.
Narrowly winning the 1964 general election, Wilson won an increased majority in a snap election in 1966.
Wilson's first period as Prime Minister coincided with a period of low unemployment and relative economic prosperity, though hindered by significant problems with Britain's external balance of payments.
In 1969 he sent British troops to Northern Ireland.
After losing the 1970 election to Edward Heath, he spent four years as Leader of the Opposition before the February 1974 election resulted in a hung parliament.
After Heath's talks with the Liberals broke down, Wilson returned to power as leader of a minority government until another general election in October, resulting in a narrow Labour victory.
A period of economic crisis had begun to hit most Western countries, and in 1976 Wilson suddenly announced his resignation as Prime Minister.
Wilson's approach to socialism was moderate compared to others in his party at the time, emphasising programmes aimed at increasing opportunity in society, rather than on the controversial socialist goal of promoting wider public ownership of industry; he took little action to pursue the Labour constitution's stated dedication to nationalisation, though he did not formally disown it.
Himself a member of the party's "soft left", Wilson joked about leading a cabinet made up mostly of social democrats, comparing himself to a Bolshevik revolutionary presiding over a Tsarist cabinet, but there was arguably little to divide him ideologically from the cabinet majority.
Overall, Wilson is seen to have managed a number of difficult political issues with considerable tactical skill, including such potentially divisive issues for his party such as the role of public ownership, membership of the European Community and the Vietnam War, in which he refused to allow the use of British combat troops, while continuing to maintain a costly military presence east of Suez.
His stated ambition of substantially improving Britain's long-term economic performance was left largely unfulfilled.
He lost his energy and drive in his second premiership, and accomplished little as the leadership split over Europe and trade union issues began tearing Labour apart.
Early life
Wilson was born at 4 Warneford Road, Huddersfield, in the West Riding of Yorkshire, England, on 11 March 1916.
He came from a political family: his father James Herbert Wilson (1882-1971) was a works chemist who had been active in the Liberal Party, going as far as to be Winston Churchill's deputy election agent in his 1908 by election before then joining the Labour Party.
His mother Ethel (née Seddon; 1882-1957) was a schoolteacher before her marriage; in 1901 her brother Harold Seddon settled in Western Australia and became a local political leader.
When Wilson was eight, he visited London and a much-reproduced photograph was taken of him standing on the doorstep of 10 Downing Street.
At the age of ten he went with his family to Australia, where he became fascinated with the pomp and glamour of politics.
On the way home he told his mother, "I am going to be Prime Minister."
Education
Wilson won a scholarship to attend Royds Hall Grammar School, his local grammar school (now a comprehensive school) in Huddersfield in Yorkshire.
His father, working as an industrial chemist, was made redundant in December 1930, and it took him nearly two years to find work; he moved to Spital in Cheshire, on the Wirral, in order to do so.
Wilson was educated in the Sixth Form at the Wirral Grammar School for Boys, where he became Head Boy.
Wilson did well at school and, although he missed getting a scholarship, he obtained an exhibition; this, when topped up by a county grant, enabled him to study Modern History at Jesus College, Oxford, from 1934.
At Oxford, Wilson was moderately active in politics as a member of the Liberal Party but was strongly influenced by G. D. H. Cole.
His politics tutor, R. B. McCallum, considered Wilson as the best student he ever had.
He graduated in PPE (Philosophy, Politics and Economics) with "an outstanding first class Bachelor of Arts degree, with alphas on every paper" in the final examinations, and a series of major academic awards.
Biographer Roy Jenkins wrote:
Academically his results put him among prime ministers in the category of Peel, Gladstone, Asquith, and no one else.
But...he lacked originality.
What he was superb at was the quick assimilation of knowledge, combined with an ability to keep it ordered in his mind and to present it lucidly in a form welcome to his examiners.
He continued in academia, becoming one of the youngest Oxford dons of the century at the age of 21.
He was a lecturer in Economic History at New College from 1937, and a research fellow at University College.
Marriage
On New Year's Day 1940, in the chapel of Mansfield College, Oxford, he married Mary Baldwin, who remained his wife until his death.
Mary Wilson became a published poet.
They had two sons, Robin and Giles (named after Giles Alington); Robin became a professor of Mathematics, and Giles became a teacher.
In their twenties, his sons were under a kidnap threat from the IRA because of their father's prominence.
War service
On the outbreak of the Second World War, Wilson volunteered for military service but was classed as a specialist and moved into the civil service instead.
For much of this time, he was a research assistant to William Beveridge, the Master of University College, working on the issues of unemployment and the trade cycle.
Wilson later became a statistician and economist for the coal industry.
He was Director of Economics and Statistics at the Ministry of Fuel and Power in 1943-44, and received an OBE for his services.
He was to remain passionately interested in statistics, becoming a Fellow of the Royal Statistical Society in 1943.
As President of the Board of Trade, he was the driving force behind the Statistics of Trade Act 1947, which is still the authority governing most economic statistics in Great Britain.
He was instrumental as Prime Minister in appointing Claus Moser as head of the Central Statistical Office, and was president of the Royal Statistical Society in 1972-73.
Member of Parliament (1945-64)
As the war drew to an end, he searched for a seat to fight at the impending general election.
He was selected for the constituency of Ormskirk, then held by Stephen King-Hall.
Wilson agreed to be adopted as the candidate immediately rather than delay until the election was called, and was therefore compelled to resign from his position in the Civil Service.
He served as Praelector in Economics at University College between his resignation and his election to the House of Commons.
He also used this time to write A New Deal for Coal, which used his wartime experience to argue for nationalisation of the coal mines on the grounds of the improved efficiency he predicted would ensue.
In the 1945 general election, Wilson won his seat in the Labour landslide.
To his surprise, he was immediately appointed to the government by Prime Minister Clement Attlee as Parliamentary Secretary to the Ministry of Works.
Two years later, he became Secretary for Overseas Trade, in which capacity he made several official trips to the Soviet Union to negotiate supply contracts.
The boundaries of his Ormskirk constituency was significantly altered before the general election of 1950.
He stood instead for the new seat of Huyton near Liverpool, and was narrowly elected; he served there for 33 years until 1983.
Cabinet Minister, 1947-51
Wilson was appointed President of the Board of Trade on 29 September 1947, becoming, at the age of 31, the youngest member of a British Cabinet in the 20th century.
He took a lead in abolishing some wartime rationing, which he referred to as a "bonfire of controls".
In mid-1949, with Chancellor of the Exchequer Stafford Cripps having gone to Switzerland in an attempt to recover his health, Wilson was one of a group of three young ministers, all of them former economics dons and wartime civil servants, convened to advise Prime Minister Attlee on financial matters.
The others were Douglas Jay (Economic Secretary to the Treasury) and Hugh Gaitskell (Minister of Fuel and Power), both of whom soon grew to distrust him.
Jay wrote of Wilson's role in the debates over whether or not to devalue sterling that “he changed sides three times within eight days and finished up facing both ways”.
Wilson was given the task during his Swiss holiday of taking a letter to Cripps informing him of the decision to devalue, to which Cripps had been opposed.
Wilson had tarnished his reputation in both political and official circles.
Wilson was becoming known in the Labour Party as a left-winger, and joined Aneurin Bevan and John Freeman in resigning from the government in April 1951 in protest at the introduction of National Health Service (NHS) medical charges to meet the financial demands imposed by the Korean War.
At this time, Wilson was not yet regarded as a heavyweight politician: Hugh Dalton referred to him scornfully as "Nye Bevan’s dog".
After Labour lost the 1951 election, he became the Chairman of Keep Left, Bevan's political group.
At the bitter Morecambe Conference in late 1952, Wilson was one of the Bevanites elected as constituency representatives to Labour's National Executive Committee (NEC), whilst senior right-wingers such as Dalton and Herbert Morrison were voted off.
Shadow Cabinet, 1954-63
Wilson had never made much secret that his support of the left-wing Aneurin Bevan was opportunistic.
In early 1954, Bevan resigned from the Shadow Cabinet over Labour's support for the setting-up of the South East Asia Treaty Organisation (SEATO).
Wilson, who had been runner-up in the elections, stepped up to fill the vacant place.
He was supported in this by Richard Crossman, but his actions angered Bevan and the other Bevanites.
Wilson's course in intra-party matters in the 1950s and early 1960s left him neither fully accepted nor trusted by the left or the right in the Labour Party.
Despite his earlier association with Bevan, in 1955 he backed Hugh Gaitskell, the right-wing candidate in internal Labour Party terms, against Bevan for the party leadership.
Gaitskell appointed him Shadow Chancellor of the Exchequer in 1955, and he proved to be very effective.
One of his procedural moves caused a substantial delay to the progress of the Government's Finance Bill in 1955, and his speeches as Shadow Chancellor from 1956 were widely praised for their clarity and wit.
He coined the term "Gnomes of Zurich" to ridicule Swiss bankers for selling Britain short and pushing the pound down by speculation.
He conducted an inquiry into the Labour Party's organisation following its defeat in the 1955 general election, which compared Labour's organisation to an antiquated "penny farthing" bicycle, and made various recommendations for improvements.
Unusually, Wilson combined the job of Chairman of the House of Commons' Public Accounts Committee with that of Shadow Chancellor from 1959, holding that position until 1963.
Gaitskell's leadership was weakened after the Labour Party's 1959 defeat, his controversial attempt to ditch Labour's commitment to nationalisation by scrapping Clause Four, and his defeat at the 1960 Party Conference over a motion supporting unilateral nuclear disarmament.
Bevan had died in July 1960, so Wilson established himself as a leader of the Labour left by launching an opportunistic but unsuccessful challenge to Gaitskell's leadership in November 1960.
Wilson would later be moved to the position of Shadow Foreign Secretary in 1961, before he challenged for the deputy leadership in 1962 but was defeated by George Brown.
Opposition Leader, 1963-64
Gaitskell died in January 1963, just as the Labour Party had begun to unite and appeared to have a very good chance of winning the next election, with the Macmillan Government running into trouble.
Wilson was adopted as the left-wing candidate for the leadership, defeating Brown and James Callaghan to become the Leader of the Labour Party and the Leader of the Opposition.
At the Labour Party's 1963 Annual Conference, Wilson made both his best-remembered speech, on the implications of scientific and technological change.
He argued that "the Britain that is going to be forged in the white heat of this revolution will be no place for restrictive practices or for outdated measures on either side of industry".
This speech did much to set Wilson's reputation as a technocrat not tied to the prevailing class system.
Labour's 1964 election campaign was aided by the Profumo affair, a ministerial sex scandal that had mortally wounded Harold Macmillan and hurt the Conservatives.
Wilson made capital without getting involved in the less salubrious aspects.
(Asked for a statement on the scandal, he reportedly said "No comment ... in glorious Technicolor!").
Sir Alec Douglas-Home was an aristocrat who had given up his peerage to sit in the House of Commons and become Prime Minister upon Macmillan's resignation.
To Wilson's comment that he was out of touch with ordinary people since he was the 14th Earl of Home, Home retorted, "I suppose Mr. Wilson is the fourteenth Mr. Wilson".
First period as Prime Minister (1964-70)
Labour won the 1964 general election with a narrow majority of four seats, and Wilson became Prime Minister, the youngest person to hold that office since Lord Rosebery 70 years earlier.
During 1965, by-election losses reduced the government's majority to a single seat; but in March 1966 Wilson took the gamble of calling another general election.
The gamble paid off, because this time Labour achieved a 96-seat majority over the Conservatives, who the previous year had made Edward Heath their leader.
Domestic affairs
Economic policies
In economic terms, Wilson's first three years in office were dominated by an ultimately doomed effort to stave off the devaluation of the pound.
He inherited an unusually large external deficit on the balance of trade.
This partly reflected the preceding government's expansive fiscal policy in the run-up to the 1964 election, and the incoming Wilson team tightened the fiscal stance in response.
Many British economists advocated devaluation, but Wilson resisted, reportedly in part out of concern that Labour, which had previously devalued sterling in 1949, would become tagged as "the party of devaluation".
In the latter half of 1967, an attempt was made to prevent the recession in activity from going too far in the form of a stimulus to consumer durable spending through an easing of credit, which in turn prevented a rise in unemployment.
After a costly battle, market pressures forced the government into devaluation in 1967.
Wilson was much criticised for a broadcast in which he assured listeners that the "pound in your pocket" had not lost its value.
It was widely forgotten that his next sentence had been "prices will rise".
Economic performance did show some improvement after the devaluation, as economists had predicted.
The devaluation, with accompanying austerity measures, successfully restored the balance of payments to surplus by 1969.
This unexpectedly turned into a small deficit again in 1970.
The bad figures were announced just before polling in the 1970 general election, and are often cited as one of the reasons for Labour's defeat.
embodied in the DEA and Mintech, was at the time by no means confined to the Labour Party.
Wilson built on foundations that had been laid by his Conservative predecessors, in the shape, for example, of the National Economic Development Council (known as "Neddy") and its regional counterparts (the "little Neddies").
The continued relevance of industrial nationalisation (a centrepiece of the post-War Labour government's programme) had been a key point of contention in Labour's internal struggles of the 1950s and early 1960s.
Wilson's predecessor as leader, Hugh Gaitskell, had tried in 1960 to tackle the controversy head-on, with a proposal to expunge Clause Four (the public ownership clause) from the party's constitution, but had been forced to climb down.
Wilson took a characteristically more subtle approach.
He placated the party's left wing by renationalising the steel industry; otherwise, he left Clause Four formally in the constitution but in practice on the shelf.
Across his two periods in office, Wilson presided over significant increases in the overall tax burden in the UK.
In 1974, three weeks after forming a new government, Wilson's new chancellor Denis Healey partially reversed the 1971 reduction in the top rate of tax from 90% to 75%, increasing it to 83% in his first budget, which came into law in April 1974.
This applied to incomes over £20,000 (equivalent to £ in ),, and combined with a 15% surcharge on 'unearned' income (investments and dividends) could add up to a 98% marginal rate of personal income tax.
In 1974, as many as 750,000 people were liable to pay the top-rate of income tax.
Labour's identification with high tax rates was to prove one of the issues that helped the Conservative Party under Margaret Thatcher and John Major dominate British politics during the 1980s and early-to-mid-1990s.
Wilson had entered power at a time when unemployment stood at around 400,000.
It still stood at 371,000 by early 1966 after a steady fall during 1965, but by March 1967 it stood at 631,000.
It fell again towards the end of the decade, standing at 582,000 by the time of the general election in June 1970.
Social issues
A number of liberalising social reforms were passed through parliament during Wilson's first period in government.
These dealt with the death penalty, homosexual acts, abortion, censorship and the voting age.
There were new restrictions on immigration.
Wilson personally, coming culturally from a provincial non-conformist background, showed no particular enthusiasm for much of this agenda.
Education
Education held special significance for a socialist of Wilson's generation, in view of its role in both opening up opportunities for children from working-class backgrounds and enabling Britain to seize the potential benefits of scientific advances.
Under the first Wilson government, for the first time in British history, more money was allocated to education than to defence.
Wilson continued the rapid creation of new universities, in line with the recommendations of the Robbins Report, a bipartisan policy already in train when Labour took power.
Wilson promoted the concept of an Open University, to give adults who had missed out on tertiary education a second chance through part-time study and distance learning.
His political commitment included assigning implementation responsibility to Baroness Lee, the widow of Aneurin Bevan.
By 1981, 45,000 students had received degrees through the Open University.
Labour pressed local authorities to convert grammar schools into comprehensives.
Conversion continued on a large scale during the subsequent Conservative Heath administration, although the Secretary of State, Margaret Thatcher, ended the compulsion of local governments to convert.
A major controversy that arose during Wilson's first government was the decision that the government could not fulfil its long-held promise to raise the school leaving age to 16, because of the investment required in infrastructure, such as extra classrooms and teachers.
Overall, public expenditure on education rose as a proportion of GNP from 4.8% in 1964 to 5.9% in 1968, and the number of teachers in training increased by more than a third between 1964 and 1967.
The percentage of students staying on at school after the age of sixteen increased similarly, and the student population increased by over 10% each year.
Pupil-teacher ratios were also steadily reduced.
As a result of the first Wilson government's educational policies, opportunities for working-class children were improved, while overall access to education in 1970 was broader than in 1964.
As summarised by Brian Lapping,
"The years 1964-70 were largely taken up with creating extra places in universities, polytechnics, technical colleges, colleges of education: preparing for the day when a new Act would make it the right of a student, on leaving school, to have a place in an institution of further education."
while the number of council homes built increased steadily, from 119,000 in 1964 to 133,000 in 1965 and to 142,000 in 1966.
Allowing for demolitions, 1.3 million new homes were built between 1965 and 1970, This scheme had the effect of reducing housing costs for buyers on low incomes and enabling more people to become owner occupiers.
In addition, house owners were exempted from capital gains tax.
Together with the Option Mortgage Scheme, this measure stimulated the private housing market.
Significant emphasis was also placed on town planning, with new conservation areas introduced and a new generation of new towns built, notably Milton Keynes.
The New Towns Acts of 1965 and 1968 together gave the government the authority (through its ministries) to designate any area of land as a site for a New Town.
Urban renewal
A number of subsidies were allocated to local authorities faced with acute areas of severe poverty (or other social problems).
In July 1967, the government decided to pour money into what the Plowden Committee defined as Educational Priority Areas, poverty-stricken areas where children were environmentally deprived.
A number of poor inner-city areas were subsequently granted EPA status (despite concerns that Local Education Authorities would be unable to finance Educational Priority Areas).
The widow's earning rule was also abolished, Redundancy payments were introduced in 1965 to lessen the impact of unemployment, and earnings-related benefits for maternity, unemployment, sickness, industrial injuries and widowhood were introduced in 1966, followed by the replacement of flat-rate family allowances with an earnings-related scheme in 1968.
Increases were made in pensions and other benefits during Wilson's first year in office that were the largest ever real term increases carried out up until that point.
Social security benefits were markedly increased during Wilson's first two years in office, as characterised by a budget passed in the final quarter of 1964 which raised the standard benefit rates for old age, sickness and invalidity by 18.5%.
In 1965, the government increased the national assistance rate to a higher level relative to earnings, and via annual adjustments, broadly maintained the rate at between 19% and 20% of gross industrial earnings until the start of 1970.
Agriculture
Under the First Wilson Government, subsidies for farmers were increased.
Farmers who wished to leave the land or retire became eligible for grants or annuities if their holdings were sold for approved amalgamations, and could receive those benefits whether they wished to remain in their farmhouses or not.
A Small Farmers Scheme was also extended, and from 1 December 1965, 40,000 more farmers became eligible for the maximum £1,000 grant.
New grants to agriculture also encouraged the voluntary pooling of smallholdings, and in cases where their land was purchased for non-commercial purposes, tenant-farmers could now receive double the previous "disturbance compensation."
A Hill Land Improvement Scheme, introduced by the Agriculture Act of 1967, provided 50% grants for a wide range of land improvements, along with a supplementary 10% grant on drainage works benefitting hill land.
The Agriculture Act 1967 also provided grants to promote farm amalgamation and to compensate outgoers.
Health
The proportion of GNP spent on the NHS rose from 4.2% in 1964 to about 5% in 1969.
This additional expenditure provided for an energetic revival of a policy of building health centres for GPs, extra pay for doctors who served in areas particularly short of them, a significant growth in hospital staffing, and a significant increase in a hospital building programme.
Far more money was spent each year on the NHS than under the 1951-64 Conservative governments, while much more effort was put into modernising and reorganising the health service.
In addition, National Health expenditure rose from 4.2% of GNP in 1964 to 5% in 1969 and spending on hospital construction doubled.
More money was also allocated to hospitals treating the mentally ill.
Direct government expenditure on sports more than doubled from £0.9 million in 1964 68, while 11 regional Sports Councils had been set up by 1968.
In Wales, five new health centres had been opened by 1968, whereas none had been opened from 1951 to 1964, while spending on health and welfare services in the region went up from £55.8 million in 1963 68.
From 1964 to 1968, the number of training places had doubled.
Trade unions also benefited from the passage of the Trade Dispute Act 1965.
This restored the legal immunity of trade union officials, thus ensuring that they could no longer be sued for threatening to strike.
The First Wilson Government also encouraged married women to return to teaching and improved Assistance Board Concessionary conditions for those teaching part-time, “by enabling them to qualify for pension rights and by formulating a uniform scale of payment throughout the country."
Soon after coming into office, midwives and nurses were given an 11% pay increase, In May 1966, Wilson announced 30% pay rises for doctors and dentists - a move which did not prove popular with unions, as the national pay policy at the time was for rises of between 3% and 3.5%.
Much needed improvements were made in junior hospital doctors' salaries.
From 1959 to 1970, while the earnings of manual workers increased by 75%, the salaries of registrars more than doubled while those of house officers more than trebled.
Most of these improvements, such as for nurses, came in the pay settlements of 1970.
On a limited scale, reports by the National Board for Prices and Incomes encouraged incentive payments schemes to be development in local government and elsewhere.
In February 1969, the government accepted an "above the ceiling" increase for farmworkers, a low-paid group.
Some groups of professional workers, such as nurses, teachers, and doctors, gained substantial awards.
The Transport Act 1968 established the principle of government grants for transport authorities if uneconomic passenger services were justified on social grounds.
A National Freight Corporation was also established to provide integrated rail freight and road services.
Public expenditure on roads steadily increased and stricter safety precautions were introduced, such as the breathalyser test for drunken driving, Central government expenditure on roads went up from £125 million in 1963 68, while a number of road safety regulations were introduced, covering seat belts, lorry drivers’ hours, car and lorry standards, and an experimental 70 mile per hour speed limit.
In Scotland, spending on trunk roads went up from £6.8 million in 1963 67, while in Wales, spending on Welsh roads went up from £21.2 million in 1963 67.
A new Special Development Status was also introduced in 1967 to provide even higher levels of assistance.
Funds allocated to regional assistance more than doubled, from £40 million in 1964 70, and from 1964 to 1970, the number of factories completed was 50% higher than from 1960 to 1964, which helped to reduce unemployment in development areas.
In 1970, the unemployment rate in development areas was 1.67 times the national average, compared to 2.21 times in 1964.
Although national rates of unemployment were higher in 1970 than in the early 1960s, unemployment rates in the development areas were lower and had not increased for three years.
Increases were made in some of the minor allowances in the 1969 Finance Act, notably the additional personal allowance, the age exemption and age relief and the dependent relative limit.
Apart from the age relief, further adjustments in these concessions were implemented in 1970.
Liberal reforms
A wide range of liberal measures were introduced during Wilson's time in office.
The Matrimonial Proceedings and Property Act 1970 made provision for the welfare of children whose parents were about to divorce or be judicially separated, with courts (for instance) granted wide powers to order financial provision for children in the form of maintenance payments made by either parent.
In 1967, corporal punishment in borstals and prisons was abolished.
7 regional associations were established to develop the arts, and government expenditure on cultural activities rose from £7.7 million in 1964 69.
A Criminal Injuries Compensation Board was also set up, which had paid out over £2 million to victims of criminal violence by 1968.
A year later, the Family Law Reform Act 1969 was passed, which allowed people born outside marriage to inherit on the intestacy of either parent.
In 1967, homosexuality was partially decriminalised by the passage of the Sexual Offences Act.
Record on income distribution
Despite the economic difficulties faced by the first Wilson government, it succeeded in maintaining low levels of unemployment and inflation during its time in office.
Unemployment was kept below 2.7%, and inflation for much of the 1960s remained below 4%.
Living standards generally improved, while public spending on housing, social security, transport, research, education and health went up by an average of more than 6% between 1964 and 1970.
The average household grew steadily richer, with the number of cars in the United Kingdom rising from one to every 6.4 persons to one for every five persons in 1968, representing a net increase of three million cars on the road.
The rise in the standard of living was also characterised by increased ownership of various consumer durables from 1964 to 1969, as demonstrated by television sets (from 88% to 90%), refrigerators (from 39% to 59%), and washing machines (from 54% to 64%).
According to one historian:
QTEMPLATE |In its commitment to social services and public welfare, the Wilson government put together a record unmatched by any subsequent administration, and the mid-sixties are justifiably seen as the 'golden age' of the welfare state.
The first Wilson government thus saw the distribution of income became more equal, These achievements were mainly brought about by several increases in social welfare benefits, such as supplementary benefit, pensions and family allowances, the latter of which were doubled between 1964 and 1970 (although most of the increase in family allowances did not come about until 1968).
A new system of rate rebates was introduced, which benefited one million households by the end of the 1960s.
Also, in spite of an increase in unemployment, the poor improved their share of the national income while that of the rich was slightly reduced.
Between 1964 and 1968, benefits in kind were significantly progressive, in that over the period those in the lower half of the income scale benefited more than those in the upper half.
On average those receiving state benefits benefited more in terms of increases in real disposable income than the average manual worker or salaried employee between 1964 and 1969.
From 1965 to 1968, the income of single pensioner households as a percentage of other one adult households rose from 48.9% to 52.5%.
For two pensioner households, the equivalent increase was from 46.8% to 48.2%.
Public expenditure as a percentage of GDP rose significantly under the 1964-1970 Labour government, from 34% in 1964-65 to nearly 38% of GDP by 1969-70, whilst expenditure on social services rose from 16% of national income in 1964 to 23% by 1970.
External affairs
United States
Wilson believed in a strong "Special Relationship" with the United States and wanted to highlight his dealings with the White House to strengthen his own prestige as a statesman.
President Lyndon Johnson disliked Wilson, and ignored any "special" relationship.
Vietnam was a sore point.
Johnson needed and asked for help to maintain American prestige.
Wilson offered lukewarm verbal support but no military aid.
Wilson's policy angered the left-wing of his Labour Party.
Wilson and Johnson also differed sharply on British economic weakness and its declining status as a world power.
Historian Jonathan Colman concludes it made for the most unsatisfactory "special" relationship in the 20th century.
Europe
Among the more challenging political dilemmas Wilson faced was the issue of British membership of the European Community, the forerunner of the present European Union.
An entry attempt was vetoed in 1963 by French President Charles de Gaulle.
The Labour Party in Opposition had been divided on the issue, with Hugh Gaitskell having come out in 1962 in opposition to Britain joining the Community.
After initial hesitation, Wilson's Government in May 1967 lodged the UK's second application to join the European Community.
It was vetoed by de Gaulle in November 1967.
After De Gaulle lost power, Conservative prime minister Edward Heath negotiated Britain's admission to the EC in 1973.
Wilson in opposition showed political ingenuity in devising a position that both sides of the party could agree on, opposing the terms negotiated by Heath but not membership in principle.
Labour's 1974 manifesto included a pledge to renegotiate terms for Britain's membership and then hold a referendum on whether to stay in the EC on the new terms.
This was a constitutional procedure without precedent in British history.
Following Wilson's return to power, the renegotiations with Britain's fellow EC members were carried out by Wilson himself in tandem with Foreign Secretary James Callaghan, and they toured the capital cities of Europe meeting their European counterparts.
The discussions focused primarily on Britain's net budgetary contribution to the EC.
As a small agricultural producer heavily dependent on imports, Britain suffered doubly from the dominance of:
: (i) agricultural spending in the EC budget,
: (ii) agricultural import taxes as a source of EC revenues.
During the renegotiations, other EEC members conceded, as a partial offset, the establishment of a significant European Regional Development Fund (ERDF), from which it was clearly agreed that Britain would be a major net beneficiary.
In the subsequent referendum campaign, rather than the normal British tradition of "collective responsibility", under which the government takes a policy position which all cabinet members are required to support publicly, members of the Government were free to present their views on either side of the question.
The electorate voted on 5 June 1975 to continue membership, by a substantial majority.
Asia
American military involvement in Vietnam escalated continuously from 1964 to 1968 and President Lyndon Johnson brought pressure to bear for at least a token involvement of British military units.
Wilson consistently avoided any commitment of British forces, giving as reasons British military commitments to the Malayan Emergency and British co-chairmanship of the 1954 Geneva Conference.
His government offered some rhetorical support for the US position .
On at least one occasion the British government made an unsuccessful effort to mediate in the conflict, with Wilson discussing peace proposals with Alexei Kosygin, the Chairman of the USSR Council of Ministers.
On 28 June 1966 Wilson 'dissociated' his Government from American bombing of the cities of Hanoi and Haiphong.
In his memoirs, Wilson writes of "selling LBJ a bum steer", a reference to Johnson's Texas roots, which conjured up images of cattle and cowboys in British minds.
In July 1967 Defence Secretary Denis Healey announced that Britain would abandon her mainland bases East of Suez by 1977, although airmobile forces would be retained which could if necessary be deployed in the region.
Shortly afterward, in January 1968, Wilson announced that the proposed timetable for this withdrawal was to be accelerated, and that British forces were to be withdrawn from Singapore, Malaysia, and the Persian Gulf by the end of 1971.
Wilson was known for his strong pro-Israel views.
He was a particular friend of Israeli Premier Golda Meir, though her tenure largely coincided with Wilson's 1970-1974 hiatus.
Another associate was West German Chancellor Willy Brandt; all three were members of the Socialist International.
Africa
The British "retreat from Empire" had made headway by 1964 and was to continue during Wilson's administration.
Southern Rhodesia was not granted independence, principally because Wilson refused to grant independence to the white minority government headed by Rhodesian Prime Minister Ian Smith which was not willing to extend unqualified voting rights to the native African population.
Smith's defiant response was a Unilateral Declaration of Independence, on 11 November 1965.
Wilson's immediate recourse was to the United Nations, and in 1965, the Security Council imposed sanctions, which were to last until official independence in 1979.
This involved British warships blockading the port of Beira to try to cause economic collapse in Rhodesia.
Wilson was applauded by most nations for taking a firm stand on the issue (and none extended diplomatic recognition to the Smith régime).
A number of nations did not join in with sanctions, undermining their efficiency.
Certain sections of public opinion started to question their efficacy, and to demand the toppling of the régime by force.
Wilson declined to intervene in Rhodesia with military force, believing the British population would not support such action against their "kith and kin".
The two leaders met for discussions aboard British warships, in 1966 and in 1968.
Smith subsequently attacked Wilson in his memoirs, accusing him of delaying tactics during negotiations and alleging duplicity; Wilson responded in kind, questioning Smith's good faith and suggesting that Smith had moved the goal-posts whenever a settlement appeared in sight.
The matter was still unresolved at the time of Wilson's resignation in 1976.
Defeat and return to opposition, 1970-74
By 1969, the Labour Party was suffering serious electoral reverses, and by the turn of 1970 had lost a total of 16 seats in by-elections since the previous general election.
By 1970, the economy was showing signs of improvement, and by May that year, Labour had overtaken the Conservatives in the opinion polls.
Wilson responded to this apparent recovery in his government's popularity by calling a general election, but, to the surprise of most observers, was defeated at the polls by the Conservatives under Heath.
Most opinion polls had predicted a Labour win, with a poll six days before the election showing a 12.4% Labour lead.
Writing in the aftermath of the election, The Times journalist George Clark wrote that the 1970 contest would be "remembered as the occasion when the people of the United Kingdom hurled the findings of the opinion polls back into the faces of the pollsters and at the voting booths proved them wrong - most of them badly wrong".
Heath and the Conservatives had attacked Wilson over the economy.
Towards the end of the campaign bad trade figures for May added weight to Heath's campaign and he claimed that a Labour victory would result in a further devaluation.
Wilson considered Heath's claims as "irresponsible" and "damaging to the nation".
Ultimately however the election saw Labour's vote share fall to its lowest since 1935.
Several prominent Labour figures lost their seats, notably George Brown who was still Deputy Leader of the Labour Party.
Wilson survived as leader of the Labour party in opposition.
In mid-1973, holidaying on the Isles of Scilly, he tried to board a motor boat from a dinghy and stepped into the sea.
He was unable to get into the boat and was left in the cold water, hanging on to the fenders of the motor boat.
He was close to death before he was saved by passers by.
The incident was taken up by the press and resulted in some embarrassment for Wilson; his press secretary, Joe Haines, tried to deflect some of the comment by blaming Wilson's dog Paddy for the problem.
Economic conditions during the 1970s were becoming more difficult for Britain and many other western economies as a result of the ending of the Bretton Woods Agreement and the 1973 oil shock, and the Heath government in its turn was buffeted by economic adversity and industrial unrest (notably including confrontation with the coalminers which led to the Three-Day Week) towards the end of 1973, and on 7 February 1974 (with the crisis still ongoing) Heath called a snap election for 28 February.
Second period as Prime Minister (1974-76)
Labour won more seats (though fewer votes) than the Conservative Party in the general election in February 1974, which resulted in a hung parliament.
As Heath was unable to persuade the Liberals to form a coalition, Wilson returned to 10 Downing Street on 4 March 1974 as Prime Minister of a minority Labour Government.
He gained a three-seat majority in another election later that year, on 10 October 1974.
One of the key issues addressed during his second period in office was the referendum on British membership of the EEC (see Europe, above).
Domestic affairs
The Second Wilson Government made a major commitment to the expansion of the British welfare state, with increased spending on education, health, and housing rents.
Northern Ireland
Wilson's earlier government had witnessed the outbreak of The Troubles in Northern Ireland.
In response to a request from the Government of Northern Ireland, Wilson agreed to deploy the British Army in August 1969 in an effort to restore the peace.
While out of office in late 1971, Wilson had formulated a 16-point, 15-year programme that was designed to pave the way for the unification of Ireland.
The proposal was not adopted by the then Heath government.
In May 1974, when back in office as leader of a minority government, Wilson condemned the Unionist-controlled Ulster Workers Council Strike as a "sectarian strike", which was "being done for sectarian purposes having no relation to this century but only to the seventeenth century".
He refused to pressure a reluctant British Army to face down the loyalist paramilitaries who were intimidating utility workers.
In a televised speech later, he referred to the loyalist strikers and their supporters as "spongers" who expected Britain to pay for their lifestyles.
The strike was eventually successful in breaking the power-sharing Northern Ireland executive.
On 11 September 2008, BBC Radio Four's Document programme claimed to have unearthed a secret plan - codenamed Doomsday - which proposed to cut all of the United Kingdom's constitutional ties with Northern Ireland and transform the province into an independent dominion.
Document went on to claim that the Doomsday plan was devised mainly by Wilson and was kept a closely guarded secret.
The plan then allegedly lost momentum, due in part, it was claimed, to warnings made by both the then Foreign Secretary, James Callaghan, and the then Irish Minister for Foreign Affairs Garret FitzGerald who admitted the 12,000-strong Irish army would be unable to deal with the ensuing civil war.
In 1975 Wilson secretly offered Libya's dictator Muammar Gaddafi £14 million (£500 million in 2009 values) to stop arming the IRA, but Gaddafi demanded a far greater sum of money.
This offer did not become publicly known until 2009.
Resignation
On 16 March 1976, Wilson announced his resignation as Prime Minister (taking effect on 5 April 1976).
He claimed that he had always planned on resigning at the age of 60, and that he was physically and mentally exhausted.
As early as the late 1960s, he had been telling intimates, like his doctor Sir Joseph Stone (later Lord Stone of Hendon), that he did not intend to serve more than eight or nine years as Prime Minister.
Roy Jenkins has suggested that Wilson may have been motivated partly by the distaste for politics felt by his loyal and long-suffering wife, Mary.
Queen Elizabeth II came to dine at 10 Downing Street to mark his resignation, an honour she has bestowed on only one other Prime Minister, Sir Winston Churchill.
Wilson's Prime Minister's Resignation Honours included many businessmen and celebrities, along with his political supporters.
His choice of appointments caused lasting damage to his reputation, worsened by the suggestion that the first draft of the list had been written by his political secretary Marcia Williams on lavender notepaper (it became known as the "Lavender List").
Roy Jenkins noted that Wilson's retirement "was disfigured by his, at best, eccentric resignation honours list, which gave peerages or knighthoods to some adventurous business gentlemen, several of whom were close neither to him nor to the Labour Party."
Some of those whom Wilson honoured included Lord Kagan, the inventor of Gannex (Wilson's preferred raincoat), who was eventually imprisoned for fraud, and Sir Eric Miller, who later committed suicide while under police investigation for corruption.
The Labour Party held an election to replace Wilson as leader of the Party (and therefore Prime Minister).
Six candidates stood in the first ballot; in order of votes they were: Michael Foot, James Callaghan, Roy Jenkins, Tony Benn, Denis Healey and Anthony Crosland.
In the third ballot on 5 April, Callaghan defeated Foot in a parliamentary vote of 176 to 137, thus becoming Wilson's successor as Prime Minister and leader of the Labour Party, and he continued to serve as Prime Minister until May 1979, when Labour lost the general election to the Conservatives and Margaret Thatcher became Britain's first female prime minister.
As Wilson wished to remain an MP after leaving office, he was not immediately given the peerage customarily offered to retired Prime Ministers, but instead was created a Knight of the Garter.
On leaving the House of Commons after the 1983 general election he was granted a life peerage as Baron Wilson of Rievaulx, after Rievaulx Abbey, in the north of his native Yorkshire.
Retirement and death, 1983-95
Shortly after resigning as Prime Minister, Wilson was signed by David Frost to host a series of interview/chat show programmes.
The pilot episode proved to be a flop as Wilson appeared uncomfortable with the informality of the format.
Wilson also hosted two editions of the BBC chat show Friday Night, Saturday Morning.
He famously floundered in the role, and in 2000, Channel 4 chose one of his appearances as one of the 100 Moments of TV Hell.
A lifelong Gilbert and Sullivan fan, in 1975, Wilson joined the Board of Trustees of the D'Oyly Carte Trust at the invitation of Sir Hugh Wontner, who was then the Lord Mayor of London.
At Christmas 1978, Wilson appeared on the Morecambe and Wise Christmas Special.
Eric Morecambe's habit of appearing not to recognise the guest stars was repaid by Wilson, who referred to him throughout as 'Morry-camby' (the mis-pronunciation of Morecambe's name made by Ed Sullivan when the pair appeared on his famous American television show).
Wilson appeared on the show again in 1980.
Wilson was not especially active in the House of Lords, although he did initiate a debate on unemployment in May 1984.
His last speech was in a debate on marine pilotage in 1986, when he commented as an elder brother of Trinity House.
In the same year he played himself as Prime Minister in an Anglia Television drama, Inside Story.
He continued regularly attending the House of Lords until just over a year before his death; the last sitting he attended was on 27 April 1994.
Wilson died from colon cancer and Alzheimer's disease in May 1995, aged 79.
His death came only months before that of his predecessor, Alec Douglas-Home.
His memorial service was held in Westminster Abbey on 13 July 1995.
It was attended by the Prince of Wales, former Prime Ministers Edward Heath, James Callaghan, and Margaret Thatcher, serving Prime Minister John Major, and also a future Prime Minister, Tony Blair.
Wilson was buried at St Mary's Old Church, St. Mary's, Isles of Scilly, on 6 June.
His epitaph is (Time the Commander of Things).
Political style
Wilson regarded himself as a "man of the people" and did much to promote this image, contrasting himself with the stereotypical aristocratic conservatives and other statesmen who had preceded him, as an example of social mobility.
He largely retained his Yorkshire accent.
Other features of this persona included his working man's Gannex raincoat, his pipe (the British Pipesmokers' Council voted him Pipe Smoker of the Year in 1965 and Pipeman of the Decade in 1976, though in private he smoked cigars), his love of simple cooking and fondness for popular British relish HP Sauce, and his support for his home town's football team, Huddersfield Town.
Eschewing continental holidays, he returned every summer with his family to the Isles of Scilly.
His first general election victory relied heavily on associating these down-to-earth attributes with a sense that the UK urgently needed to modernise after "thirteen years of Tory mis-rule".
These characteristics were exaggerated in Private Eye's satirical column "Mrs Wilson's Diary".
Wilson exhibited his populist touch in June 1965 when he had the Beatles honoured with the award of MBE (such awards are officially bestowed by The Queen but are nominated by the Prime Minister of the day).
The award was popular with young people and contributed to a sense that the Prime Minister was "in touch" with the younger generation.
There were some protests by conservatives and elderly members of the military who were earlier recipients of the award, but such protesters were in the minority.
Critics claimed that Wilson acted to solicit votes for the next general election (which took place less than a year later), but defenders noted that, since the minimum voting age at that time was 21, this was hardly likely to impact many of the Beatles' fans who at that time were predominantly teenagers.
It cemented Wilson's image as a modernistic leader and linked him to the burgeoning pride in the 'New Britain' typified by the Beatles.
The Beatles mentioned Wilson rather negatively, naming both him and his opponent Edward Heath in George Harrison's song "Taxman", the opener to 1966's Revolver-recorded and released after the MBEs.
In 1967, Wilson had a different interaction with a musical ensemble.
He sued the pop group the Move for libel after the band's manager Tony Secunda published a promotional postcard for the single "Flowers in the Rain", featuring a caricature depicting Wilson in bed with his female assistant, Marcia Williams.
Gossip had hinted at an improper relationship, though these rumours were never substantiated.
Wilson won the case, and all royalties from the song (composed by Move leader Roy Wood) were assigned in perpetuity to a charity of Wilson's choosing.
Wilson coined the term 'Selsdon Man' to refer to the anti-interventionist policies of the Conservative leader Edward Heath, developed at a policy retreat held at the Selsdon Park Hotel in early 1970.
This phrase, intended to evoke the 'primitive throwback' qualities of anthropological discoveries such as Piltdown Man and Swanscombe Man, was part of a British political tradition of referring to political trends by suffixing 'man'.
Other memorable phrases attributed to Wilson include "the white heat of the technological revolution", and "a week is a long time in politics", meaning that political fortunes can change extremely rapidly.
In his broadcast after the 1967 devaluation of the pound, Wilson said: "This does not mean that the pound here in Britain - in your pocket or purse - is worth any less" and the phrase "the pound in your pocket" subsequently took on a life of its own.
Reputation
Despite his successes and one-time popularity, Harold Wilson's reputation took a long time to recover from the low ebb reached immediately following his second premiership.
Some accuse him of undue deviousness, some claim he did not do enough to modernise the Labour Party's policy positions on issues such as the respective roles of the state and the market or the reform of industrial relations.
This line of argument partly blames Wilson for the civil unrest of the late 1970s (during Britain's Winter of Discontent), and for the electoral success of the Conservative party and its ensuing 18-year rule.
His supporters argue that Wilson's skillful management (on issues such as nationalisation, Europe and Vietnam) allowed an otherwise fractious party to stay politically united and govern.
This co-existence did not long survive his leadership, and the factionalism that followed contributed greatly to the Labour Party's electoral weakness during the 1980s.
The reinvention of the Labour Party would take the better part of two decades at the hands of Neil Kinnock, John Smith and electorally and most conclusively Tony Blair.
When Wilson took office in 1964, the mainstream of informed opinion strongly favoured the type of technocratic, "indicative planning" approach that Wilson endeavoured to implement.
Radical market-orientated reforms of the kind eventually adopted by Margaret Thatcher were in the mid-1960s backed only by a fringe of enthusiasts (such as the leadership of the later-influential Institute of Economic Affairs), and had almost no representation at senior levels even of the Conservative Party.
Fifteen years later, disillusionment with Britain's weak economic performance and troubled industrial relations, combined with active spadework by figures such as Sir Keith Joseph, had helped to make a radical market programme politically feasible for Thatcher (which was in turn to influence the subsequent Labour leadership, especially under Blair).
An opinion poll in September 2011 found that Wilson came in third place when respondents were asked to name the best post-war Labour Party leader.
He was beaten only by John Smith and Tony Blair.
Possible plots and conspiracy theories
Historian Christopher Andrew's official history of MI5, Defend the Realm: The Authorized History of MI5 included a chapter specifically trying to debunk the idea that there was any plot against Wilson in the 1970s.
Recent scholarship concludes that:
QTEMPLATE |The characterisation of Harold Wilson as paranoid does not take account of the political context of the time, which was characterised by a paranoid political style generally which applied to both left and right (including MI5 itself).
The suspicion of Wilson and others towards the unlawful activities of the security services and other right wing figures resulted from concrete domestic and international developments discussed in more detail below.
Andrew is correct to be sceptical, and there remains limited evidence of a ‘plot’, if a plot is defined as a tightly organised high-level conspiracy with a detailed plan.
However there is evidence of a conspiracy: a loosely connected series of unlawful manoeuvres against an elected government by a group of like-minded figures.
The Director General of the Security Service assured Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher, and she told the House of Commons on 6 May 1987:
QTEMPLATE |He has found no evidence of any truth in the allegations.
He has given me his personal assurance that the stories are false.
In particular, he has advised me that all the Security Service officers who have been interviewed have categorically denied that they were involved in, or were aware of, any activities or plans to undermine or discredit Lord Wilson and his Government when he was Prime Minister.
In 1963, Soviet defector Anatoliy Golitsyn is said to have secretly claimed that Wilson was a KGB agent.
The majority of intelligence officers did not believe that Golitsyn was credible in this and various other claims, but a significant number did (most prominently James Jesus Angleton, Deputy Director of Operations for Counter-Intelligence at the U.S. Central Intelligence Agency) and factional strife broke out between the two groups.
Former MI5 officer Peter Wright claimed in his memoirs, Spycatcher, that 30 MI5 agents then collaborated in an attempt to undermine Wilson.
He retracted that claim, saying there was only one man.
In March 1987, James Miller, a former agent, claimed that the Ulster Workers Council Strike of 1974 had been promoted by MI5 in order to help destabilise Wilson's government.
In July 1987, Labour MP Ken Livingstone used his maiden speech to raise the 1975 allegations of a former Army Press officer in Northern Ireland, Colin Wallace, who also alleged a plot to destabilise Wilson.
Chris Mullin, MP, speaking on 23 November 1988, argued that sources other than Peter Wright supported claims of a long-standing attempt by MI5 to undermine Wilson's government.
In 2009, The Defence of the Realm, the authorised history of MI5 by Christopher Andrew, held that while MI5 kept a file on Wilson from 1945, when he became an MP - because communist civil servants claimed that he had similar political sympathies - there was no bugging of his home or office, and no conspiracy against him.
In 2010 newspaper reports made detailed allegations that the Cabinet Office had required that the section on bugging of 10 Downing Street be omitted from the history for "wider public interest reasons".
In 1963 on Macmillan's orders following the Profumo affair, MI5 bugged the cabinet room, the waiting room, and the prime minister's study until the devices were removed in 1977 on Callaghan's orders.
From the records it is unclear if Wilson or Heath knew of the bugging, and no recorded conversations were retained by MI5 so possibly the bugs were never activated.
Professor Andrew had previously recorded in the preface of the history that "One significant excision as a result of these Cabinet Office requirements is, I believe, hard to justify" giving credence to these new allegations.
As a result of his concerns about the danger to British Parliamentary democracy from these activities, Wilson issued instructions that no agency should ever bug the telephones of any members of Parliament, a policy (still in place) which came to be known as the Wilson Doctrine.
Statues and other tributes
A portrait of Harold Wilson, painted by the Scottish portrait artist Cowan Dobson, hangs today at University College, Oxford.
Two statues of Harold Wilson stand in prominent places.
The first, unveiled by the then Prime Minister Tony Blair in July 1999, stands outside Huddersfield railway station in St George's Square, Huddersfield.
Costing £70,000, the statue, designed by sculptor Ian Walters, is based on photographs taken in 1964 and depicts Wilson in walking pose at the start of his first term as Prime Minister.
His widow, Mary requested that the eight-foot tall monument did not show Wilson holding his famous pipe as she feared it would make the representation a caricature.
In September 2006, Tony Blair unveiled a second bronze statue of Wilson in the latter's former constituency of Huyton, near Liverpool.
The statue was created by Liverpool sculptor, Tom Murphy, and Blair paid tribute to Wilson's legacy at the unveiling, including the Open University.
He added: "He also brought in a whole new culture, a whole new country.
He made the country very, very different".
Also in 2006, a street on a new housing development in Tividale, West Midlands, was named Wilson Drive in honour of Wilson.
Along with neighbouring new development Callaghan Drive (named after James Callaghan), it formed part of a large housing estate developed since the 1960s where all streets were named after former prime ministers or senior parliamentary figures.
Scholastic honours
; Chancellor, visitor, governor, and fellowships
;Honorary degrees
Cultural depictions
Arms
Further reading
Bibliography
There is an extensive bibliography on Harold Wilson.
He is the author of a number of books.
He is the subject of many biographies (both light and serious) and academic analyses of his career and various aspects of the policies pursued by the governments he led.
He features in many "humorous" books.
He was the Prime Minister in the so-called "Swinging London" era of the 1960s, and therefore features in many of the books about this period of history.
* Wilson, Harold.
A Personal Record: The Labour Government, 1964-1970 (1971).
* Wilson, Harold.
The Labour Government 1964-1970: A Personal Record (1979)
Biographical
* Farr, Martin.
"Wilson, (James) Harold, 1st
Baron Wilson 1916-1995."
in David Loades, ed., Reader's Guide to British History London: Routledge, 2003.
online at Credo Reference; historiography
* Jenkins, Roy.
"Wilson, (James) Harold, Baron Wilson of Rievaulx (1916-1995)," Oxford Dictionary of National Biography, Oxford University Press, 2004; http:/ view 58000 online edn, January 2009 accessed 15 October 2012; a short scholarly biography.
Domestic policy and politics
* Blick, Andrew.
"Harold Wilson, Labour and the machinery of government."
Contemporary British History 20#3 (2006): 343-362.
* Butler, David, and Anthony King.
The British General Election of 1964 (1965)
* Butler, David and M. Pinto-Duschinsky.
The British General Election of 1970 (1971).
* Butler, Butler and David Kavanagh.
The British General Election of 1974 (1974).
* Childs, David.
Britain since 1945:
A Political History (7th ed. 2012), pp.
117-61, 179-96.
https:/ Britain-since-1945-Political-History 0415519527/ excerpt
* Coopey, Richard, and Steven Fielding.
The Wilson Governments, 1964-1970 (1993).
* Davies, Andrew.
To build a new Jerusalem: the British Labour movement from the 1880s to the 1990s (1992), pp. 209-31.
* Dell, Edmund.
The Chancellors: A History of the Chancellors of the Exchequer, 1945-90 (HarperCollins, 1997) (covers economic policy under the Attlee and Wilson governments)
* Donoughue, Bernard.
Prime Minister: the conduct of policy under Harold Wilson and James Callaghan (1987), highly favourable report by insider.
* Dorey, Pete.
"‘Well, Harold Insists on Having It!’-The Political Struggle to Establish The Open University, 1965-67."
Contemporary British History 29#2 (2015): 241-272.
* Fielding, Steven, ed.
The Labour governments, 1964-70, volume 1: Labour and cultural change (Manchester UP, 2003).
* Holmes, Martin.
The labour government, 1974-79: political aims and economic reality (Macmillan, 1985).
* King, Anthony.
The British General Election of 1966 (1966).
* Lapping, Brian.
The Labour Government, 1964-70 (Penguin books, 1970).
* Morgan, Kenneth O.
The People's Peace: British History 1945-1989 (1990), pp. 239-313.
* O'Hara, Glen.
From dreams to disillusionment: economic and social planning in 1960s Britain (Palgrave Macmillan, 2007)
http:/ 1317692 271224.pdf online PhD version
* Ponting, Clive.
Breach of promise: Labour in power, 1964-1970 (Penguin, 1989).
* Pugh, Martin.
Speak for Britain!:
A New History of the Labour Party (2010), pp. 319-52.
* Rogers, Chris.
"From Social Contract to ‘Social Contrick’: The Depoliticisation of Economic Policy-Making under Harold Wilson, 1974-751."
British Journal of Politics & International Relations 11#4 (2009): 634-651.
http:/ 4276 WRAP_Rogers_100211-from_social_contract_to_social_contrick_bjpir_14-05-2009.pdf online
* Sked, Alan and Chris Cook.
Post-War Britain: A Political History (4th ed. 1993), pp.
200-53, 292-311.
Foreign policy
* Colman, Jonathan.
A 'Special Relationship'?
Harold Wilson, Lyndon B. Johnson, and Anglo-American Relations 'At the Summit', 1964-68 (2004)
https:/ library a-special-relationship-harold-wilson-lyndon-b online
* Daddow, Oliver J. Harold Wilson and European integration: Britain's second application to join the EEC (Psychology Press, 2003).
* Dockrill, Saki.
"Forging the Anglo-American global defence partnership: Harold Wilson, Lyndon Johnson and the Washington summit, December 1964."
Journal of Strategic Studies 23#4 (2000): 107-129.
* Ellis, Sylvia A. "Lyndon Johnson, Harold Wilson and the Vietnam War: A Not So Special Relationship?."
in Jonathan Hollowell, ed., Twentieth-Century Anglo-American Relations.
(Palgrave Macmillan UK, 2001), pp.
* Haeussler, Mathias.
"A Pyrrhic Victory: Harold Wilson, Helmut Schmidt, and the British Renegotiation of EC Membership, 1974-5."
International History Review 37#4 (2015): 768-789.
* Hughes, Geraint.
Harold Wilson's Cold War: The Labour Government and East-West Politics, 1964-1970 (2009)
* Parr, Helen.
"A question of leadership: July 1966 and Harold Wilson's European decision."
Contemporary British History 19.4 (2005): 437-458.
* Parr, Helen.
Britain's Policy Towards the European Community: Harold Wilson and Britain's World Role, 1964-1967 (Routledge, 2005).
* Vickers, Rhiannon.
"Harold Wilson, the British Labour Party, and the War in Vietnam."
Journal of Cold War Studies 10.2 (2008): 41-70.
http:/ doi 10.1162/jcws.2008.10.2.41 online
* Young, John W. ed.
The Labour governments 1964-1970 volume 2: International policy (2008).
Historiography
* Crines, Andrew S., ed.
Harold Wilson: The Unprincipled Prime Minister?:
A Reappraisal of Harold Wilson (2016).
evaluations by scholars; https:/ Harold-Wilson-Unprincipled-Prime-Minister 1785900315/ excerpt
* O'Hara, Glen; Parr, Helen.
"The Fall and Rise of a Reputation" Contemporary British History (2006) 20#3, pp.
* Pimlott, Ben. Frustrate Their Knavish Tricks: Writings on Biography, History and Politics (1994), pp. 31-36.
