Little Women is a novel by American author Louisa May Alcott (1832-1888), which was originally published in two volumes in 1868 and 1869.
Alcott wrote the books over several months at the request of her publisher.
Following the lives of the four March sisters-Meg, Jo, Beth and Amy-the novel details their passage from childhood to womanhood and is loosely based on the author and her three sisters.
Little Women was an immediate commercial and critical success with readers demanding to know more about the characters.
Alcott quickly completed a second volume (entitled Good Wives in the United Kingdom, although this name originated from the publisher and not from Alcott).
It was also successful.
The two volumes were issued in 1880 as a single novel entitled Little Women.
Alcott wrote two sequels to her popular work, both of which also featured the March sisters: Little Men (1871) and Jo's Boys (1886).
Although Little Women was a novel for girls, it differed notably from contemporary writings for children, especially girls.
The novel addressed three major themes: "domesticity, work, and true love, all of them interdependent and each necessary to the achievement of its heroine's individual identity."
Little Women "has been read as a romance or as a quest, or both.
It has been read as a family drama that validates virtue over wealth", but also "as a means of escaping that life by women who knew its gender constraints only too well".
According to Sarah Elbert, Alcott created a new form of literature, one that took elements from Romantic children's fiction and combined it with others from sentimental novels, resulting in a totally new format.
Elbert argued that within Little Women can be found the first vision of the "All-American girl" and that her various aspects are embodied in the differing March sisters.
At first she resisted, preferring to publish a collection of her short stories.
Niles pressed her to write the girls' book first, and he was aided by her father Amos Bronson Alcott, who also urged her to do so.
Alcott set her novel in an imaginary Orchard House modeled on her own residence of the same name, where she wrote the novel.
"I plod away," she wrote in her diary, "although I don't enjoy this sort of things."
Explanation of the novel's title
According to literary critic Sarah Elbert, when using the term "little women", Alcott was drawing on its Dickensian meaning; it represented the period in a young woman's life where childhood and elder childhood were "overlapping" with young womanhood.
Each of the March sister heroines had a harrowing experience that alerted her and the reader that "childhood innocence" was of the past, and that "the inescapable woman problem" was all that remained.
Plot summary
Part one
Four teenaged sisters and their mother, Marmee, live in a new neighborhood (loosely based on Concord) in Massachusetts in genteel poverty.
Having lost all his money, their father is acting as a pastor, miles from home, involved in the American Civil War.
The women face their first Christmas without him.
Meg and Jo March, the elder two, have to work in order to support the family: Meg teaches a nearby family of four children; Jo assists her aged great-aunt March, a wealthy widow living in a mansion, Plumfield.
Beth, too timid for school, is content to stay at home and help with housework; Amy is still at school.
Meg is beautiful and traditional, Jo is a tomboy who writes; Beth is a peacemaker and a pianist; Amy is an artist who longs for elegance and fine society.
Jo is impulsive and quick to anger.
One of her challenges is trying to control her anger, a challenge that her mother experiences.
She advises Jo to speak with forethought before leaving to travel to Washington, where her husband has pneumonia.
Their neighbour, Mr. Laurence, who is charmed by Beth, gives her a piano.
Beth contracts scarlet fever after spending time with a poor family where three children die.
Jo tends Beth in her illness.
Beth recovers, but never fully.
As a precaution, Amy is sent to live with Aunt March, replacing Jo, while Beth was ill and still infectious.
Jo has success earning money with her writing.
Meg spends two weeks with friends, where there are parties for the girls to dance with boys and improve social skills.
Theodore "Laurie" Laurence, Mr. Laurence's grandson, is invited to one of the dances, as her friends incorrectly think Meg is in love with him.
Meg is more interested in John Brooke, Laurie's young tutor.
Brooke goes to Washington to help Mr. March.
While with the March parents, Brooke confesses his love for Meg.
They are pleased but consider Meg too young to be married.
Brooke agrees to wait but enlists and serves a year or so in the war.
After he is wounded, he returns to find work so he can buy a house ready for when he marries Meg.
Laurie goes off to college.
On Christmas Day, a year after the book's opening, the girls' father returns from the war.
Part two
Three years later, Meg and John marry and learn how to live together.
When they have twins, Meg is a devoted mother but John begins to feel left out.
Laurie graduates from college, having put in effort to do well in his last year with Jo's prompting.
Amy goes on a European tour with her aunt and Beth’s health is weak and her spirits are down.
When trying to uncover the reason for Beth’s sadness, Jo realizes that Laurie has fallen in love.
At first she believes it’s with Beth but soon senses it’s with herself.
Jo confides in Marmee, telling her that she loves Laurie but she loves him like a brother and that she could not love him the romantic way.
Jo decides she wants a bit of adventure and wants to put distance between herself and Laurie, hoping he forgets his feelings.
She spends six months with a friend of her mother in New York City, serving as governess for her two children.
The family runs a boarding house.
She takes German lessons with Professor Bhaer, who lives in the house.
He has come to America from Berlin to care for the orphaned sons of his sister.
For extra money, Jo writes stories without a moral, which disappoints Bhaer.
He persuades her to give up poorly-written sensational stories as her time in New York comes to an end.
When she returns, Laurie proposes marriage and she declines.
Laurie travels to Europe with his grandfather to escape his heartbreak.
At home, Beth's health has seriously deteriorated.
Jo devotes her time to the care of her dying sister.
Laurie encounters Amy in Europe.
With the news of Beth's death, they meet for consolation and their romance grows.
Amy's aunt will not allow Amy to return with just Laurie and his grandfather, so they marry before returning home from Europe.
Professor Bhaer goes to the Marches' and stays for two weeks.
On his last day, he proposes to Jo.
Jo accepts.
When Aunt March dies, she leaves Plumfield to Jo.
She and Bhaer turn the house into a school for boys.
They have two sons of their own, and Amy and Laurie have a daughter.
At the apple-picking time, Marmee celebrates her 60th birthday at Plumfield, with her husband, her three surviving daughters, their husbands, and her five grandchildren.
Characters
Margaret "Meg" March
Meg, the eldest sister, is 16 when the story starts.
She is referred to as beauty and manages the household when her mother is absent.
According to Alcott's description of the character, she is brown-haired and blue-eyed and has particularly beautiful hands.
Meg fulfills expectations for women of the time; from the start, she is already a nearly perfect "little woman" in the eyes of the world.
Meg is based in the domestic household; she does not have significant employment or activities outside it.
Before her marriage to John Brooke, while still living at home, she often lectures her younger sisters to ensure they grow to embody the title of "little women".
Meg is employed as a governess for the Kings, a wealthy local family.
Because of their father's family's social standing, Meg makes her debut into high society, but is lectured by her friend and neighbor, Theodore "Laurie" Laurence, for behaving like a snob.
Meg marries John Brooke, the tutor of Laurie.
They have twins, Margaret "Daisy" Brooke and John "Demi" Brooke.
The sequel, Little Men, mentions a baby daughter, Josephine "Josy" Brooke, who is 14 at the beginning of the final book.
Critics have portrayed Meg as lacking in independence, reliant entirely on her husband, and "isolated in her little cottage with two small children".
Josephine "Jo" March
The principal character, Jo, 15 years old at the beginning of the book, is a strong and willful young woman, struggling to subdue her fiery temper and stubborn personality.
The second-oldest of four sisters, Josephine March is the boyish one; her father has referred to her as his "son Jo", and her best friend and neighbor, Theodore "Laurie" Laurence, sometimes calls her "my dear fellow", and she alone calls him Teddy.
Jo has a "hot" temper that often leads her into trouble.
With the help of her own misguided sense of humor, her sister Beth, and her mother, she works on controlling it.
It has been said that a lot of Louisa May Alcott shows through in these characteristics of Jo.
Jo loves literature, both reading, and writing.
She composes plays for her sisters to perform and writes short stories.
She initially rejects the idea of marriage and romance, feeling that it would break up her family and separate her from the sisters whom she adores.
While pursuing a literary career in New York City, she meets Friedrich Bhaer, a German professor.
On her return home, Jo rejects Laurie's marriage proposal, confirming her independence.
After Beth dies, Professor Bhaer woos Jo at her home, when "They decide to share life's burdens just as they shared the load of bundles on their shopping expedition".
Infused with quiet wisdom, she is the peacemaker of the family and gently scolds her sisters when they argue.
As her sisters grow up, they begin to leave home, but Beth has no desire to leave her house or family.
She is especially close to Jo: when Beth develops scarlet fever after visiting the Hummels, Jo does most of the nursing and rarely leaves her side.
Beth recovers from the acute disease but her health is permanently weakened.
As she grows, Beth begins to realize that her time with her loved ones is coming to an end.
Finally, the family accepts that Beth will not live much longer.
They make a special room for her, filled with all the things she loves best: her kittens, piano, Father's books, Amy's sketches, and her beloved dolls.
She is never idle; she knits and sews things for the children who pass by on their way to and from school.
But eventually she puts down her sewing needle, saying it grew "heavy."
Beth's final sickness has a strong effect on her sisters, especially Jo, who resolves to live her life with more consideration and care for everyone.
The main loss during Little Women is the death of beloved Beth.
Her "self-sacrifice" is ultimately the greatest in the novel.
She gives up her life knowing that it has had only private, domestic meaning."
Often coddled because she is the youngest, Amy can behave in a vain and self-centered way.
She has the middle name Curtis, and is the only March sister to use her full name rather than a diminutive.
She is chosen by her aunt and uncle to travel in Europe with them, where she grows and makes a decision about the level of her artistic talent and how to direct her adult life.
She encounters "Laurie" Laurence and his grandfather during the extended visit.
Amy is the least inclined of the sisters to sacrifice and self-denial.
She behaves well in good society, at ease with herself.
Critic Martha Saxton observes the author was never fully at ease with Amy's moral development and her success in life seemed relatively accidental.
Additional characters
*Margaret "Marmee" March - The girls' mother and head of household while her husband is away.
She engages in charitable works and lovingly guides her girls' morals and their characters.
She once confesses to Jo that her temper is as volatile as Jo's, but that she has learned to control it.
Somewhat modeled after the author's own mother, she is the focus around which the girls' lives unfold as they grow.
*Robin and Theodore Bhaer ("Rob" and "Teddy") - Jo's and Fritz's sons, introduced in the final pages of the novel, named after the March girls' father and Laurie.
*John Brooke - During his employment as a tutor to Laurie, he falls in love with Meg.
He accompanies Mrs. March to Washington D.C. when her husband is ill with pneumonia.
When Laurie leaves for college, Brooke continues his employment with Mr. Laurence as a bookkeeper.
When Aunt March overhears Meg rejecting John's declaration of love, she threatens Meg with disinheritance because she suspects that Brooke is only interested in Meg's future prospects.
Eventually, Meg admits her feelings to Brooke, they defy Aunt March (who ends up accepting the marriage), and they are engaged.
Brooke serves in the Union Army for a year and is sent home as an invalid when he is wounded.
Brooke marries Meg a few years later when the war has ended and she has turned twenty.
Brooke was modeled after John Bridge Pratt, her sister Anna's husband.
*Margaret and John Laurence Brooke ("Daisy" and "Demijohn/Demi")- Meg's twin son and daughter.
Daisy is named after both Meg and Marmee, while Demi is named for John and the Laurence family.
*Josephine Brooke ("Josy" or "Josie") - Meg's youngest child, named after Jo.
She develops a passion for acting as she grows up.
*Uncle and Aunt Carrol - Sister and brother-in-law of Mr. March.
They take Amy to Europe with them, where Uncle Carrol frequently tries to be like an English gentleman.
*Florence "Flo" Carrol - Amy's cousin, daughter of Aunt and Uncle Carrol, and companion in Europe.
*May and Mrs. Chester - A well-to-do family with whom the Marches are acquainted.
May Chester is a girl about Amy's age, who is rich and jealous of Amy's popularity and talent.
*Miss Crocker - An old and poor spinster who likes to gossip and who has few friends.
*Mr. Dashwood - Publisher and editor of the Weekly Volcano.
*Mr. Davis - The schoolteacher at Amy's school.
He punishes Amy for bringing pickled limes to school by striking her palm and making her stand on a platform in front of the class.
She is withdrawn from the school by her mother.
*Estelle "Esther" Valnor - A French woman employed as a servant for Aunt March who befriends Amy.
*The Gardiners - Wealthy friends of Meg's.
Sallie Gardiner is a well-to-do friend of Meg's who later marries Ned Moffat.
*The Hummels - A poor German family consisting of a widowed mother and six children.
Marmee and the girls help them by bringing food, firewood, blankets, and other comforts.
They help with minor repairs to their small dwelling.
Three of the children die of scarlet fever and Beth contracts the disease while caring for them.
The eldest daughter, Lottchen "Lotty" Hummel, later works as a matron at Jo's school at Plumfield
*The Kings - A wealthy family with four children for whom Meg works as a governess.
*The Kirkes - Mrs. Kirke is a friend of Mrs. March's who runs a boarding house in New York.
She employs Jo as governess to her two daughters, Kitty and Minnie.
*The Lambs - A well-off family with whom the Marches are acquainted.
*James Laurence - Laurie's grandfather and a wealthy neighbor of the Marches.
Lonely in his mansion, and often at odds with his high-spirited grandson, he finds comfort in becoming a benefactor to the Marches.
He protects the March sisters while their parents are away.
He was a friend to Mrs. March's father, and admires their charitable works.
He develops a special, tender friendship with Beth, who reminds him of his late granddaughter.
He gives Beth the girl's piano.
*Theodore "Laurie" Laurence - A rich young man who lives opposite the Marches, older than Jo but younger than Meg.
Laurie is the "boy next door" to the March family and has an overprotective paternal grandfather, Mr. Laurence.
After eloping with an Italian pianist, Laurie's father was disowned by his parents.
Both Laurie's mother and father died young, so as a boy Laurie was taken in by his grandfather.
Preparing to enter Harvard, Laurie is being tutored by John Brooke.
He is described as attractive and charming, with black eyes, brown skin, and curly black hair.
He later falls in love with Amy and they marry; they have one child, a little girl named after Beth: Elizabeth "Bess" Laurence.
Sometimes Jo calls Laurie "Teddy".
Though Alcott did not make Laurie as multidimensional as the female characters, she partly based him on Ladislas Wisniewski, a young Polish émigré she had befriended, and Alf Whitman, a friend from Lawrence, Kansas.
*Elizabeth Laurence ("Bess") -
The only daughter of Laurie and Amy, named for Beth.
Like her mother, she develops a love for art as she grows up.
*Aunt Josephine March - Mr. March's aunt, a rich widow.
Somewhat temperamental and prone to being judgmental, she disapproves of the family's poverty, their charitable work, and their general disregard for the more superficial aspects of society's ways.
Her vociferous disapproval of Meg's impending engagement to the impoverished Mr. Brooke becomes the proverbial "last straw" that actually causes Meg to accept his proposal.
She appears to be strict and cold, but deep down, she's really quite soft-hearted.
She dies near the end of the first book, and Jo and Friedrich turn her estate into a school for boys.
*Annie Moffat - A fashionable and wealthy friend of Meg and Sallie Gardiner.
*Ned Moffat - Annie Moffat's brother, who marries Sallie Gardiner.
*Hannah Mullet - The March family maid and cook, their only servant.
She is of Irish descent and very dear to the Family.
She is treated more like a member of the family than a servant.
*Miss Norton - A friendly, well-to-do tenant living in Mrs. Kirke's boarding house.
She occasionally invites Jo to accompany her to lectures and concerts.
*The Scotts - Friends of Meg and John Brooke.
John knows Mr. Scott from work.
*Tina - The young daughter of an employee of Mrs. Kirke.
Tina loves Mr. Bhaer and treats him like a father.
*The Vaughans - English friends of Laurie's who come to visit him.
Kate is the oldest of the Vaughn siblings, and prim and proper Grace is the youngest.
The middle siblings, Fred and Frank, are twins; Frank is the younger twin.
*Fred Vaughan - A Harvard friend of Laurie's who, in Europe, courts Amy. Rivalry with the much richer Fred for Amy's love inspires the dissipated Laurie to pull himself together and become more worthy of her.
Amy will eventually reject Fred, knowing she does not love him and deciding not to marry out of ambition.
*Frank Vaughan - Fred's twin brother, mentioned a few times in the novel.
When Fred and Amy are both travelling in Europe, Fred leaves because he heard his twin is ill.
Inspiration
For her books, Alcott was often inspired by familiar elements.
The characters in Little Women are recognizably drawn from family members and friends.
However, Alcott's portrayal, even if inspired by her family, is an idealized one.
For instance, Mr. March is portrayed as a hero of the American Civil War, a gainfully employed chaplain, and, presumably, a source of inspiration to the women of the family.
He is absent for most of the novel.
In addition to her own childhood and that of her sisters, scholars who have examined the diaries of Louisa Alcott's mother, Abigail Alcott, have surmised that Little Women was also heavily inspired by Abigail Alcott's own early life.
The first printing of 2,000 copies sold out quickly, and the company had trouble keeping up with demand for additional printings.
They announced: "The great literary hit of the season is undoubtedly Miss Alcott's Little Women, the orders for which continue to flow in upon us to such an extent as to make it impossible to answer them with promptness."
Alcott delivered the manuscript for the second volume on New Year's Day 1869, just three months after publication of part one.
There are 23 chapters in Part 1 and 47 chapters in the complete book.
Each chapter is numbered and has a title as well.
Part 2, opens with "In order that we may start afresh and go to Meg's wedding with free minds, it will be well to begin with a little gossip about the Marches."
This split of the two volumes also shows at Goodreads, which refers to the books as the Little Women series, including Little Women, Good Wives, Little Men and Jo's Boys.
Reception
G. K. Chesterton notes that in Little Women, Alcott "anticipated realism by twenty or thirty years," and that Fritz's proposal to Jo, and her acceptance, "is one of the really human things in human literature."
Gregory S. Jackson said that Alcott's use of realism belongs to the American Protestant pedagogical tradition, which includes a range of religious literary traditions with which Alcott was familiar.
He has copies in his book of nineteenth-century images of devotional children's guides which provide background for the game of "playing pilgrim" that Alcott uses in her plot of Book One.
When Little Women was published, it was well received.
According to 21st-century critic Barbara Sicherman, during the 19th century, there was a "scarcity of models for nontraditional womanhood", which led more women to look toward "literature for self-authorization.
This is especially true during adolescence".
Alcott did not have Jo accept Laurie's hand in marriage; rather, when she arranged for Jo to marry, she portrayed an unconventional man as her husband.
Alcott used Friedrich to "subvert adolescent romantic ideals" because he was much older and seemingly unsuited for Jo.
Based on a 2007 online poll, the U.S. National Education Association named it one of "Teachers' Top 100 Books for Children".
In 2012 it was ranked number 48 among all-time children's novels in a survey published by School Library Journal, a monthly with primarily U.S. audience.
Influence
Little Women has been one of the most widely read novels, noted by Stern from a 1927 report in the New York Times and cited in Little Women and the Feminist Imagination: Criticism, Controversy, Personal Essays.
Ruth MacDonald argued that "Louisa May Alcott stands as one of the great American practitioners of the girls' novel and the family story."
In the 1860s, gendered separation of children's fiction was a newer division in literature.
This division signaled a beginning of polarization of gender roles as social constructs "as class stratification increased".
Girls related to the March sisters in Little Women, along with following the lead of their heroines, by assimilating aspects of the story into their own lives., Jo & Louisa features a rousing confrontation between the unhappy character, Jo March, who wants rewrites from her author.
Marian de Forest adapted Little Women for the Broadway stage in 1912.
The 1919 London production made a star of Katharine Cornell, who played the role of Jo.
A one-act stage version, written by Gerald P. Murphy in 2009, has been produced in the U.S., U.K., Italy, Australia, Ireland, and Singapore.
Myriad Theatre & Film adapted the novel as a full-length play which was staged in London and Essex in 2011.
Marisha Chamberlain and June Lowery have both adapted the novel as a full-length play; the latter play was staged in Luxembourg in 2014.
A new adaptation by award-winning playwright Kate Hamill had it's world premiere in 2018, followed by a New York premiere in 2019 at Primary Stages directed by Sarna Lapine.
Film
Besides silent versions in 1917 and 1918, Little Women was filmed by George Cukor in 1933, Mervyn LeRoy in 1949, David Lowell Rich in 1978, and Gillian Armstrong in 1994.
In January 2017, another film adaptation was announced with a casting call.
The film was produced by Maclain Nelson, Kristi Shimek, Stephen Shimek, and David Wulf.
It stars Lea Thompson as Marmee and is directed by Clare Niederpruem in her directorial debut.
It was released in September 2018 to mark the 150th anniversary of the novel.
Little Women has been made into a serial four times by the anthology in 2018.
In the 1980s, two anime series were made in Japan, Little Women in 1981 and Tales of Little Women in 1987.
Both anime series were dubbed in English and shown on American television.
In 2012, Lifetime aired The March Sisters at Christmas (directed by John Simpson), a contemporary television film focusing on the title characters' efforts to save their family home from being sold.
It is usually rebroadcast on the channel each holiday season.
A 2018 adaption is that of Balaji Telefilms in India.
The web series is called Haq Se.
Set in Kashmir, the series is a modern-day Indian adaptation of the book.
Musicals and opera
The novel was adapted to a musical of the same name and debuted on Broadway at the Virginia Theatre on January 23, 2005 and closed on May 22, 2005 after 137 performances.
A production was also staged in Sydney, Australia in 2008.
The Houston Grand Opera commissioned and performed Little Women in 1998, and NPR broadcast it on radio in the US.
The opera was shown on television in 2001 and has been staged by other opera companies since the premiere.
Audio drama
A dramatized version, produced by Focus on the Family Radio Theatre, was released on September 4, 2012.
* Hillside (later renamed The Wayside), the Alcott family home (1845-1848) and real-life setting for some of the book's scenes
* Orchard House, the Alcott family home (1858-1877) and site where the book was written; adjacent to The Wayside
