The Gila monster (Heloderma suspectum, ) is a species of venomous lizard native to the southwestern United States and northwestern Mexican state of Sonora.
A heavy, typically slow-moving lizard, up to long, the Gila monster is the only venomous lizard native to the United States and one of only two known species of venomous lizards in North America, the other being its close relative, the Mexican beaded lizard (H. horridum).
Although the Gila monster is venomous, its sluggish nature means it represents little threat to humans.
However, it has acquired a fearsome reputation, and is sometimes killed despite being protected by state law in Arizona.
In 2019, the state of Utah made the Gila monster its official state reptile, despite the very small range of the Gila monster in the state.
History
Gila monster is the largest extant lizard native to North America north of the Mexican border (non-natives like green iguanas are larger).
Its snout-to-vent length is .
The tail is about 20% of the body size and the largest specimens may reach in total length.
Body mass is typically in the range of , with 11 males having been found to average .
Reportedly the very largest specimens can weigh as much as .
The Gila monster has one close living relative, the beaded lizard (H. horridum), as well as many extinct relatives in the Helodermatidae, the evolutionary history of which may be traced back to the Cretaceous period.
The genus Heloderma has existed since the Miocene, when H. texana lived, and fragments of osteoderms from the Gila monster have been found in late Pleistocene (10,000-8,000 years ago) deposits near Las Vegas, Nevada.
Because the helodermatids have remained relatively unchanged morphologically, they are occasionally regarded as living fossils.
The name "Gila" refers to the Gila River Basin in the U.S. states of New Mexico and Arizona, where the Gila monster was once plentiful.
Heloderma means "studded skin", from the Ancient Greek words helos (ἧλος), "the head of a nail or stud", and derma (δέρμα), "skin".
Suspectum comes from the describer, paleontologist Edward Drinker Cope, who suspected the lizard might be venomous due to the grooves in the teeth.
Distribution and habitat
The Gila monster is found in the Southwestern United States and Mexico, a range including Sonora, Arizona, parts of California, Nevada, Utah, and New Mexico (potentially including Baja California).
They inhabit scrubland, succulent desert, and oak woodland, seeking shelter in burrows, thickets, and under rocks in locations with ready access to moisture.
In fact, Gila monsters seem to like water and can be observed immersing themselves in puddles of water after a summer rain.
They avoid living in open areas such as flats and farmland.
Ecology
Gila monsters spend 90% of their time underground in burrows or rocky shelters.
They are active in the morning during the dry season (spring and early summer); later in the summer, they may be active on warm nights or after a thunderstorm.
They maintain a surface body temperature of about .
Gila monsters are slow in sprinting ability, but they have relatively high endurance and maximal aerobic capacity (VO2 max) for a lizard.
They are preyed upon by coyotes and raptors.
Diet
The Gila monster eats small birds, small mammals, frogs, smaller lizards, insects, and carrion.
The Gila monster feeds primarily on bird and reptile eggs, and eats infrequently (only five to ten times a year in the wild), but when it does feed, it may eat up to one-third of its body mass.
It uses its extremely acute sense of smell to locate prey, especially eggs.
Its sense of smell is so keen, it can locate and dig up chicken eggs buried deep and accurately follow a trail made by a rolling egg.
Venom
QTEMPLATE box|align
right|width
33%|quote = I have never been called to attend a case of Gila monster bite, and I don't want to be.
I think a man who is fool enough to get bitten by a Gila monster ought to die.
The creature is so sluggish and slow of movement that the victim of its bite is compelled to help largely in order to get bitten.|Dr.
Ward, Arizona Graphic, September 23, 1899
Pioneer beliefs
In the Old West, the pioneers believed a number of myths about the Gila monster, including that the lizard had foul or toxic breath and that its bite was fatal.
The Tombstone Epitaph of Tombstone, Arizona, wrote about a Gila monster that a local person caught on May 14, 1881:
QTEMPLATE |text=This is a monster, and no baby at that, it being probably the largest specimen ever captured in Arizona.
It is 27 inches long and weighs 35 lb.
It was caught by H. C. Hiatt on the road between Tombstone and Grand Central Mill and was purchased by Messrs. Ed Baker and Charles Eastman, who now have it on exhibition at Kelley's Wine House, next door above Grand Hotel, Allen Street.
Eastern people who have never seen one of these monsters should not fail to inspect his Aztecship, for they might accidentally stumble upon one some fine day and get badly frightened, except they know what it is.
Delivery
The Gila monster produces venom in modified salivary glands in its lower jaw, unlike snakes, whose venom is produced in the upper jaw.
More than a dozen peptides and other substances have been isolated from the Gila monster's venom, including hyaluronidase, serotonin, phospholipase A2, and several kallikrein-like glycoproteins responsible for the pain and edema caused by a bite.
Four potentially lethal toxins have been isolated from the Gila monster's venom, including horridum venom, which causes hemorrhage in internal organs and exophthalmos (bulging of the eyes), and helothermine, which causes lethargy, partial paralysis of the limbs, and hypothermia in rats.
Most are similar in form to vasoactive intestinal peptide (VIP), which relaxes smooth muscle and regulates water and electrolyte secretion between the small and large intestines.
These bioactive peptides are able to bind to VIP receptors in many different human tissues.
One of these, helodermin, has been shown to inhibit the growth of lung cancer.
The constituents of the lizard's venom that have received the most attention from researchers are the bioactive peptides, including helodermin, helospectin, exendin-3, and exendin-4.
Exendin-4 has formed the basis of a class of medications for the treatment of type 2 diabetes, known as Glucagon-like peptide-1 agonists.
Exenatide was the first product in the class to reach the market and was launched in 2005.
Drug research
In 2005, the US Food and Drug Administration approved the drug exenatide (marketed as Byetta) for the management of type 2 diabetes.
It is a synthetic version of a protein, exendin-4, derived from the Gila monster's saliva.
In a three-year study with people with type 2 diabetes, exenatide led to healthy sustained glucose levels and progressive weight loss.
The effectiveness is because the lizard protein is about 50% identical to glucagon-like peptide-1 analog (GLP-1), a hormone released from the human digestive tract that helps to regulate insulin and glucagon.
The lizard protein remains effective much longer than the human hormone, helping diabetics keep their blood sugar levels under control.
Exenatide slows the emptying of the stomach and causes a decrease in appetite, contributing to weight loss.
The saliva of the Gila monster contains many chemicals which can be deadly.
One of these has been shown to affect memory.
Several companies have been researching the abilities of this chemical to help memory loss due to various diseases such as Alzheimer's disease, schizophrenia, and ADHD.
Gilatide, derived from exendin-4, has been shown to dramatically heighten memory in a study with mice.
Gilatide is likely to be researched further to provide help to Alzheimer's patients.
Life history
The Gila monster emerges from dormancy in January or February and mates in May and June.
The hatchlings are about long and can bite and inject venom upon hatching.
The juveniles typically have larger bands of pink scales than adults, although the banded Gila monster (H. s. cinctum) has a tendency to retain the band pattern.
H. suspectum sexually matures at three to five years old.
After egg-laying, adult Gila monsters gradually spend less time on the surface to avoid the hottest part of the summer (although they may be active in the evening), eventually starting their hibernation around November.
Although the Gila monster has a low metabolism and one of the lowest lizard sprint speeds, it has one of the highest aerobic scope values (the increase in oxygen consumption from rest to maximum metabolic exertion) among lizards, allowing them to engage in intense aerobic activity for a sustained period of time.
Males have been observed to have higher aerobic scopes than females, presumably because of sexual selection for a trait advantageous in prolonged combat.
Gila monsters are listed as Near Threatened by the IUCN.
Relationship with humans
Though the Gila monster is venomous, its laggard movement means it poses little threat to humans.
However, it has a fearsome reputation and is often killed by humans.
Among Native American tribes, the Gila monster had a mixed standing.
The Apache believed its breath could kill a man, and the Tohono O'Odham and the Pima believed it possessed a spiritual power that could cause sickness.
In contrast, the Seri and the Yaqui believed the Gila monster's hide had healing properties.
It played a minor role in the motion picture The Treasure of the Sierra Madre.
In Brock Brower's 1971 novel The Late Great Creature fictional horror movie star Simon Moro is presented as famous for playing the reptilian werewolf-like Gila Man.
Myths about the animal include that the animal's breath is toxic enough to kill humans, that it can spit venom like a spitting cobra and that it can leap several feet in the air to attack.
In 2017, the Vegas Golden Knights selected a Gila monster, named Chance, as the official mascot.
Gallery
File:Heloderma suspectum 'suspectum'.jpg
File:Heloderma suspectum 'suspectum' 2.jpg
File:Heloderma suspectum 'suspectum' 3.jpg
File:AZ Gila Monster 01.jpg|Arizona Gila monster.
File:AZ Gila Monster 02.jpg|Arizona Gila monster.
File:Gila monster - Animaux venimeux et venins, 1922 (18172980816).jpg|Illustration in Animaux venimeux et venins, 1922
Further reading
ijs7hhpw1tnay39xhbojbzqpv3vkvtc
