Fandom, also known as Wikia (especially before October 2016) and Wikicities before 2006, is a wiki hosting service and domain operated by Wikia, Inc., a for-profit Delaware company founded in October 2004 by Jimmy Wales and Angela Beesley and headed by Perkins Miller as CEO.
Fandom uses the open-source wiki software MediaWiki, the same used by Wikipedia.
Wikia, Inc. derives its income from advertising and sold content, publishing most user-provided text under copyleft licenses.
The company also runs the associated Fandom editorial project, offering pop-culture and gaming news.
Most wikis are hosted under the domain , but some, especially those whose focus is a subject other than media franchises, are hosted under .
History
2004-09: Early days and growth
Wikia was launched on October 18, 2004 under the name "Wikicities" (which invited comparisons to GeoCities), by Jimmy Wales and Angela Beesley Starling-respectively Chairman Emeritus and Advisory Board member of the Wikimedia Foundation.
The name of the project was changed to "Wikia" on March 27, 2006.
and Wikia staff call this description inaccurate.
In 2006, the Wikimedia Foundation shared hosting and bandwidth costs with Wikia, and received some donated office space from Wikia during the fiscal year ending June 30, 2006.
At the end of fiscal year 2007, Wikia owed the Foundation US$6,000.
In June 2007, two members of the Foundation's Board of Directors also served as employees, officers, or directors of Wikia.
In January 2009, Wikia subleased two conference rooms to the Wikimedia Foundation for the , deputy director of the Wikimedia Foundation:
We obtained about a dozen bids...We used averaging as a way to arrive at a fair market rate to neither advantage nor disadvantage Wikia when suggesting a rate.
The averaging also resulted in a rate that was roughly equivalent to the most comparable space in the running.
Wikia, Inc.
Wikia, Inc. is headquartered in San Francisco, California.
The company was incorporated in Florida in December 2004 and re-incorporated in Delaware as Wikia, Inc. on January 10, 2006.
Wikia has technical staff in the US, but also has an office in Poznań, Poland, where the primary engineering functions are performed.
but moved on to Federated Media before bringing ad management in-house.
Alongside Wikia's in-house advertising, they continue to use Adsense as well as Amazon Ads and several other third party advertising services.
Wikia additionally gains income from various partnerships oriented around various sweepstake sponsorships on related wikis.
Wikia has several other offices.
International operations are based in Germany, and Asian operations and sales are conducted in Tokyo.
Other sales offices are located in Chicago, Latin America, Los Angeles (marketing programming and content), New York, and London.
Notes
