Richard II (6 January 1367 - c. 14 February 1400), also known as Richard of Bordeaux, was King of England from 1377 until he was deposed in 1399.
Richard's father, Edward the Black Prince, died in 1376, leaving Richard as heir apparent to King Edward III.
Upon the death of his grandfather Edward III, the 10-year-old Richard succeeded to the throne.
During Richard's first years as king, government was in the hands of a series of regency councils, influenced by Richard's uncles John of Gaunt and Thomas of Woodstock.
England then faced various problems, most notably the Hundred Years' War.
A major challenge of the reign was the Peasants' Revolt in 1381, and the young king played a central part in the successful suppression of this crisis.
Less warlike than either his father or grandfather, he sought to bring an end to the Hundred Years' War.
A firm believer in the royal prerogative, Richard restrained the power of the aristocracy and relied on a private retinue for military protection instead.
In contrast to his grandfather, Richard cultivated a refined atmosphere at court, in which the king was an elevated figure, with art and culture at its centre.
The king's dependence on a small number of courtiers caused discontent among the influential, and in 1387 control of government was taken over by a group of aristocrats known as the Lords Appellant.
By 1389 Richard had regained control, and for the next eight years governed in relative harmony with his former opponents.
In 1397, Richard took his revenge on the Appellants, many of whom were executed or exiled.
The next two years have been described by historians as Richard's "tyranny".
In 1399, after John of Gaunt died, the king disinherited Gaunt's son, Henry of Bolingbroke, who had previously been exiled.
Henry invaded England in June 1399 with a small force that quickly grew in numbers.
Meeting little resistance, Bolingbroke deposed Richard and had himself crowned king.
Richard is thought to have been starved to death in captivity, although questions remain regarding his final fate.
Richard's posthumous reputation has been shaped to a large extent by William Shakespeare, whose play Richard II portrayed Richard's misrule and his deposition by Bolingbroke as responsible for the 15th-century Wars of the Roses.
Modern historians do not accept this interpretation, while not exonerating Richard from responsibility for his own deposition.
While probably not insane, as historians of the 19th and 20th centuries believed, he may have had a personality disorder, particularly manifesting itself towards the end of his reign.
Most authorities agree that his policies were not unrealistic or even entirely unprecedented, but that the way in which he carried them out was unacceptable to the political establishment, leading to his downfall.
Early life
Richard of Bordeaux was the younger son of Edward the Black Prince and Joan of Kent.
Edward, eldest son of Edward III and heir apparent to the throne of England, had distinguished himself as a military commander in the early phases of the Hundred Years' War, particularly in the Battle of Poitiers in 1356.
After further military adventures, however, he contracted dysentery in Spain in 1370.
He never fully recovered and had to return to England the next year.
Richard was born at the Archbishop's Palace, Bordeaux, in the English principality of Aquitaine, on 6 January 1367.
According to contemporary sources, three kings"the King of Castille, the King of Navarre and the King of Portugal"were present at his birth.
This anecdote, and the fact that his birth fell on the feast of Epiphany, was later used in the religious imagery of the Wilton Diptych, where Richard is one of three kings paying homage to the Virgin and Child.
His elder brother, Edward of Angoulême, died near his sixth birthday in 1371.
The Black Prince finally succumbed to his long illness in June 1376.
The Commons in parliament genuinely feared that Richard's uncle, John of Gaunt, would usurp the throne.
For this reason, the prince was quickly invested with the princedom of Wales and his father's other titles.
On 21 June the next year, Richard's grandfather Edward III, who was for some years frail and decrepit, also died, after a 50-year-long reign.
This resulted in the 10-year-old Richard succeeding to the throne.
He was crowned king on 16 July 1377 at Westminster Abbey.
Again, fears of John of Gaunt's ambitions influenced political decisions, and a regency led by the King's uncles was avoided.
Instead, the king was nominally to exercise kingship with the help of a series of "continual councils", from which John of Gaunt was excluded.
By 1381, there was a deep-felt resentment against the governing classes in the lower levels of English society.
Peasants' Revolt
Whereas the poll tax of 1381 was the spark of the Peasants' Revolt, the root of the conflict lay in tensions between peasants and landowners precipitated by the economic and demographic consequences of the Black Death and subsequent outbreaks of the plague.
who were demanding the complete abolition of serfdom.
The king, sheltered within the Tower of London with his councillors, agreed that the Crown did not have the forces to disperse the rebels and that the only feasible option was to negotiate.
It is unclear how much Richard, who was still only fourteen years old, was involved in these deliberations, although historians have suggested that he was among the proponents of negotiations.
The next day, Friday, 14 June, he set out by horse and met the rebels at Mile End.
The king agreed to the rebels' demands, but this move only emboldened them; they continued their looting and killings.
Richard met Wat Tyler again the next day at Smithfield and reiterated that the demands would be met, but the rebel leader was not convinced of the king's sincerity.
The king's men grew restive, an altercation broke out, and William Walworth, the mayor of London, pulled Tyler down from his horse and killed him.
The situation became tense once the rebels realised what had happened, but the king acted with calm resolve and, saying "I am your captain, follow me!", he led the mob away from the scene.
Walworth meanwhile gathered a force to surround the peasant army, but the king granted clemency and allowed the rebels to disperse and return to their homes.
The king soon revoked the charters of freedom and pardon that he had granted, and as disturbances continued in other parts of the country, he personally went into Essex to suppress the rebellion.
On 28 June at Billericay, he defeated the last rebels in a small skirmish and effectively ended the Peasants' Revolt.
One of his first significant acts after the rebellion was to marry Anne of Bohemia, daughter of Charles IV, Holy Roman Emperor, on 20 January 1382.
The marriage had diplomatic significance; in the division of Europe caused by the Western Schism, Bohemia and the Empire were seen as potential allies against France in the ongoing Hundred Years' War.
Nonetheless, the marriage was not popular in England.
Despite great sums of money awarded to the Empire, the political alliance never resulted in any military victories.
Furthermore, the marriage was childless.
Anne died from plague in 1394, greatly mourned by her husband.
Michael de la Pole had been instrumental in the marriage negotiations; De la Pole came from an upstart merchant family.
When Richard made him chancellor in 1383, and created him Earl of Suffolk two years later, this antagonised the more established nobility.
Another member of the close circle around the king was Robert de Vere, Earl of Oxford, who in this period emerged as the king's favourite.
Richard's close friendship to de Vere was also disagreeable to the political establishment.
This displeasure was exacerbated by the earl's elevation to the new title of Duke of Ireland in 1386.
The chronicler Thomas Walsingham suggested the relationship between the king and de Vere was of a homosexual nature, due to a resentment Walsingham had toward the king.
Tensions came to a head over the approach to the war in France.
While the court party preferred negotiations, Gaunt and Buckingham urged a large-scale campaign to protect English possessions.
but the effort came to nothing, and the army had to return without ever engaging the Scots in battle.
Meanwhile, only an uprising in Ghent prevented a French invasion of southern England.
The relationship between Richard and his uncle John of Gaunt deteriorated further with military failure, and John of Gaunt left England to pursue his claim to the throne of Castile in 1386 amid rumours of a plot against his person.
Rather than consenting, the parliament responded by refusing to consider any request until the chancellor was removed.
The parliament (later known as the Wonderful Parliament) was presumably working with the support of Gloucester and Arundel.
The king famously responded that he would not dismiss as much as a scullion from his kitchen at parliament's request.
Only when threatened with deposition was Richard forced to give in and let de la Pole go.
A commission was set up to review and control royal finances for a year.
Richard was deeply perturbed by this affront to his royal prerogative, and from February to November 1387 went on a "gyration" (tour) of the country to muster support for his cause.
By installing de Vere as Justice of Chester, he began the work of creating a loyal military power base in Cheshire.
He also secured a legal ruling from Chief Justice Robert Tresilian that parliament's conduct had been unlawful and treasonable.
On his return to London, the king was confronted by Thomas of Woodstock (now Duke of Gloucester), Arundel and Thomas de Beauchamp, 12th Earl of Warwick, who brought an appeal of treason against de la Pole, de Vere, Tresilian, and two other loyalists: the mayor of London, Nicholas Brembre, and Alexander Neville, the Archbishop of York.
Richard stalled the negotiations to gain time, as he was expecting de Vere to arrive from Cheshire with military reinforcements.
The three earls then joined forces with Gaunt's son Henry Bolingbroke, Earl of Derby, and Thomas de Mowbray, Earl of Nottinghamthe group known to history as the Lords Appellant.
On 20 December 1387 they intercepted de Vere at Radcot Bridge, where he and his forces were routed and he was obliged to flee the country.
Richard now had no choice but to comply with the appellants' demands; Brembre and Tresilian were condemned and executed, while de Vere and de la Polewho had by now also left the country The proceedings went further, and a number of Richard's chamber knights were also executed, among these Burley.
The appellants had now succeeded completely in breaking up the circle of favourites around the king.
Richard was now over twenty-one years old and could with confidence claim the right to govern in his own name.
Furthermore, John of Gaunt returned to England in 1389 and settled his differences with the king, after which the old statesman acted as a moderating influence on English politics.
Richard assumed full control of the government on 3 May 1389, claiming that the difficulties of the past years had been due solely to bad councillors.
He outlined a foreign policy that reversed the actions of the appellants by seeking peace and reconciliation with France, and promised to lessen the burden of taxation on the people significantly.
In particular, the execution of his former teacher Sir Simon de Burley was an insult not easily forgotten.
With national stability secured, Richard began negotiating a permanent peace with France.
A proposal put forward in 1393 would have greatly expanded the territory of Aquitaine possessed by the English crown.
However, the plan failed because it included a requirement that the English king pay homage to the King of Francea condition that proved unacceptable to the English public.
Instead, in 1396, a truce was agreed to, which was to last 28 years.
As part of the truce, Richard agreed to marry Isabella, daughter of Charles VI of France, when she came of age.
There were some misgivings about the betrothal, in particular because the princess was then only six years old, and thus would not be able to produce an heir to the throne of England for many years.
Although Richard sought peace with France, he took a different approach to the situation in Ireland.
The English lordships in Ireland were in danger of being overrun, and the Anglo-Irish lords were pleading for the king to intervene.
In the autumn of 1394, Richard left for Ireland, where he remained until May 1395.
His army of more than 8,000 men was the largest force brought to the island during the late Middle Ages.
The invasion was a success, and a number of Irish chieftains submitted to English overlordship.
It was one of the most successful achievements of Richard's reign, and strengthened the king's support at home, although the consolidation of the English position in Ireland proved to be short-lived.
The king had Gloucester, Arundel and Warwick arrested in July 1397.
The timing of these arrests and Richard's motivation are not entirely clear.
Although one chronicle suggested that a plot was being planned against the king, there is no evidence that this was the case.
It is more likely that Richard had simply come to feel strong enough to safely retaliate against these three men for their role in events of 1386-88 and eliminate them as threats to his power.
Arundel was the first of the three to be brought to trial, at the parliament of September 1397.
After a heated quarrel with the king, he was condemned and executed.
Gloucester was being held prisoner by the Earl of Nottingham at Calais while awaiting his trial.
As the time for the trial drew near, Nottingham brought news that Gloucester was dead.
It is thought likely that the king had ordered him to be killed to avoid the disgrace of executing a prince of the blood.
Warwick was also condemned to death, but his life was spared and his sentence reduced to life imprisonment.
Arundel's brother Thomas Arundel, the Archbishop of Canterbury, was exiled for life.
Richard then took his persecution of adversaries to the localities.
While recruiting retainers for himself in various counties, he prosecuted local men who had been loyal to the appellants.
The fines levied on these men brought great revenues to the crown, although contemporary chroniclers raised questions about the legality of the proceedings.
These included the former Appellants Henry Bolingbroke, Earl of Derby, who was made Duke of Hereford, and Thomas de Mowbray, Earl of Nottingham, who was created Duke of Norfolk.
Also among them were John and Thomas Holland, the king's half-brother and nephew, who were promoted from earls of Huntingdon and Kent to dukes of Exeter and Surrey respectively; the King's cousin Edward, Earl of Rutland, who received Gloucester's French title of Duke of Aumale; Gaunt's son John Beaufort, Earl of Somerset, who was made Marquess of Somerset and Marquess of Dorset; John Montacute, Earl of Salisbury; and Lord Thomas le Despenser, who became Earl of Gloucester.
With the forfeited lands of the convicted appellants, the king could reward these men with lands suited to their new ranks.
A threat to Richard's authority still existed, however, in the form of the House of Lancaster, represented by John of Gaunt and his son Henry Bolingbroke, Duke of Hereford.
The House of Lancaster not only possessed greater wealth than any other family in England, they were of royal descent and, as such, likely candidates to succeed the childless Richard.
Discord broke out in the inner circles of court in December 1397, when Bolingbroke On 3 February 1399, John of Gaunt died.
Rather than allowing Bolingbroke to succeed, Richard extended the term of his exile to life and expropriated his properties.
The king felt safe from Bolingbroke, who was residing in Paris, since the French had little interest in any challenge to Richard and his peace policy.
Richard left the country in May for another expedition in Ireland.
In 1398 Richard summoned a packed Parliament to Shrewsbury - known as the Parliament of Shrewsbury - which declared all the acts of the Merciless Parliament to be null and void, and announced that no restraint could legally be put on the king.
It delegated all parliamentary power to a committee of twelve lords and six commoners chosen from the king's friends, making Richard an absolute ruler unbound by the necessity of gathering a Parliament again.
Court culture
In the last years of Richard's reign, and particularly in the months after the suppression of the appellants in 1397, the king enjoyed a virtual monopoly on power in the country, a relatively uncommon situation in medieval England.
In this period a particular court culture was allowed to emerge, one that differed sharply from that of earlier times.
A new form of address developed; where the king previously had been addressed simply as "highness", now "royal majesty", or "high majesty" were often used.
It was said that on solemn festivals Richard would sit on his throne in the royal hall for hours without speaking, and anyone on whom his eyes fell had to bow his knees to the king.
The inspiration for this new sumptuousness and emphasis on dignity came from the courts on the continent, not only the French and Bohemian courts that had been the homes of Richard's two wives, but also the court that the Black Prince had maintained while residing in Aquitaine.
Richard's approach to kingship was rooted in his strong belief in the royal prerogative, the inspiration of which can be found in his early youth, when his authority was challenged first by the Peasants' Revolts and then by the Lords Appellant.
Richard rejected the approach his grandfather Edward III had taken to the nobility.
Edward's court had been a martial one, based on the interdependence between the king and his most trusted noblemen as military captains.
In Richard's view, this put a dangerous amount of power in the hands of the baronage.
To avoid dependence on the nobility for military recruitment, he pursued a policy of peace towards France.
At the same time, he developed his own private military retinue, larger than that of any English king before him, and gave them livery badges with his White Hart, which are also worn by the angels in the Wilton Diptych (right).
He was then free to develop a courtly atmosphere in which the king was a distant, venerated figure, and art and culture, rather than warfare, were at the centre.
Patronage and the arts
As part of Richard's programme of asserting his authority, he also tried to cultivate the royal image.
Unlike any other English king before him, he had himself portrayed in panel paintings of elevated majesty, of which two survive: the over life-size Westminster Abbey portrait of the king (c. 1390, see top of page), and the Wilton Diptych (1394-99), a portable work probably intended to accompany Richard on his Irish campaign.
It is one of the few surviving English examples of the courtly International Gothic style of painting that was developed in the courts of the Continent, especially Prague and Paris.
Richard's expenditure on jewellery, rich textiles and metalwork was far higher than on paintings, but as with his illuminated manuscripts, there are hardly any surviving works that can be connected with him, except for a crown, "one of the finest achievements of the Gothic goldsmith", that probably belonged to Anne.
Among Richard's grandest projects in the field of architecture was Westminster Hall, which was extensively rebuilt during his reign, perhaps spurred on by the completion in 1391 of John of Gaunt's magnificent hall at Kenilworth Castle.
Fifteen life-size statues of kings were placed in niches on the walls, and the hammer-beam roof by the royal carpenter Hugh Herland, "the greatest creation of medieval timber architecture", allowed the original three Romanesque aisles to be replaced with a single huge open space, with a dais at the end for Richard to sit in solitary state.
The rebuilding had been begun by Henry III in 1245, but had by Richard's time been dormant for over a century.
The court's patronage of literature is especially important, because this was the period in which the English language took shape as a literary language.
The greatest poet of the age, Geoffrey Chaucer, served the king as a diplomat, a customs official and a clerk of The King's Works while producing some of his best-known work.
Chaucer was also in the service of John of Gaunt, and wrote The Book of the Duchess as a eulogy to Gaunt's wife Blanche.
Chaucer's colleague and friend John Gower wrote his Confessio Amantis on a direct commission from Richard, although he later grew disenchanted with the king.
Downfall
In June 1399, Louis I, Duke of Orléans, gained control of the court of the insane Charles VI of France.
The policy of rapprochement with the English crown did not suit Louis's political ambitions, and for this reason he found it opportune to allow Henry to leave for England.
With a small group of followers, Bolingbroke landed at Ravenspur in Yorkshire towards the end of June 1399.
Men from all over the country soon rallied around the duke.
Meeting with Henry Percy, 1st Earl of Northumberland, who had his own misgivings about the king, Bolingbroke insisted that his only object was to regain his own patrimony.
Percy took him at his word and declined to interfere.
The king had taken most of his household knights and the loyal members of his nobility with him to Ireland, so Henry experienced little resistance as he moved south.
Edmund of Langley, Duke of York, who was acting as Keeper of the Realm, had little choice but to side with Bolingbroke.
Meanwhile, Richard was delayed in his return from Ireland and did not land in Wales until 24 July.
He made his way to Conwy, where on 12 August he met with the Earl of Northumberland for negotiations.
On 19 August, Richard II surrendered to Henry at Flint Castle, promising to abdicate if his life were spared.
Both men then returned to London, the indignant king riding all the way behind Henry.
On arrival, he was imprisoned in the Tower of London on 1 September.
Henry was by now fully determined to take the throne, but presenting a rationale for this action proved a dilemma.
However, Henry was not next in line to the throne; the heir presumptive was Edmund Mortimer, 5th Earl of March, great-grandson of Edward III's second surviving son, Lionel.
Bolingbroke's father, John of Gaunt, was Edward's third son to survive to adulthood.
The problem was solved by emphasising Henry's descent in a direct male line, whereas March's descent was through his grandmother, Philippa.
According to the official record, read by the Archbishop of Canterbury during an assembly of lords and commons at Westminster Hall on Tuesday 30 September, Richard gave up his crown willingly and ratified his deposition citing as a reason his own unworthiness as a monarch.
On the other hand, the Traison et Mort Chronicle suggests otherwise.
It describes a meeting between Richard and Henry that took place one day before the parliament's session.
The king succumbed to blind rage, ordered his release from the Tower, called his cousin a traitor, demanded to see his wife and swore revenge throwing down his bonnet, while Henry refused to do anything without parliamentary approval.
When parliament met to discuss Richard's fate, the Bishop of St Asaph read thirty-three articles of deposition that were unanimously accepted by lords and commons.
On 1 October 1399, Richard II was formally deposed and on 13 October, the feast day of Edward the Confessor, Henry Bolingbroke was crowned king.
Although averted, the plot highlighted the danger of allowing Richard to live.
He is thought to have been starved to death in captivity in Pontefract Castle on or around 14 February 1400, although there is some question over the date and manner of his death.
in Scotland, however, a man identified as Richard came into the hands of Regent Albany, lodged in Stirling Castle, and serving as the notionaland perhaps reluctantfigurehead of various anti-Lancastrian and Lollard intrigues in England.
Henry IV's government dismissed him as an impostor, and several sources from both sides of the Border suggest the man had a mental illness, one also describing him as a "beggar" by the time of his death in 1419, but he was buried as a king in the local Dominican friary in Stirling.
Meanwhile, in 1413, Henry Vin an effort both to atone for his father's act of murder and to silence the rumours of Richard's survivalhad decided to have the body at King's Langley moved to its final resting place in Westminster Abbey.
Here Richard himself had prepared an elaborate tomb, where the remains of his wife Anne were already entombed.
Character and assessment
Contemporary writers, even those less sympathetic to the king, agreed that Richard was a "most beautiful king", though with a "face which was white, rounded and feminine", implying he lacked manliness.
He was athletic and tall; when his tomb was opened in 1871 he was found to be six feet tall.
He was also intelligent and well read, and when agitated he had a tendency to stammer.
While the Westminster Abbey portrait probably shows a good similarity of the king, the Wilton Diptych portrays the king as significantly younger than he was at the time; it must be assumed that he had a beard by this point.
Religiously, he was orthodox, and particularly towards the end of his reign he became a strong opponent of the Lollard heresy.
He was particularly devoted to the cult of Edward the Confessor, and around 1395 he had his own coat of arms impaled with the mythical arms of the Confessor.
The popular view of Richard has more than anything been influenced by Shakespeare's play about the king, Richard II.
Shakespeare's Richard was a cruel, vindictive and irresponsible king, who attained a semblance of greatness only after his fall from power.
Writing a work of fiction, however, Shakespeare took many liberties and made great omissions.
Shakespeare based his play on works by writers such as Edward Hall and Samuel Daniel, who in turn based their writings on contemporary chroniclers such as Thomas Walsingham.
Hall and Daniel were part of Tudor historiography, which was highly unsympathetic to Richard.
The Tudor orthodoxy, reinforced by Shakespeare, saw a continuity in civil discord starting with Richard's misrule that did not end until Henry VII's accession in 1485.
The idea that Richard was to blame for the later-15th century Wars of the Roses was prevalent as late as the 19th century, but came to be challenged in the 20th.
Some recent historians prefer to look at the Wars of the Roses in isolation from the reign of Richard II.
Richard's mental state has been a major issue of historical debate since the first academic historians started treating the subject in the 19th century.
One of the first modern historians to deal with Richard II as a king and as a person was Bishop Stubbs.
Stubbs argued that towards the end of his reign, Richard's mind "was losing its balance altogether".
Historian Anthony Steel, who wrote a full-scale biography of the king in 1941, took a psychiatric approach to the issue, and concluded that the king had schizophrenia.
This was challenged by V. H. Galbraith, who argued that there was no historical basis for such a diagnosis, a line that has also been followed by later historians of the period, such as Anthony Goodman and Anthony Tuck.
One of the primary historiographical questions surrounding Richard concerns his political agenda and the reasons for its failure.
His kingship was thought to contain elements of the early modern absolute monarchy as exemplified by the Tudor dynasty.
More recently, Richard's concept of kingship has been seen by some as not so different from that of his antecedents, and that it was exactly by staying within the framework of traditional monarchy that he was able to achieve as much as he did.
Yet his actions were too extreme, and too abrupt.
For one, the absence of war was meant to reduce the burden of taxation, and so help Richard's popularity with the Commons in parliament.
However, this promise was never fulfilled, as the cost of the royal retinue, the opulence of court and Richard's lavish patronage of his favourites proved as expensive as war had been, without offering commensurate benefits.
As Simon Walker concludes: "What he sought was, in contemporary terms, neither unjustified nor unattainable; it was the manner of his seeking that betrayed him."
It has been speculated that the whole incident surrounding the killing of Wat Tyler was in fact planned in advance by the council, in order to end the rebellion.
While both England and the Empire supported Pope Urban VI in Rome, the French sided with the Avignon Papacy of Clement VII.
e. Beaufort was the oldest of John of Gaunt's children with Katherine Swynford; illegitimate children whom Richard had given legitimate status in 1390.
He was made Marquess of Dorset; marquess being a relatively new title in England up until this point.
Rutland, heir to the Duke of York, was created Duke of Aumale.
Montacute had succeeded his uncle as Earl of Salisbury earlier the same year.
Despenser, the great-grandson of Hugh Despenser the Younger, Edward II's favourite who was executed for treason in 1326, was given the forfeited earldom of Gloucester.
f. Though it had become established tradition for earldoms to descend in the male line, there was no such tradition for royal succession in England.
The precedence could indeed be seen to invalidate the English claim to the French throne, based on succession through the female line, over which the Hundred Years' War was being fought.
Sources
Chronicles
* (1993)
Chronicles of the Revolution, 1397-1400: The Reign of Richard II, ed. Chris
Given-Wilson.
Manchester: Manchester University Press. .
Froissart, Jean (1978).
Chronicles, ed.
Geoffrey Brereton.
London: Penguin. .
* (1977) Historia Vitae et Regni Ricardi Secundi, ed.
George B. Stow.
Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press. .
* Knighton, Henry (1995).
Knighton's Chronicle 1337-1396, ed.
G. H. Martin.
Oxford: Clarendon Press. .
* Walsingham, Thomas (1862-64).
https:/ web http:/ bin advanced/process%3Bjsessionid%3D59D8F43C7272104ED67F29E5CE1CF65C?sort
title&browse
1&clauseMapped (creatorBrowse)=Walsingham,+Thomas,+fl.+1360-1420.
Historia Anglicana 2 vols., ed.
Henry Thomas Riley.
London:
Longman, Roberts, and Green
Secondary sources
* Alexander, Jonathan; Binski, Paul (eds.) (1987).
Age of Chivalry, Art in Plantagenet England, 1200-1400.
London: Royal Academy/Weidenfeld & Nicolson.
* Levey, Michael (1971).
Painting at Court.
London:
Weidenfeld and Nicolson.
