Wikipedia ( or ) is a multilingual online encyclopedia created and maintained as an open collaboration project by a community of volunteer editors using a wiki-based editing system.
It is the largest and most popular general reference work on the World Wide Web, and is one of the most popular websites ranked by Alexa as of October 2019.
Wikipedia was launched on January 15, 2001, by Jimmy Wales and Larry Sanger.
Sanger coined its name, and by February 2014 it had reached 18 billion page views and nearly 500 million unique visitors per month.
The following year, Time magazine stated that the open-door policy of allowing anyone to edit had made Wikipedia the biggest and possibly the best encyclopedia in the world, and was a testament to the vision of Jimmy Wales.
Wikipedia has been criticized for exhibiting systemic bias, for presenting a mixture of "truths, half truths, and some falsehoods", Facebook announced that by 2017 it would help readers detect fake news by suggesting links to related Wikipedia articles.
YouTube announced a similar plan in 2018.
History
Nupedia
Other collaborative online encyclopedias were attempted before Wikipedia, but none were as successful.
Wikipedia began as a complementary project for Nupedia, a free online English-language encyclopedia project whose articles were written by experts and reviewed under a formal process.
It was founded on March 9, 2000, under the ownership of Bomis, a web portal company.
Its main figures were Bomis CEO Jimmy Wales and Larry Sanger, editor-in-chief for Nupedia and later Wikipedia.
On January 10, 2001, Sanger proposed on the Nupedia mailing list to create a wiki as a "feeder" project for Nupedia.
Launch and early growth
The domains and were registered on January 12, 2001 and January 13, 2001 respectively, and Wikipedia was launched on January 15, 2001,
Wikipedia gained early contributors from Nupedia, Slashdot postings, and web search engine indexing.
Language editions were also created, with a total of 161 by the end of 2004.
Nupedia and Wikipedia coexisted until the former's servers were taken down permanently in 2003, and its text was incorporated into Wikipedia.
The English Wikipedia passed the mark of two million articles on September 9, 2007, making it the largest encyclopedia ever assembled, surpassing the 1408 Yongle Encyclopedia, which had held the record for almost 600 years.
These moves encouraged Wales to announce that Wikipedia would not display advertisements, and to change Wikipedia's domain from to .
Around 1,800 articles were added daily to the encyclopedia in 2006; by 2013 that average was roughly 800.
A team at the Palo Alto Research Center attributed this slowing of growth to the project's increasing exclusivity and resistance to change.
Others suggest that the growth is flattening naturally because articles that could be called ""-topics that clearly merit an article-have already been created and built up extensively.
In November 2009, a researcher at the Rey Juan Carlos University in Madrid found that the English Wikipedia had lost 49,000 editors during the first three months of 2009; in comparison, the project lost only 4,900 editors during the same period in 2008.
The Wall Street Journal cited the array of rules applied to editing and disputes related to such content among the reasons for this trend.
Wales disputed these claims in 2009, denying the decline and questioning the methodology of the study.
Two years later, in 2011, Wales acknowledged the presence of a slight decline, noting a decrease from "a little more than 36,000 writers" in June 2010 to 35,800 in June 2011.
In the same interview, Wales also claimed the number of editors was "stable and sustainable".
In July 2012, The Atlantic reported that the number of administrators is also in decline.
In the November 25, 2013, issue of New York magazine, Katherine Ward stated "Wikipedia, the sixth-most-used website, is facing an internal crisis".
Milestones
In January 2007, Wikipedia entered for the first time the top-ten list of the most popular websites in the US, according to comScore Networks.
With 42.9 million unique visitors, Wikipedia was ranked number 9, surpassing The New York Times (#10) and Apple (#11).
This marked a significant increase over January 2006, when the rank was number 33, with Wikipedia receiving around 18.3 million unique visitors.
, Wikipedia has rank 9 On February 9, 2014, The New York Times reported that Wikipedia has 18 billion page views and nearly 500 million unique visitors a month, "according to the ratings firm comScore."
On January 18, 2012, the English Wikipedia participated in a series of coordinated protests against two proposed laws in the United States Congress-the Stop Online Piracy Act (SOPA) and the PROTECT IP Act (PIPA)-by blacking out its pages for 24 hours.
More than 162 million people viewed the blackout explanation page that temporarily replaced Wikipedia content.
Loveland and Reagle argue that, in process, Wikipedia follows a long tradition of historical encyclopedias that accumulated improvements piecemeal through "stigmergic accumulation".
On January 20, 2014, Subodh Varma reporting for The Economic Times indicated that not only had Wikipedia's growth stalled, but that it "had lost nearly 10 per cent of its page views last year.
There was a decline of about 2 billion between December 2012 and December 2013.
Its most popular versions are leading the slide: page-views of the English Wikipedia declined by 12 per cent, those of German version slid by 17 per cent and the Japanese version lost 9 per cent."
Varma added that, "While Wikipedia's managers think that this could be due to errors in counting, other experts feel that Google's Knowledge Graphs project launched last year may be gobbling up Wikipedia users."
In January 2013, 274301 Wikipedia, an asteroid, was named after Wikipedia; in October 2014, Wikipedia was honored with the Wikipedia Monument; and, in July 2015, Wikipedia became available as 7,473 books for $500,000.
In 2019, a species of flowering plant was named Viola wikipedia.
In April 2019, an etched copy of Wikipedia is now on the Moon after surviving a crash landing of Beresheet, a failed Israeli lunar lander, according to experts.
In June 2019, scientists reported that all 16 GB of Wikipedia have been encoded into synthetic DNA.
Openness
Unlike traditional encyclopedias, Wikipedia follows the procrastination principle It started almost entirely open-anyone could create articles, and any Wikipedia article could be edited by any reader, even those who did not have a Wikipedia account.
Modifications to all articles would be published immediately.
As a result, any article could contain inaccuracies such as errors, ideological biases, and nonsensical or irrelevant text.
Restrictions
Due to the increasing popularity of Wikipedia, some editions, including the English version, have introduced editing restrictions in some cases.
For instance, on the English Wikipedia and some other language editions, only registered users may create a new article.
On the English Wikipedia, among others, some particularly controversial, sensitive and/or vandalism-prone pages have been protected to some degree.
A frequently vandalized article can be are able to make changes.
In certain cases, all editors are allowed to submit modifications, but review is required for some editors, depending on certain conditions.
For example, the German Wikipedia maintains "stable versions" of articles, which have passed certain reviews.
Following protracted trials and community discussion, the English Wikipedia introduced the "pending changes" system in December 2012.
Under this system, new and unregistered users' edits to certain controversial or vandalism-prone articles are reviewed by established users before they are published.
Review of changes
Although changes are not systematically reviewed, the software that powers Wikipedia provides certain tools allowing anyone to review changes made by others.
The "History" page of each article links to each revision.
In 2003, economics PhD student Andrea Ciffolilli argued that the low transaction costs of participating in a wiki create a catalyst for collaborative development, and that features such as allowing easy access to past versions of a page favor "creative construction" over "creative destruction".
Vandalism
Any change or edit that manipulates content in a way that purposefully compromises the integrity of Wikipedia is considered vandalism.
The most common and obvious types of vandalism include additions of obscenities and crude humor.
Vandalism can also include advertising and other types of spam.
Sometimes editors commit vandalism by removing content or entirely blanking a given page.
Less common types of vandalism, such as the deliberate addition of plausible but false information to an article can be more difficult to detect.
Vandals can introduce irrelevant formatting, modify page semantics such as the page's title or categorization, manipulate the underlying code of an article, or use images disruptively.
After the incident, Seigenthaler described Wikipedia as "a flawed and irresponsible research tool".
Edit warring
Wikipedians often have disputes regarding content, which may result in repeatedly making opposite changes to an article, known as .
Special interest groups have engaged in edit wars to advance their own political interests.
Defending Israeli settlements in the West Bank, numerous pro-occupation groups have launched "Zionist editing" campaigns.
In 2010, the then director general of the Yesha Council and former Israeli Cabinet Minister Naftali Bennett described their goal "as not to make Wikipedia rightist but for it to include our point of view".
Policies and laws ==
Content in Wikipedia is subject to the laws of the United States and of the US state of Virginia, where the majority of Wikipedia's servers are located.
Beyond legal matters, the editorial principles of Wikipedia are embodied in the and in numerous intended to appropriately shape content.
Even these rules are stored in wiki form, and Wikipedia editors write and revise the website's policies and guidelines.
Editors can by deleting or modifying non-compliant material.
Originally, rules on the non-English editions of Wikipedia were based on a translation of the rules for the English Wikipedia.
They have since diverged to some extent.
Finally, Wikipedia must not take sides.
An article is not considered to be owned by its creator or any other editor, nor by the subject of the article.
Administrators
Fewer editors become administrators than in years past, in part because the process of vetting potential Wikipedia administrators has become more rigorous.
name new administrators solely upon the recommendations from the community.
Dispute resolution
Over time, Wikipedia has developed a semi-formal dispute resolution process to assist in such circumstances.
In order to determine community consensus, editors can raise issues at appropriate community forums,
Community
Each article and each user of Wikipedia has an associated "Talk" page.
These form the primary communication channel for editors to discuss, coordinate and debate.
Wikipedia's community has been described as cult-like, although not always with entirely negative connotations.
The project's preference for cohesiveness, even if it requires compromise that includes disregard of credentials, has been referred to as "anti-elitism".
Wikipedians sometimes award one another for good work.
These personalized tokens of appreciation reveal a wide range of valued work extending far beyond simple editing to include social support, administrative actions, and types of articulation work.
Wikipedia does not require that its editors and contributors provide identification.
Jimmy Wales once argued that only "a community ... a dedicated group of a few hundred volunteers" makes the bulk of contributions to Wikipedia and that the project is therefore "much like any traditional organization".
In 2008, a Slate magazine article reported that: "According to researchers in Palo Alto, 1 percent of Wikipedia users are responsible for about half of the site's edits."
This method of evaluating contributions was later disputed by Aaron Swartz, who noted that several articles he sampled had large portions of their content (measured by number of characters) contributed by users with low edit counts.
The English Wikipedia has articles, registered editors, and active editors.
An editor is considered active if they have made one or more edits in the past 30 days.
Editors who fail to comply with Wikipedia cultural rituals, such as cannot be attributed to a particular editor with certainty.
Studies
A 2007 study by researchers from Dartmouth College found that "anonymous and infrequent contributors to Wikipedia ... are as reliable a source of knowledge as those contributors who register with the site".
Jimmy Wales stated in 2009 that " (I)t turns out over 50% of all the edits are done by just .7% of the users... 524 people...
And in fact the most active 2%, which is 1400 people, have done 73.4% of all the edits."
although a later commentary pointed out serious flaws, including that the data showed higher openness and that the differences with the control group and the samples were small.
According to a 2009 study, there is "evidence of growing resistance from the Wikipedia community to new content".
Diversity
Several studies have shown that most of the Wikipedia contributors are male.
Notably, the results of a Wikimedia Foundation survey in 2008 showed that only 13 percent of Wikipedia editors were female.
Because of this, universities throughout the United States tried to encourage females to become Wikipedia contributors.
Similarly, many of these universities, including Yale and Brown, gave college credit to students who create or edit an article relating to women in science or technology.
Andrew Lih, a professor and scientist, wrote in The New York Times that the reason he thought the number of male contributors outnumbered the number of females so greatly was because identifying as a woman may expose oneself to "ugly, intimidating behavior."
Data has shown that Africans are underrepresented among Wikipedia editors.
Language editions
There are currently 301 language editions of Wikipedia (also called language versions, or simply Wikipedias).
As of , the six largest, in order of article count, are the , , , , , and Wikipedias.
The second and third largest Wikipedias owe their position to the article-creating bot Lsjbot, which as of 2013 had created about half the articles in the Swedish Wikipedia, and most of the articles in the Cebuano and Waray Wikipedias.
The latter are both languages of the Philippines.
In addition to the top six, nine other Wikipedias have over one million articles each: Russian, Italian, Spanish, Waray-Waray, Polish, Vietnamese, Japanese, Chinese and Portuguese), four more have over 500,000 articles (Ukrainian, Persian, Catalan and Arabic), 40 more have over 100,000 articles, and 78 more have over 10,000 articles.
or points of view.
Though the various language editions are held to global policies such as "neutral point of view", they diverge on some points of policy and practice, most notably on whether images that are not licensed freely may be used under a claim of fair use.
Jimmy Wales has described Wikipedia as "an effort to create and distribute a free encyclopedia of the highest possible quality to every single person on the planet in their own language".
Though each language edition functions more or less independently, some efforts are made to supervise them all.
They are coordinated in part by Meta-Wiki, the Wikimedia Foundation's wiki devoted to maintaining all of its projects (Wikipedia and others).
For instance, Meta-Wiki provides important statistics on all language editions of Wikipedia, and it maintains a list of articles every Wikipedia should have.
The list concerns basic content by subject: biography, history, geography, society, culture, science, technology, and mathematics.
It is not rare for articles strongly related to a particular language not to have counterparts in another edition.
For example, articles about small towns in the United States might be available only in English, even when they meet notability criteria of other language Wikipedia projects.
Translated articles represent only a small portion of articles in most editions, in part because those editions do not allow fully automated translation of articles.
Articles available in more than one language may offer "interwiki links", which link to the counterpart articles in other editions.
A study published by PLoS ONE in 2012 also estimated the share of contributions to different editions of Wikipedia from different regions of the world.
It reported that the proportion of the edits made from North America was 51% for the English Wikipedia, and 25% for the simple English Wikipedia.
The Wikimedia Foundation hopes to increase the number of editors in the Global South to 37% by 2015.
English Wikipedia editor decline
On March 1, 2014, The Economist, in an article titled "The Future of Wikipedia", cited a trend analysis concerning data published by Wikimedia stating that "the number of editors for the English-language version has fallen by a third in seven years."
The attrition rate for active editors in English Wikipedia was cited by The Economist as substantially in contrast to statistics for Wikipedia in other languages (non-English Wikipedia).
The Economist reported that the number of contributors with an average of five or more edits per month was relatively constant since 2008 for Wikipedia in other languages at approximately 42,000 editors within narrow seasonal variances of about 2,000 editors up or down.
The number of active editors in English Wikipedia, by sharp comparison, was cited as peaking in 2007 at approximately 50,000 and dropping to 30,000 by the start of 2014.
Should attrition continue unabated at the quoted trend rate of approximately 20,000 editors lost within a seven-year stretch, by 2021 there will be only 10,000 active editors on English Wikipedia.
Reception
Several Wikipedians have criticized Wikipedia's large and growing regulation, which includes over 50 policies and nearly 150,000 words .
Critics have stated that Wikipedia exhibits systemic bias.
In 2010, columnist and journalist Edwin Black criticized Wikipedia for being a mixture of "truth, half truth, and some falsehoods".
Articles in The Chronicle of Higher Education and The Journal of Academic Librarianship have criticized Wikipedia's Retrieved March 27, 2014
Journalists Oliver Kamm and Edwin Black noted (in 2010 and 2011 respectively) how articles are dominated by the loudest and most persistent voices, usually by a group with an "ax to grind" on the topic.
A 2008 article in Education Next Journal concluded that as a resource about controversial topics, Wikipedia is subject to manipulation and spin.
In 2006, the Wikipedia Watch criticism website listed dozens of examples of plagiarism in the English Wikipedia.
However, a peer review in 2005 of forty-two scientific entries on both Wikipedia and Encyclopædia Britannica by the science journal Nature found few differences in accuracy, and concluded that "the average science entry in Wikipedia contained around four inaccuracies; Britannica, about three."
and in response, Nature gave a rebuttal of the points raised by Britannica.
In addition to the point-for-point disagreement between these two parties, others have examined the sample size and selection method used in the Nature effort, and suggested a "flawed study design" , absence of statistical analysis (e.g., of reported confidence intervals), and a lack of study "statistical power" .
As a consequence of the open structure, Wikipedia "makes no guarantee of validity" of its content, since no one is ultimately responsible for any claims appearing in it.
Concerns have been raised by PC World in 2009 regarding the lack of accountability that results from users' anonymity, vandalism, and similar problems.
Economist Tyler Cowen wrote: "If I had to guess whether Wikipedia or the median refereed journal article on economics was more likely to be true, after a not so long think I would opt for Wikipedia."
He comments that some traditional sources of non-fiction suffer from systemic biases and novel results, in his opinion, are over-reported in journal articles and relevant information is omitted from news reports.
However, he also cautions that errors are frequently found on Internet sites, and that academics and experts must be vigilant in correcting them.
Critics argue that Wikipedia's open nature and a lack of proper sources for most of the information makes it unreliable.
Some commentators suggest that Wikipedia may be reliable, but that the reliability of any given article is not clear.
Wikipedia's open structure inherently makes it an easy target for Internet trolls, spammers, and various forms of paid advocacy seen as counterproductive to the maintenance of a neutral and verifiable online encyclopedia.
In response to paid advocacy editing and undisclosed editing issues, Wikipedia was reported in an article in The Wall Street Journal, to have strengthened its rules and laws against undisclosed editing.
The article stated that: "Beginning Monday from the date of the article, June 16, 2014, changes in Wikipedia's terms of use will require anyone paid to edit articles to disclose that arrangement.
Katherine Maher, the nonprofit Wikimedia Foundation's chief communications officer, said the changes address a sentiment among volunteer editors that, 'we're not an advertising service; we're an encyclopedia.
Discouragement in education
Most university lecturers discourage students from citing any encyclopedia in academic work, preferring primary sources; Wales stresses that encyclopedias of any type are not usually appropriate to use as citable sources, and should not be relied upon as authoritative.
In February 2007, an article in The Harvard Crimson newspaper reported that a few of the professors at Harvard University were including Wikipedia articles in their syllabi, although without realizing the articles might change.
In June 2007, former president of the American Library Association Michael Gorman condemned Wikipedia, along with Google, Beck continued to detail in this article new programs of Amin Azzam at the University of San Francisco to offer medical school courses to medical students for learning to edit and improve Wikipedia articles on health-related issues, as well as internal quality control programs within Wikipedia organized by James Heilman to improve a group of 200 health-related articles of central medical importance up to Wikipedia's highest standard of articles using its Featured Article and Good Article peer review evaluation process.
Beck added that: "Wikipedia has its own peer review process before articles can be classified as 'good' or 'featured.'
Heilman, who has participated in that process before, says 'less than 1 percent' of Wikipedia's medical articles have passed."
A study of Wikipedia articles on cancer was conducted in 2010 by Yaacov Lawrence of the Kimmel Cancer Center at Thomas Jefferson University.
The study was limited to those articles that could be found in the Physician Data Query and excluded those written at the "start" class or "stub" class level.
Lawrence found the articles accurate but not very readable, and thought that "Wikipedia's lack of readability (to non-college readers) may reflect its varied origins and haphazard editing".
The Economist argued that better-written articles tend to be more reliable: "inelegant or ranting prose usually reflects muddled thoughts and incomplete information".
To assess Wikipedia articles various quality measures related to credibility, completeness, objectivity, readability, relevance, style and timeliness can be used.
Coverage of topics and systemic bias
, amongst other countries.
A 2008 study conducted by researchers at Carnegie Mellon University and Palo Alto Research Center gave a distribution of topics as well as growth (from July 2006 to January 2008) in each field:
A 2011 study conducted by researchers at the University of Minnesota indicated that male and female editors focus on different coverage topics.
There was a greater concentration of females in the People and Arts category, while males focus more on Geography and Science.
Coverage of topics and selection bias
Research conducted by Mark Graham of the Oxford Internet Institute in 2009 indicated that the geographic distribution of article topics is highly uneven.
Africa is most underrepresented.
Across 30 language editions of Wikipedia, historical articles and sections are generally Eurocentric and focused on recent events.
An editorial in The Guardian in 2014 claimed that more effort went into providing references for a list of female porn actors than a list of women writers.
Data has also shown that Africa-related material often faces omission; a knowledge gap that a July 2018 Wikimedia conference in Cape Town sought to address.
The October 22, 2013, essay by Tom Simonite in MIT's Technology Review titled "The Decline of Wikipedia" discussed the effect of systemic bias and policy creep on the downward trend in the number of editors.
It may more specifically follow the biases of Internet culture, inclining to being young, male, English-speaking, educated, technologically aware, and wealthy enough to spare time for editing.
Biases of its own may include over-emphasis on topics such as pop culture, technology, and current events.
His research examined the counterproductive work behavior of edit warring.
Yasseri contended that simple reverts or "undo" operations were not the most significant measure of counterproductive behavior at Wikipedia and relied instead on the statistical measurement of detecting "reverting/reverted pairs" or "mutually reverting edit pairs".
Such a "mutually reverting edit pair" is defined where one editor reverts the edit of another editor who then, in sequence, returns to revert the first editor in the "mutually reverting edit pairs".
The results were tabulated for several language versions of Wikipedia.
The English Wikipedia's three largest conflict rates belonged to the articles George W. Bush, Anarchism and Muhammad.
Explicit content
Wikipedia has been criticized for allowing information of graphic content.
Articles depicting what some critics have called objectionable content (such as Feces, Cadaver, Human penis, Vulva, and Nudity) contain graphic pictures and detailed information easily available to anyone with access to the internet, including children.
The site also includes sexual content such as images and videos of masturbation and ejaculation, illustrations of zoophilia, and photos from hardcore pornographic films in its articles.
It also has non-sexual photographs of nude children.
The Wikipedia article about Virgin Killer-a 1976 album from German heavy metal band Scorpions-features a picture of the album's original cover, which depicts a naked prepubescent girl.
The original release cover caused controversy and was replaced in some countries.
In December 2008, access to the Wikipedia article Virgin Killer was blocked for four days by most Internet service providers in the United Kingdom after the Internet Watch Foundation (IWF) decided the album cover was a potentially illegal indecent image and added the article's URL to a "blacklist" it supplies to British internet service providers.
In April 2010, Sanger wrote a letter to the Federal Bureau of Investigation, outlining his concerns that two categories of images on Wikimedia Commons contained child pornography, and were in violation of US federal obscenity law.
Sanger later clarified that the images, which were related to pedophilia and one about lolicon, were not of real children, but said that they constituted "obscene visual representations of the sexual abuse of children", under the PROTECT Act of 2003.
Wikimedia Foundation spokesman Jay Walsh strongly rejected Sanger's accusation, Critics, including Wikipediocracy, noticed that many of the pornographic images deleted from Wikipedia since 2010 have reappeared.
Privacy
One privacy concern in the case of Wikipedia is the right of a private citizen to remain a "private citizen" rather than a "public figure" in the eyes of the law.
It is a battle between the right to be anonymous in cyberspace and the right to be anonymous in real life ("meatspace").
A particular problem occurs in the case of an individual who is relatively unimportant and for whom there exists a Wikipedia page against her or his wishes.
In January 2006, a German court ordered the German Wikipedia shut down within Germany because it stated the full name of Boris Floricic, aka "Tron", a deceased hacker.
On February 9, 2006, the injunction against Wikimedia Deutschland was overturned, with the court rejecting the notion that Tron's right to privacy or that of his parents was being violated.
Wikipedia has a "" that uses the OTRS system to handle queries without having to reveal the identities of the involved parties.
This is used, for example, in confirming the permission for using individual images and other media in the project.
Sexism
Wikipedia has been described as harboring a battleground culture of sexism and harassment.
The perceived toxic attitudes and tolerance of violent and abusive language are also reasons put forth for the gender gap in Wikipedia editors.
In 2014, a female editor who requested a separate space on Wikipedia to discuss improving civility had her proposal referred to by a male editor using the words "the easiest way to avoid being called a cunt is not to act like one".
Operation
Wikimedia Foundation and Wikimedia movement affiliates
Wikipedia is hosted and funded by the Wikimedia Foundation, a non-profit organization which also operates Wikipedia-related projects such as Wiktionary and Wikibooks.
The foundation relies on public contributions and grants to fund its mission.
The foundation's 2013 IRS Form 990 shows revenue of $39.7 million and expenses of almost $29 million, with assets of $37.2 million and liabilities of about $2.3 million.
In May 2014, Wikimedia Foundation named Lila Tretikov as its second executive director, taking over for Sue Gardner.
The Wall Street Journal reported on May 1, 2014, that Tretikov's information technology background from her years at University of California offers Wikipedia an opportunity to develop in more concentrated directions guided by her often repeated position statement that, "Information, like air, wants to be free."
The same Wall Street Journal article reported these directions of development according to an interview with spokesman Jay Walsh of Wikimedia, who "said Tretikov would address that issue (paid advocacy) as a priority.
'We are really pushing toward more transparency...
We are reinforcing that paid advocacy is not welcome.'
Initiatives to involve greater diversity of contributors, better mobile support of Wikipedia, new geo-location tools to find local content more easily, and more tools for users in the second and third world are also priorities, Walsh said."
Maher has stated that one of her priorities would be the issue of editor harassment endemic to Wikipedia as identified by the Wikipedia board in December.
Maher stated regarding the harassment issue that: "It establishes a sense within the community that this is a priority... (and that correction requires that)
it has to be more than words."
Wikipedia is also supported by many organizations and groups that are affiliated with the Wikimedia Foundation but independently run, called Wikimedia movement affiliates.
These include Wikimedia chapters (which are national or sub-national organizations, such as Wikimedia Deutschland and Wikimédia France), thematic organizations (such as Amical Wikimedia for the Catalan language community), and user groups.
These affiliates participate in the promotion, development, and funding of Wikipedia.
Software operations and support
The operation of Wikipedia depends on MediaWiki, a custom-made, free and open source wiki software platform written in PHP and built upon the MySQL database system.
The software incorporates programming features such as a macro language, variables, a transclusion system for templates, and URL redirection.
MediaWiki is licensed under the GNU General Public License and it is used by all Wikimedia projects, as well as many other wiki projects.
Originally, Wikipedia ran on UseModWiki written in Perl by Clifford Adams (Phase I), which initially required CamelCase for article hyperlinks; the present double bracket style was incorporated later.
Starting in January 2002 (Phase II), Wikipedia began running on a PHP wiki engine with a MySQL database; this software was custom-made for Wikipedia by Magnus Manske.
The Phase II software was repeatedly modified to accommodate the exponentially increasing demand.
In July 2002 (Phase III), Wikipedia shifted to the third-generation software, MediaWiki, originally written by Lee Daniel Crocker.
Several MediaWiki extensions are installed to extend the functionality of the MediaWiki software.
In April 2005, a Lucene extension was added to MediaWiki's built-in search and Wikipedia switched from MySQL to Lucene for searching.
The site currently uses Lucene Search 2.1, which is written in Java and based on Lucene library 2.3.
In July 2013, after extensive beta testing, a WYSIWYG (What You See Is What You Get) extension, VisualEditor, was opened to public use.
It was met with much rejection and criticism, and was described as "slow and buggy".
The feature was changed from opt-out to opt-in afterward.
Automated editing
Computer programs called bots have often been used to perform simple and repetitive tasks, such as correcting common misspellings and stylistic issues, or to start articles such as geography entries in a standard format from statistical data.
One controversial contributor creating articles with his bot was reported to create up to 10,000 articles on the Swedish Wikipedia on certain days.
Additionally, there are bots designed to automatically notify editors when they make common editing errors (such as unmatched quotes or unmatched parentheses).
Edits falsely identified by bots as the work of a banned editor can be restored by other editors.
incident in July 2014 when it was reported edits were made via IPs controlled by the Russian government.
Bots on Wikipedia must be approved before activation.
According to Andrew Lih, the current expansion of Wikipedia to millions of articles would be difficult to envision without the use of such bots.
Hardware operations and support
Wikipedia receives between 25,000 and 60,000 page requests per second, depending on time of day.
, there were 300 in Florida and 44 in Amsterdam.
in 2017, Wikipedia had installed a caching cluster in an Equinix facility in Singapore, the first of its kind in Asia.
Internal research and operational development
In accordance with growing amounts of incoming donations exceeding seven digits in 2013 as recently reported, Two of the recent projects of such internal research and development have been the creation of a Visual Editor and a largely under-utilized "Thank" tab which were developed for the purpose of ameliorating issues of editor attrition, which have met with limited success.
At the 2013 level of contributions for Wikimedia presently documented as 45 million dollars, the computed budget level recommended by Jaffe and Caballero for reinvestment into internal research and development is between 1.8 million and 11.3 million dollars annually.
The GFDL was created for software manuals that come with free software programs licensed under the GPL.
This made it a poor choice for a general reference work: for example, the GFDL requires the reprints of materials from Wikipedia to come with a full copy of the GFDL text.
In December 2002, the Creative Commons license was released: it was specifically designed for creative works in general, not just for software manuals.
The license gained popularity among bloggers and others distributing creative works on the Web.
The Wikipedia project sought the switch to the Creative Commons.
Because the two licenses, GFDL and Creative Commons, were incompatible, in November 2008, following the request of the project, the Free Software Foundation (FSF) released a new version of the GFDL designed specifically to allow Wikipedia to by August 1, 2009.
In April 2009, Wikipedia and its sister projects held a community-wide referendum which decided the switch in June 2009.
The handling of media files (e.g. image files) varies across language editions.
Some language editions, such as the English Wikipedia, include non-free image files under fair use doctrine, while the others have opted not to, in part because of the lack of fair use doctrines in their home countries (e.g. in Japanese copyright law).
Media files covered by free content licenses (e.g. Creative Commons' CC BY-SA) are shared across language editions via Wikimedia Commons repository, a project operated by the Wikimedia Foundation.
Wikipedia's accommodation of varying international copyright laws regarding images has led some to observe that its photographic coverage of topics lags behind the quality of the encyclopedic text.
The Wikimedia Foundation is not a licensor of content, but merely a hosting service for the contributors (and licensors) of the Wikipedia.
This position has been successfully defended in court.
Methods of access
Because Wikipedia content is distributed under an open license, anyone can reuse or re-distribute it at no charge.
The content of Wikipedia has been published in many forms, both online and offline, outside of the Wikipedia website.
* Websites - Thousands of "mirror sites" exist that republish content from Wikipedia: two prominent ones, that also include content from other reference sources, are and .
Another example is Wapedia, which began to display Wikipedia content in a mobile-device-friendly format before Wikipedia itself did.
* Mobile apps - A variety of mobile apps provide access to Wikipedia on hand-held devices, including both Android and iOS devices (see Wikipedia apps).
* Search engines - Some web search engines make special use of Wikipedia content when displaying search results: examples include Bing (via technology gained from Powerset)
The Polish-language version contains nearly 240,000 articles.
There are German- and Spanish-language versions as well.
Also, "Wikipedia for Schools", the Wikipedia series of CDs / DVDs produced by Wikipedians and SOS Children, is a free, hand-checked, non-commercial selection from Wikipedia targeted around the UK National Curriculum and intended to be useful for much of the English-speaking world.
Since 2009, tens of thousands of print-on-demand books that reproduced English, German, Russian and French Wikipedia articles have been produced by the American company Books LLC and by three Mauritian subsidiaries of the German publisher VDM.
Several languages of Wikipedia also maintain a , with an accuracy of 55 percent.
Mobile access
Wikipedia's original medium was for users to read and edit content using any standard web browser through a fixed Internet connection.
Although Wikipedia content has been accessible through the mobile web since July 2013, The New York Times on February 9, 2014, quoted Erik Möller, deputy director of the Wikimedia Foundation, stating that the transition of internet traffic from desktops to mobile devices was significant and a cause for concern and worry.
At the time of the Tretikov appointment and her posted web interview with Sue Gardner in May 2014, Wikimedia representatives made a technical announcement concerning the number of mobile access systems in the market seeking access to Wikipedia.
Directly after the posted web interview, the representatives stated that Wikimedia would be applying an all-inclusive approach to accommodate as many mobile access systems as possible in its efforts for expanding general mobile access, including BlackBerry and the Windows Phone system, making market share a secondary issue.
The latest version for iOS was released on April 3, 2013, to similar reviews.
Access to Wikipedia from mobile phones was possible as early as 2004, through the Wireless Application Protocol (WAP), via the Wapedia service.
In June 2007 Wikipedia launched https:/ web http:/ , an official website for wireless devices.
In 2009 a newer mobile service was officially released, located at https:/ , which caters to more advanced mobile devices such as the iPhone, Android-based devices or WebOS-based devices.
Several other methods of mobile access to Wikipedia have emerged.
Many devices and applications optimize or enhance the display of Wikipedia content for mobile devices, while some also incorporate additional features such as use of Wikipedia metadata (See ), such as geoinformation.
Wikipedia Zero was an initiative of the Wikimedia Foundation to expand the reach of the encyclopedia to the developing countries.
It was discontinued in February 2018.
Andrew Lih and Andrew Brown both maintain editing Wikipedia with smart phones is difficult and this discourages new potential contributors.
Several years running the number of Wikipedia editors has been falling and Tom Simonite of MIT Technology Review claims the bureaucratic structure and rules are a factor in this.
Simonite alleges some Wikipedians use the labyrinthine rules and guidelines to dominate others and those editors have a vested interest in keeping the status quo.
Cultural impact
Trusted source to combat fake news
In 2017-18, after a barrage of false news reports, both Facebook and YouTube announced they would rely on Wikipedia to help their users evaluate reports and reject false news.
Noam Cohen, writing in The Washington Post states, "YouTube’s reliance on Wikipedia to set the record straight builds on the thinking of another fact-challenged platform, the Facebook social network, which announced last year that Wikipedia would help its users root out 'fake news'."
According to "Wikipedia Readership Survey 2011", the average age of Wikipedia readers is 36, with a rough parity between genders.
Almost half of Wikipedia readers visit the site more than five times a month, and a similar number of readers specifically look for Wikipedia in search engine results.
About 47 percent of Wikipedia readers do not realize that Wikipedia is a non-profit organization.
Cultural significance
Wikipedia's content has also been used in academic studies, books, conferences, and court cases.
The Parliament of Canada's website refers to Wikipedia's article on same-sex marriage in the "related links" section of its "further reading" list for the Civil Marriage Act.
The encyclopedia's assertions are increasingly used as a source by organizations such as the US federal courts and the World Intellectual Property Organization
In 2006, Time magazine recognized Wikipedia's participation (along with YouTube, Reddit, MySpace, and Facebook which argued that, with increased usage and awareness, the number of references to Wikipedia in popular culture is such that the word is one of a select band of 21st-century nouns that are so familiar (Google, Facebook, YouTube) that they no longer need explanation.
On September 28, 2007, Italian politician Franco Grillini raised a parliamentary question with the minister of cultural resources and activities about the necessity of freedom of panorama.
He said that the lack of such freedom forced Wikipedia, "the seventh most consulted website", to forbid all images of modern Italian buildings and art, and claimed this was hugely damaging to tourist revenues.
On September 16, 2007, The Washington Post reported that Wikipedia had become a focal point in the 2008 US election campaign, saying: "Type a candidate's name into Google, and among the first results is a Wikipedia page, making those entries arguably as important as any ad in defining a candidate.
Already, the presidential entries are being edited, dissected and debated countless times each day."
An October 2007 Reuters article, titled "Wikipedia page the latest status symbol", reported the recent phenomenon of how having a Wikipedia article vindicates one's notability.
Active participation also has an impact.
Law students have been assigned to write Wikipedia articles as an exercise in clear and succinct writing for an uninitiated audience.
A working group led by Peter Stone in its report called Wikipedia "the best-known example of crowdsourcing... that far exceeds traditionally-compiled information sources, such as encyclopedias and dictionaries, in scale and depth."
In a 2017 opinion piece for Wired, Hossein Derakhshan describes Wikipedia as "one of the last remaining pillars of the open and decentralized web" and contrasted its existence as a text-based source of knowledge with social media and social networking services, the latter having "since colonized the web for television's values."
For Derakhshan, Wikipedia's goal as an encyclopedia represents the Age of Enlightenment tradition of rationality triumphing over emotions, a trend which he considers "endangered" due to the "gradual shift from a typographic culture to a photographic one, which in turn means a shift from rationality to emotions, exposition to entertainment."
Rather than "" (), social networks have led to a culture of "dare not to care to know."
This is while Wikipedia faces "a more concerning problem" than funding, namely "a flattening growth rate in the number of contributors to the website."
Consequently, the challenge for Wikipedia and those who use it is to "save Wikipedia and its promise of a free and open collection of all human knowledge amid the conquest of new and old television-how to collect and preserve knowledge when nobody cares to know."
Awards
Wikipedia won two major awards in May 2004.
Wikipedia was also nominated for a "Best Practices" Webby award.
In 2007, readers of voted Wikipedia as the fourth-highest brand ranking, receiving 15 percent of the votes in answer to the question "Which brand had the most impact on our lives in 2006?"
In September 2008, Wikipedia received Quadriga A Mission of Enlightenment award of Werkstatt Deutschland along with Boris Tadić, Eckart Höfling, and Peter Gabriel.
The award was presented to Wales by David Weinberger.
In 2015, Wikipedia was awarded both the annual Erasmus Prize, which recognizes exceptional contributions to culture, society or social sciences, and the Spanish Princess of Asturias Award on International Cooperation.
Speaking at the Asturian Parliament in Oviedo, the city that hosts the awards ceremony, Jimmy Wales praised the work of the Asturian language Wikipedia users.
The night of the ceremony, members of the Wikimedia Foundation held a meeting with Wikipedians from all parts of Spain, including the local Asturian community.
Satire
Many parodies target Wikipedia's openness and susceptibility to inserted inaccuracies, with characters vandalizing or modifying the online encyclopedia project's articles.
Comedian Stephen Colbert has parodied or referenced Wikipedia on numerous episodes of his show The Colbert Report and coined the related term wikiality, meaning "together we can create a reality that we all agree on-the reality we just agreed on".
as well as the 2010 The Onion article "'L.A. Law' Wikipedia Page Viewed 874 Times Today".
In an episode of the television comedy The Office U.S., which aired in April 2007, an incompetent office manager (Michael Scott) is shown relying on a hypothetical Wikipedia article for information on negotiation tactics in order to assist him in negotiating lesser pay for an employee.
Viewers of the show tried to add the episode's mention of the page as a section of the actual Wikipedia article on negotiation, but this effort was prevented by other users on the article's talk page.
"My Number One Doctor", a 2007 episode of the television show Scrubs, played on the perception that Wikipedia is an unreliable reference tool with a scene in which Dr. Perry Cox reacts to a patient who says that a Wikipedia article indicates that the raw food diet reverses the effects of bone cancer by retorting that the same editor who wrote that article also wrote the Battlestar Galactica episode guide.
In 2008, the comedic website CollegeHumor produced a video sketch named "Professor Wikipedia", in which the fictitious Professor Wikipedia instructs a class with a medley of unverifiable and occasionally absurd statements.
The Dilbert comic strip from May 8, 2009, features a character supporting an improbable claim by saying "Give me ten minutes and then check Wikipedia."
In July 2009, BBC Radio 4 broadcast a comedy series called Bigipedia, which was set on a website which was a parody of Wikipedia.
Some of the sketches were directly inspired by Wikipedia and its articles.
In 2010, comedian Daniel Tosh encouraged viewers of his show, Tosh.0, to visit the show's Wikipedia article and edit it at will.
On a later episode, he commented on the edits to the article, most of them offensive, which had been made by the audience and had prompted the article to be locked from editing.
On August 23, 2013, the New Yorker website published a cartoon with this caption: "Dammit, Manning, have you considered the pronoun war that this is going to start on your Wikipedia page?"
The cartoon referred to Chelsea Elizabeth Manning (born Bradley Edward Manning), an American activist, politician, and former United States Army soldier and a trans woman.
In December 2015, John Julius Norwich stated, in a letter published in The Times newspaper, that as an historian he resorted to Wikipedia "at least a dozen times a day", and had never yet caught it out.
He described it as "a work of reference as useful as any in existence", with so wide a range that it is almost impossible to find a person, place or thing that it has left uncovered, and that he could never have written his last two books without it.
Sister projects - Wikimedia
Wikipedia has also spawned several sister projects, which are also wikis run by the Wikimedia Foundation.
These other Wikimedia projects include Wiktionary, a dictionary project launched in December 2002, Nicholas Carr wrote a 2005 essay, "The amorality of Web 2.0", that criticized websites with user-generated content, like Wikipedia, for possibly leading to professional (and, in his view, superior) content producers' going out of business, because "free trumps quality all the time".
Carr wrote: "Implicit in the ecstatic visions of Web 2.0 is the hegemony of the amateur.
I for one can't imagine anything more frightening."
Others dispute the notion that Wikipedia, or similar efforts, will entirely displace traditional publications.
For instance, Chris Anderson, the editor-in-chief of Wired Magazine, wrote in Nature that the "wisdom of crowds" approach of Wikipedia will not displace top scientific journals, with their rigorous peer review process.
Research use
Wikipedia has been widely used as a corpus for linguistic research in computational linguistics, information retrieval and natural language processing.
In particular, it commonly serves as a target knowledge base for the entity linking problem, which is then called "wikification", and to the related problem of word sense disambiguation.
Methods similar to wikification can in turn be used to find "missing" links in Wikipedia.
In 2015, French researchers Dr José Lages of the University of Franche-Comté in Besançon and Dima Shepelyansky of Paul Sabatier University in Toulouse published a global university ranking based on Wikipedia scholarly citations.
They used PageRank "followed by the number of appearances in the 24 different language editions of Wikipedia (descending order) and the century in which they were founded (ascending order)."
A 2018 Charles University study concluded that Wikipedia is the most used OER for students of environmental studies (used by 95% of students) and argued that educational institutions should focus their attention on it (for example by supporting Wikipedians in residence).
Studies related to Wikipedia has been using machine learning and artificial intelligence to support various operations.
One of the most important areas-automatic detection of vandalism and data quality assessment in Wikipedia, which may include different measures for articles and infoboxes.
with many later being merged into the project (e.g. GNE).
One of the most successful early online encyclopedias incorporating entries by the public was h2g2, which was created by Douglas Adams in 1999.
The h2g2 encyclopedia is relatively light-hearted, focusing on articles which are both witty and informative.
Subsequent collaborative knowledge websites have drawn inspiration from Wikipedia.
Some, such as Susning.nu, Enciclopedia Libre, Hudong, and Baidu Baike likewise employ no formal review process, although some like Conservapedia are not as open.
Others use more traditional peer review, such as Encyclopedia of Life and the online wiki encyclopedias Scholarpedia and Citizendium.
The latter was started by Sanger in an attempt to create a reliable alternative to Wikipedia.
