The Knights of the Round Table are the knightly members of the legendary fellowship of the King Arthur in the literary cycle of the Matter of Britain, in which the first written record of them appears in the Roman de Brut written by the Norman poet Wace in 1155.
In the Arthurian romance tradition, the Knights are an order in the service of Arthur, tasked with ensuring the peace of the kingdom and charged with leading the quest for the Holy Grail.
The Round Table at which they met was supposed to represent the equality of all the members.
Different stories presented different numbers of the Knights, ranging from only 12 to as many as 150 or more.
List
Their total number (always symbolic) and the names vary depending on the text.
The first sources state 24, 36 or 72.
For Robert de Boron, for whom the Round Table is a replica of the table of the Last Supper, they are fifty.
In some versions, including Le Morte d'Arthur by Thomas Malory, they are 150 ("three times fifty" is a phrase that is often found in Welsh or Irish texts, which means "a large number" or even "immeasurable").
Bedivere, Gawain and Kay are the oldest characters associated with Arthur.
Those most popular and best known today may include:
There have been also many others, generally more or less obscure.
For instance, Malory's account in Le Morte d'Arthur lists the following in the episode "The Healing of Sir Urry":
*Sir Balan (brother of Sir Balin, whom he killed by accident in a duel in which both wore helmets and did not know who they were fighting)
*Sir Barrant le Apres (King with a Hundred Knights)
*Sir Degrave sans Villainy (fought with the giant of the Black Lowe)
*Sir Epinogris (son of King Clariance of Northumberland)
*Sir Florence (son of Gawain by Sir Brandiles's sister)
*Sir Lovell (son of Gawain by Sir Brandiles's sister)
*Sir Marrok (whose wife turned him into a werewolf)
*Sir Perimones (brother to Persant and Pertolepe; called the Red Knight)
*Sir Severause le Breuse (known for rejecting battles with men in favour of giants, dragons, and wild beasts)
Individual knights
Aglovale
Aglovale de Galis (or Agloval de Galles) is the eldest legitimate son of King Pellinore.
Like his brothers Tor, Lamorak, Dornar and Percival, he is a Knight of the Round Table.
In chivalric romances, Aglovale never cuts as impressive a figure as his brothers Lamorak and Percival, but his valor is unquestioned.
According to the Post Vulgate Cycle and Thomas Malory's Le Morte d'Arthur, it is he who first brings Percival to Camelot to be knighted.
In the Vulgate Cycle, Aglovale dies accidentally at Gawain's hand during the Quest for the Holy Grail.
However, in Malory he and his brother Tor are among the knights charged with defending the execution of Guinevere and are both killed when Lancelot and his men rescue the queen.
Aglovale appears prominently in the Dutch romance Morien.
In a situation similar to Gahmuret's begetting of Feirefiz in Wolfram von Eschenbach's Parzival, Aglovale visits Moorish lands where he meets a beautiful black Christian princess and conceives a child with her.
He returns to his own lands, and thirteen years later, his son Morien comes to find him.
After a number of adventures, father and son are reunited and both return to Morien's country to take back their rightful lands.
In modern works, Aglovale is the eponymous protagonist of Clemence Housman's 1905 novel The Life of Sir Aglovale de Galis.
T. H. White's book The Once and Future King gives a particularly endearing portrait of the knight.
Agravain
Bagdemagus
Bedivere
Bors
Brunor
Cador
Calogrenant
Calogrenant, sometimes known in English as Colgrevance, is a cousin to Yvain, and his courtesy and eloquence were known throughout the kingdom.
Calogrenant first appears in Chrétien de Troyes' Yvain, the Knight of the Lion.
After a good meal, Calogrenant tells a story to a group of knights and Queen Guinevere about an adventure he had in the forest of Brocéliande.
He had heard of a magic spring in those woods which could create a huge storm whenever someone poured its water into a nearby basin.
With directions from a local family and a gruesomely depicted giant, Calogrenant reached the spring and summoned the storm.
Immediately after the storm, a knight named Esclados attacked him for causing such havoc.
The knight soundly defeated Calogrenant, but did not kill him.
Calogrenant's cousin Yvain is upset that Calogrenant never told him of this defeat, and sets out to avenge him, embarking on the adventure that sets up the remainder of events in the romance.
His character has been derived from the Welsh mythological hero Cynon ap Clydno, usually the lover of Owain's sister Morvydd, although in Owain, or the Lady of the Fountain Cynon is stated to be the son of Clydno, possibly connected to Clyddno Eiddin.
Roger Sherman Loomis and other scholars speculated that Calogrenant was used specifically as a foil for Kay in some lost early version of the Yvain story.
In Chrétien's romance he is presented as everything Kay is not: polite, respectful, and well-mannered.
By this theory, his name can be deconstructed to "Cai lo grenant", or "Cai the grumbler", which would represent another opposite characteristic of Kay, who was famous for his acid tongue.
an anachronism as the duchy of Clarence was not created until 1362.
Though mentioned in a few other Arthurian stories, Galeschin's role is ultimately minor.
Roger Sherman Loomis derives the name Galeschin from the name Galvariun, found on the Modena Archivolt.
He theorises that the name was altered to make it sound more like Galesche, the Old French word for Gaul, and derives the name Galvariun from the epithet Gwallt Euryn, found in Culhwch and Olwen, which he translates as "golden hair".
Gareth
Gawain
Geraint
Gingalain
Gornemant
Gornemant was Percival's mentor.
He is mentioned in a few early romances, but achieves prominence in Perceval, the Story of the Grail, where he instructs the young hero in the ways of knighthood.
Gornemant's niece is Blanchefleur, whom Percival later marries after successfully defending her city against attackers.
In modern works, his character became famous as Gurnemanz in Richard Wagner's opera Parsifal, in which he is one of the main Grail Knights.
Griflet
Hector de Maris
Hector de Maris (or Ector de Maris) is the younger half-brother of Lancelot and the natural son of King Ban of Benwick and the Lady de Maris; Bors and Lionel are his cousins.
He should not be mistaken with Ector, the father of Kay and foster father of Arthur.
Hector's adventures in the name of King Arthur were many and wide-ranging.
With Morganore, it was Hector de Maris who welcomed Tristan to Camelot when he was shipwrecked nearby.
The two jousted in a friendly competition, but Hector was ashamed to have been beaten by a knight of Cornwall.
Other times he was more successful at tournaments, getting the better of both Palomides and Percivale.
He, however, failed to defeat Turquine and became one of the knights he imprisoned before being rescued by his brother, Lancelot.
He returned the favour by rediscovering the lost Knight of the Lake after his period of insanity and returning him to the court.
He is known to have had a long relationship with Lady Perse of the Narrow Borderland, whose fiancé he murdered in order to be with her.
Hector later had an affair with the cousin of the Lady of Roestoc, before being reunited with Perse.
He also participates in the Grail Quest, but he is one of the many knights who prove unworthy of achieving the object.
In the Quest du Saint Graal of the Vulgate Cycle, Hector and Gawain are travelling together when they come to a ruined chapel where they pass the night and each has a marvelous dream.
The next morning, as they are telling each other their respective visions, they see, "a Hand, showing unto the elbow, and was covered with red samite, and upon that hung a bridle, not rich, and held within the fist a great candle that burnt right clear, and so passed fore them, and entered into the Chapel, and then vanished away, and they wist not where."
Jessie Weston found this an "unintelligent" variation on the theme of the perilous Black Hand in other romances in the Grail Cycle.
When Lancelot is caught in his affair with Guinevere, Hector stands by his brother and leaves court with him.
He becomes one of the top leaders of Lancelot's faction, participating in the battle to rescue the queen at her execution, and the defence of Lancelot's castle Joyous Guard.
Like all his family, he joins Lancelot in France when they are expelled from Arthur's kingdom, and he helps defeat the army led by Mordred's sons after the Battle of Camlann.
He then joins his brother at the Archbishop of Canterbury's hermitage and apparently dies there.
Hoel
Kay
Lamorak
Lancelot
Lanval
Lionel
Lucan
Lucan the Butler is a servant of King Arthur and the son of Duke Corneus, brother to Bedivere and cousin to Griflet.
He and his relatives are among Arthur's earliest allies in the fight against the rebel kings such as Lot, Urien and Caradoc, and remained one of Arthur's loyal companions throughout his life.
Lucan was a solid and reliable Knight of the Round Table and one of King Arthur's earliest companions.
He took on the post of royal butler - an important position in charge of the royal household rather than a serving man.
The duties of a "butler" have changed over time; Lucan was supposed to have been in charge of the royal court, along with Bedivere the Marshal and Kay the Seneschal.
He valiantly defended Arthur's right to the throne at the Battle of Bedegraine and against subsequent rebellions.
Though he sought adventure, he never came to the fore in Arthurian tales with renowned exploits of his own.
He always attended the royal tournaments and was once hurt so badly by Tristram that Yvain had to escort him to Gannes Abbey for medical assistance.
In most accounts of Arthur's death, from the Lancelot-Grail cycle to Le Morte d'Arthur, Lucan is one of the last knights at the king's side at the Battle of Camlann and is usually the last of them to die.
Lucan remained loyal to King Arthur throughout the schism with Lancelot and on occasion acted as their go-between.
Similarly, he stayed by the monarch's side during Mordred's rebellion and tried to dissuade Arthur from his final attack on his son/nephew, but was unsuccessful and the King received his mortal wound.
Himself gravely wounded himself, Lucan was one of the few knights left at Camlann, along his brother, Bedivere.
Worried about looters on the battlefield, Lucan and Bedivere attempts to move the dying Arthur into a nearby chapel for safety, but the strain is too much for Lucan as a severe wound bursts open, spilling out his bowels; he dies from his own wounds just before the king returns Excalibur to the Lady of the Lake and sails off for Avalon.
Though the knight Arthur asks to cast the sword into the lake is usually Griflet (Lancelot-Grail) or Bedivere , the 16th-century English ballad King Arthur's Death ascribes this duty to Lucan.
In modern works, a character named Lucan appears in the 2004 film King Arthur, played by Johnny Brennan.
He is a young boy found and cared for by Arthur's warrior Dagonet.
Meliant de Lis
Meliant de Lis (variants include Melianz, Melians and Melyans) is a minor character in several Arthurian romances.
In Livre de Artus, Gawain's lover Floree marries Melianz de Lis.
In the Vulgate Lancelot, the second romance of the Vulgate cycle, Carado of the Dolorous Tower takes Melyans le Gai's wife as his mistress.
In Queste, the third romance of the cycle, Galahad, Bors and Percival are joined at Castle Corbenic by nine other knights, one of whom is Melians de Danemarche.
Mordred
Moriaen
Morholt
Morholt (also called Marhalt, Marhault, Morold, Marhaus and other variations) is an Irish warrior who demands tribute from King Mark of Cornwall until he is slain by Tristan, Mark's nephew and defender.
In many versions of the legend, Morholt's name is prefaced with a definite article (i.e. The Morholt) as if it were a rank or a title, but scholars have found no reason for this.
He appears in almost all versions of the Tristan and Iseult story, beginning with the verse works of Thomas of Britain and Béroul.
In the early material, Morholt is the brother of the Queen of Ireland and the uncle of Tristan's future love (both mother and daughter are named Iseult).
He comes to Cornwall to collect tribute owed to his country, but Tristan agrees to battle the champion on the remote Saint Samson's Isle in order to release his people from the debt.
Tristan mortally wounds Morholt, leaving a piece of his sword in the Irishman's skull, but Morholt stabs him with a poisoned spear and escapes to Ireland to die.
The injured Tristan eventually travels to Ireland incognito to receive healing from the Iseult the Younger, but is found out when the queen discovers the piece of metal found in her brother's head fits perfectly into a chink in Tristan's blade.
The authors of later romances expanded Morholt's role; in works like the Prose Tristan, the Post-Vulgate Cycle, and Thomas Malory's Le Morte d'Arthur, he is a Knight of the Round Table before his fateful encounter with Tristan.
The prose romances add many more details to Morholt's career; the Post-Vulgate and Malory record his adventures with the young Gawain and Yvain early in King Arthur's reign.
In the later versions, Tristan takes Morholt's place at the Round Table when he joins the company himself.
Palamedes
Pelleas
Pellinore
Percival
Safir
Safir is the youngest son of the Saracen king Esclabor in the Arthurian legend.
He is a courageous and loyal knight and was, in his time, a fairly popular character, showing up in the Prose Tristan and Thomas Malory's Le Morte d'Arthur.
His name is included on the Winchester Round Table.
Both his brothers, Segwarides and Palamedes, also belong to the Round Table.
Safir appears in many works of Arthurian literature, usually alongside his brother Palamedes.
Though he is a younger brother, Safir converted to Christianity some time before Palamedes.
In one story, Safir is disguised as Ector de Maris and fights with Helior le Preuse, defeats him, and wins Espinogres' lady.
Vowing to defend the lady's honour, Palamedes arrives on the scene, and locks sword with Safir, not realising it is his brother.
After fighting for an hour, both are impressed with each other's prowess and skill, and decide to ask the other's identity.
Safir is devastated to find that he was fighting with his own brother and asks Palamedes for forgiveness; together, they return the lady to Espinogres.
When the affair between Lancelot and Guinevere is exposed, Safir and Palamedes join Lancelot's side in the ensuing civil war between Lancelot and King Arthur.
When they are banished to Lancelot's homeland in Gaul, Safir is made Duke of Landok while Palamedes becomes Duke of Provence.
Sagramore
Segwarides
Segwarides is a liegeman of King Mark who is cuckolded by Tristan in the Prose Tristan and Thomas Malory's Le Morte d'Arthur.
Malory also lists a knight of this name as a son of the Saracen king Esclabor, his brothers being Palamedes and Safir; it seems there were originally two characters of this name, but the stories in which they appear fail to differentiate between them.
In Malory, Tristan has a brief affair with Segwarides' wife, and wounds the knight after being found out.
Tristan encounters Segwarides later on the Isle of Servage.
Segwardies forgives the more famous knight saying he "will never hate a noble knight for a light lady" and the two team up to avoid the dangers of the isle.
Soon afterwards, Tristan makes Segwarides the Lord of Servage.
Segwarides is eventually killed trying to repel Lancelot's rescue of Guinevere from the stake.
Tor
Tor appears frequently in Arthurian literature.
In earlier mentions Tor's father is King Ars or Aries, but the Post-Vulgate Cycle and Thomas Malory's Le Morte d'Arthur say this man is his adoptive father while his natural father is King Pellinore.
In the Post-Vulgate and Malory, Tor is brother to Aglovale, Lamorak, Dornar, Percival, and Dindrane.
He is born when Pellinore sleeps with his mother "half by force", and she marries Aries shortly afterward; here Aries is not a king, but a shepherd.
Tor and his twelve half-brothers are raised as shepherds, but Tor dreams of being a knight.
Finally his parents take him to King Arthur's court, and Arthur makes the boy one of his first knights.
Later Merlin reveals Tor's true parentage, and Pellinore embraces his son; neither Aries nor his wife seem offended.
Tor distinguishes himself at the wedding feast of Arthur and Guinevere when he takes up a quest to retrieve a mysterious white brachet hound that had come into the court.
According to Malory, Tor and his brother Aglovale are among the knights charged with defending the execution of Guinevere and they both die when Lancelot and his followers rescue the queen.
Tristan
Urien
Yvain
Yvain the Bastard
Yvain the Bastard, also called Ywain the Adventurous, is a son of King Urien of Gore.
He is often confused with his half-brother Yvain, after whom he was named; while the older Yvain is the child of Urien and his wife Morgan le Fay, King Urien sired Yvain the Bastard on the wife of his seneschal.
He is encountered frequently in Arthurian romance as a hearty and sensible warrior.
His death comes at the hands of his cousin Gawain during the Quest for the Holy Grail.
The two meet, disguised by their armour, and decide to joust.
Yvain is mortally wounded, and it is not until Gawain takes him to a hermitage for his last rites that he realises he has killed his own cousin.
Sources
*Chrétien de Troyes; Owen, D. D. R. (translator) (1988).
Arthurian Romances.
New York: Everyman's Library. .
*Lacy, Norris J. (Ed.)
(1 April 1995).
Lancelot-Grail: The Old French Arthurian Vulgate and Post-Vulgate in Translation, Volume 4 of 5.
New York: Garland. .
*Malory, Thomas; Bryan, Elizabeth J. (introduction) (1994).
Le Morte d'Arthur. New York: Modern Library. .
*Loomis, Roger Sherman (1997).
Celtic Myth and Arthurian Romance.
Academy Chicago Publishers. .
*Wilson, Robert H.
The "Fair Unknown" in Malory.
Publications of the Modern-Language Association of America.
