San Gimignano () is a small walled medieval hill town in the province of Siena, Tuscany, north-central Italy.
Known as the Town of Fine Towers, San Gimignano is famous for its medieval architecture, unique in the preservation of about a dozen of its tower houses, which, with its hilltop setting and encircling walls, form "an unforgettable skyline".
The town also is known for saffron, the Golden Ham, and its white wine, Vernaccia di San Gimignano, produced from the ancient variety of Vernaccia grape which is grown on the sandstone hillsides of the area.
History
In the 3rd century BC a small Etruscan village stood on the site of San Gimignano.
Chroniclers Lupi, Coppi and Pecori relate that during the Catiline conspiracy against the Roman Republic in the 1st century, two patrician brothers, Muzio and Silvio, fled Rome for Valdelsa and built two castles, Mucchio and Silvia (now San Gimignano).
The name of Silvia was changed to San Gimignano in 450 AD after Bishop Geminianus, the Saint of Modena, intervened to spare the castle from destruction by the followers of Attila the Hun.
The city flourished until 1348, when it was struck by the Black Death that affected all of Europe, and about half the townsfolk died.
The town submitted to the rule of Florence.
Initially, some Gothic palazzi were built in the Florentine style, and many of the towers were reduced to the height of the houses.
There was little subsequent development, and San Gimignano remained preserved in its medieval state until the 19th century, when its status as a touristic and artistic resort began to be recognised.
Description
The city is on the ridge of a hill with its main axis being north/south.
It is encircled by three walls and has at its highest point, to the west, the ruins of a fortress dismantled in the 16th century.
There are eight entrances into the city, set into the second wall, which dates from the 12th and 13th centuries.
The main gates are Porta San Giovanni on the ridge extending south, Porta San Matteo to the north west and Porta S. Jacopo to the north east.
The main streets are Via San Matteo and Via San Giovanni, which cross the city from north to south.
At the heart of the town are four squares: the Piazza Duomo, on which stands the Collegiate Church; the Piazza della Cisterna, the Piazza Pecori and the Piazza delle Erbe.
To the north of the town is another significant square, Piazza Agostino, on which stands the Church of Sant' Agostino.
The locations of the Collegiate Church and Sant' Agostino's and their piazzas effectively divide the town into two regions.
Main sights
The town of San Gimignano has many examples of Romanesque and Gothic architecture.
As well as churches and medieval fortifications, there are examples of Romanesque secular and domestic architecture which may be distinguished from each other by their round and pointed arches, respectively.
A particular feature which is typical of the region of Siena is that the arches of openings are depressed, with doorways often having a second low arch set beneath a semi-circular or pointed arch.
Both Romanesque and Gothic windows sometimes have a bifurcate form, with two openings divided by a stone mullion under a single arch.
Squares
Piazza della Cisterna
This Piazza, entered from Via San Giovanni, is the main square of the town.
It is triangular in shape and is surrounded by medieval houses of different dates, among them some fine examples of Romanesque and Gothic palazzos.
At the centre of the piazza stands a well which was the main source of water for the town's residents.
The structure dates from 1346.
Although much of it has been renewed in the late 20th century, parts of the paving date from the 13th century.
Piazza Duomo
This piazza is to the north of Piazza della Cisterna and is connected by a passage adjacent to an open loggia.
To the west, at the top of the square, stands the Collegiate Church, reached by a broad flight of steps.
The name of the square would seem to imply that this church was at one time a cathedral, but although it was perhaps planned, this was not the case.
Other important buildings on the square include the Palazzo Comunale and the Palazzo Podesta, the house of the mayor.
The Palazzo Podesta is distinguished by its huge arched loggia.
Towers
While in other cities, such as Florence, most or all of their towers have been brought down by wars, catastrophes, or urban renewal, San Gimignano has managed to conserve fourteen towers of varying heights, for which it is known internationally.
Churches
There are many churches in the town: the two main ones are the Collegiata, formerly a cathedral, and Sant'Agostino, housing many artworks from early Italian renaissance artists.
The Pieve di Santa Maria at Cèllole, a village in the municipality, is an example of Romanesque pleban church.
Civic buildings
The Communal Palace, once seat of the podestà, is currently home of the town gallery, with works by Pinturicchio, Benozzo Gozzoli, Filippino Lippi, Domenico di Michelino, Pier Francesco Fiorentino and others.
From Dante's Hall in the palace, access may be made to a Maesta fresco by Lippo Memmi, as well as the Torre del Podestà or Torre Grossa, 1311, which stands high.
Municipal government
San Gimignano is headed by a mayor () assisted by a legislative body, the , and an executive body, the .
Since 1995 the mayor and members of the are directly elected together by resident citizens, while from 1945 to 1995 the mayor was chosen by the legislative body.
The is chaired by the mayor, who appoints others members, called .
The offices of the are housed in a building usually called the or .
Since 1995 the mayor of San Gimignano is directly elected by citizens, originally every four, then every five years.
The current mayor is Andrea Marrucci (PD), elected on 26 May 2019 with the 70.3% of the votes.
Demographic evolution
International relations
San Gimignano is twinned with:
Panoramic view
In art
* Wall mural in Grossi Florentino, executed by students of Napier Waller under supervision
Sources
* AA.
VV., Medieval Churches of the Val d'Elsa.
The territories of the Via Francigena between Siena and San Gimignano, Empoli, dell'Acero Publishers, 1996.
