In Greek mythology Sisyphus or Sisyphos (; Ancient Greek: Σίσυφος Sísuphos) was the king of Ephyra (now known as Corinth).
He was punished for his self-aggrandizing craftiness and deceitfulness by being forced to roll an immense boulder up a hill only for it to roll down when it nears the top, repeating this action for eternity.
Through the classical influence on modern culture, tasks that are both are therefore described as Sisyphean ().
Etymology
Linguistics Professor R. S. P. Beekes has suggested a pre-Greek origin and a connection with the root of the word (σοφός, "wise").
German mythographer Otto Gruppe thought that the name derived from (σίσυς, "a goat's skin"), in reference to a rain-charm in which goats' skins were used.
Family
Sisyphus was the son of King Aeolus of Thessaly and Enarete and the brother of Salmoneus.
He married the Pleiad Merope by whom he became the father of Glaucus, Ornytion, Thersander, Almus and Porphyrion.
Sisyphus was the grandfather of Bellerophon through Glaucus, and Minyas, founder of Orchomenus, through Almus.
In another version, Hades was sent to chain Sisyphus and was chained himself.
As long as Hades was tied up, nobody could die.
Because of this, sacrifices could not be made to the gods, and those that were old and sick were suffering.
The gods finally threatened to make life so miserable for Sisyphus that he would wish he were dead.
He then had no choice but to release Hades.
Before King Sisyphus died, he had told his wife to throw his naked body into the middle of the public square (purportedly as a test of his wife's love for him).
This caused King Sisyphus to end up on the shores of the river Styx.
Then, complaining to Persephone, goddess of the Underworld, that this was a sign of his wife's disrespect for him, King Sisyphus persuaded her to allow him to return to the upper world.
Once back in Ephyra, the spirit of King Sisyphus scolded his wife for not burying his body and giving it a proper funeral (as a loving wife should).
When King Sisyphus refused to return to the Underworld, he was forcibly dragged back there by Hades.
In another version of the myth, Persephone was tricked by Sisyphus that he had been conducted to Tartarus by mistake, and so she ordered that he be released.
In Philoctetes by Sophocles, there is a reference to the father of Odysseus (rumoured to have been Sisyphus, and not Laërtes, whom we know as the father in the Odyssey) upon having returned from the dead.
Euripides, in Cyclops, also identifies Sisyphus as Odysseus' father.
Punishment in the Underworld
As a punishment for his trickery, Zeus made King Sisyphus roll a huge boulder endlessly up a steep hill.
The maddening nature of the punishment was reserved for King Sisyphus due to his hubristic belief that his cleverness surpassed that of Zeus himself.
Zeus accordingly displayed his own cleverness by enchanting the boulder into rolling away from King Sisyphus before he reached the top, which ended up consigning Sisyphus to an eternity of useless efforts and unending frustration.
Thus it came to pass that pointless or interminable activities are sometimes described as Sisyphean.
King Sisyphus was a common subject for ancient writers and was depicted by the painter Polygnotus on the walls of the Lesche at Delphi.
Interpretations
According to the solar theory, King Sisyphus is the disk of the sun that rises every day in the east and then sinks into the west.
Other scholars regard him as a personification of waves rising and falling, or of the treacherous sea.
Friedrich Welcker suggested that he symbolises the vain struggle of man in the pursuit of knowledge, and Salomon Reinach that his punishment is based on a picture in which Sisyphus was represented rolling a huge stone Acrocorinthus, symbolic of the labour and skill involved in the building of the Sisypheum.
Albert Camus, in his 1942 essay The Myth of Sisyphus, saw Sisyphus as personifying the absurdity of human life, but Camus concludes "one must imagine Sisyphus happy" as "The struggle itself towards the heights is enough to fill a man's heart."
More recently, J. Nigro Sansonese, building on the work of Georges Dumézil, speculates that the origin of the name "Sisyphos" is onomatopoetic of the continual back-and-forth, susurrant sound ("siss phuss") made by the breath in the nasal passages, situating the mythology of Sisyphus in a far larger context of archaic (see Proto-Indo-European religion) trance-inducing techniques related to breath control.
The repetitive inhalation-exhalation cycle is described esoterically in the myth as an up-down motion of Sisyphus and his boulder on a hill.
In experiments that test how workers respond when the meaning of their task is diminished, the test condition is referred to as the Sisyphusian condition.
The two main conclusions of the experiment are that people work harder when their work seems more meaningful, and that people underestimate the relationship between meaning and motivation.
In his book The Philosophy of Recursive Thinking, German author Manfred Kopfer suggested a viable solution for Sisyphus punishment.
Every time Sisyphus reaches the top of the mountain, he breaks off a stone from the mountain and carries it down to the lowest point.
This way, the mountain will eventually be levelled and the stone cannot roll down anymore.
In Kopfers interpretation, the solution turns the punishment by the gods into a test for Sisyphus to prove his worthiness for godlike deeds.
If Sisyphus is able "to move a mountain", he shall be allowed to do what otherwise only gods are entitled to do.
Literary interpretations
Homer describes Sisyphus in both Book VI of the Iliad and Book XI of the Odyssey.
In Plato's Apology, Socrates looks forward to the after-life where he can meet figures such as Sisyphus, who think themselves wise, so that he can question them and find who is wise and who "thinks he is when he is not"
Albert Camus, the French absurdist, wrote an essay entitled The Myth of Sisyphus, in which he elevates Sisyphus to the status of absurd hero.
Franz Kafka repeatedly referred to Sisyphus as a bachelor; Kafkaesque for him were those qualities that brought out the Sisyphus-like qualities in himself.
According to Frederick Karl: "The man who struggled to reach the heights only to be thrown down to the depths embodied all of Kafka's aspirations; and he remained himself, alone, solitary."
The philosopher Richard Taylor uses the myth of Sisyphus as a representation of a life made meaningless because it consists of bare repetition.
Wolfgang Mieder has collected cartoons that build on the image of Sisyphus, many of them editorial cartoons.
In popular culture
Games
*Sisyphus is the main character in the video game Rock of Ages (2011), in which he travels through several time periods with a giant boulder defeating his enemies, including the Greek titan Cronus, who serves as the main villain of the story.
Sisyphus' appearance is based on the black figure Amphora.
* Sisyphus is represented in the video game Let's Play: Ancient Greek Punishment (2011) and its sequels, in which the player is doomed to live out Sisyphus's punishment in 8-bit form.
Literature
* Sisyphus is a dialogue written in the 4th.c.
BC and included in earlier editions of Plato's works.
*King Sisyphus is featured in Percy Jackson & the Olympians, in The Demigod Files story titled "The Sword of Hades", in which Percy Jackson, Thalia Grace, and Nico di Angelo follow the trail of the person that stole the Sword of Hades to Sisyphus' area in the Fields of Punishment.
Percy and Nico ask him for advice while Thalia pushes the boulder up the hill.
As they leave, Sisyphus begs them to set him free.
* The Myth of Sisyphus, a 1942 philosophical essay by Albert Camus which uses Sisyphus' punishment as a metaphor for the Absurd
Television
*King Sisyphus was featured in the in "Ten Little Warlords".
*A future version of King Sisyphus appeared in "The Eternal Punishment", the sixth episode of the French-Japanese animated series Ulysses 31 (itself a retelling of Greek mythology, set in the 31st century).
In the episode, Zeus offers Sisyphus a way out of his punishment if he manages to replace himself with the series protagonist Ulysses.
Aside from Sisyphus' method of punishment being different from the story (he pushes a scrap metal boulder into a crater, which is then reproduced underground to be brought back to him, as opposed to him rolling the boulder up a hill and the boulder rolling back down in the original story), his punishment remains similar.
*He was referenced in The Deuce episode "What Kind of Bad?".
*Sisyphus is a character in the television show, “American Gods”, which is based on the book by Neil Gaiman.
Music
*Sisyphus is referenced in the song "Rock & Roll Outlaw", on the 1995 eponymous album by Clutch.
*Sisyphus is referenced in the song "Keep Fallin'", on the Hot Chip album Coming on Strong.
*Sisyphus is referenced in the song "Over and Over and Over", on Jack White's 2018 album Boarding House Reach.
*Sisyphus is referenced in the song "Only Skin," from Joanna Newsom's 2006 album Ys.
*Sisyphus is referenced in the song "Miley", released in 2015 by the band SWMRS.
*"Sisyphus" is the title of a track on the Pink Floyd album Ummagumma.
*Sisyphus is referenced in the title track of the 2011 album This Is Our Science by Astronautalis.
*Sisyphus is referenced in the video of the Avicii song "Levels".
*"Sisyphus" is the title of a track on the Andrew Bird album "My Finest Work Yet."
*Sisyphus is referenced in the song "Wind In Our Sail", on 2016 Weezer album The White Album.
Comedy
*The British comedy collective The Alternative Comedy Memorial Society uses Sisyphus in their logo.
** Naranath Bhranthan, a willing boulder pusher in Indian folklore
** Wu Gang - also tasked with the impossible: to fell a self-regenerating tree
Notes
*Homer, The Iliad with an English Translation by A.T. Murray, Ph.D. in two volumes.
Cambridge, MA., Harvard University Press; London, William Heinemann, Ltd. 1924.
http:/ hopper/text?doc=Perseus:text:1999.01.0134 Online version at the Perseus Digital Library.
*Homer.
Homeri Opera in five volumes.
Oxford, Oxford University Press. 1920.
http:/ hopper/text?doc=Perseus:text:1999.01.0133 Greek text available at the Perseus Digital Library.
*Homer, The Odyssey with an English Translation by A.T. Murray, PH.D. in two volumes.
Cambridge, MA., Harvard University Press; London, William Heinemann, Ltd. 1919.
http:/ hopper hopper/text?doc
Perseus:text:1999.01.0135 Greek text available from the same website.
*Pausanias, Description of Greece with an English Translation by W.H.S. Jones, Litt.D., and H.A. Ormerod, M.A., in 4 Volumes.
Cambridge, MA, Harvard University Press; London, William Heinemann Ltd. 1918.
http:/ hopper hopper/text?doc=Perseus:text:1999.01.0159 Greek text available at the Perseus Digital Library.
*Pseudo-Apollodorus, The Library with an English Translation by Sir James George Frazer, F.B.A., F.R.S. in 2 Volumes, Cambridge, MA, Harvard University Press; London, William Heinemann Ltd. 1921.
http:/ hopper hopper/text?doc
Perseus:text:1999.01.0021 Greek text available from the same website.
*Publius Ovidius Naso, Metamorphoses translated by Brookes More (1859-1942).
Boston, Cornhill Publishing Co. 1922.
http:/ hopper/text?doc=Perseus:text:1999.02.0028 Online version at the Perseus Digital Library.
*Publius Ovidius Naso, Metamorphoses.
Hugo Magnus.
Gotha (Germany).
Friedr.
Andr.
Perthes.
http:/ hopper/text?doc=Perseus:text:1999.02.0029 Latin text available at the Perseus Digital Library.
