Gabon (; ), officially the Gabonese Republic (), is a country on the west coast of Central Africa.
Located on the equator, Gabon is bordered by Equatorial Guinea to the northwest, Cameroon to the north, the Republic of the Congo on the east and south, and the Gulf of Guinea to the west.
It has an area of nearly and its population is estimated at million people.
Its capital and largest city is Libreville.
Since its independence from France in 1960, the sovereign state of Gabon has had three presidents.
In the early 1990s, Gabon introduced a multi-party system and a new democratic constitution that allowed for a more transparent electoral process and reformed many governmental institutions.
Abundant petroleum and foreign private investment have helped make Gabon one of the most prosperous countries in Sub-Saharan Africa, with the 7th highest HDI a federation that survived until 1959.
In World War II, the Allies invaded Gabon in order to overthrow the pro-Vichy France colonial administration.
The territories of French Equatorial Africa became independent on August 17, 1960.
The first president of Gabon, elected in 1961, was Léon M'ba, with Omar Bongo Ondimba as his vice president.
After M'ba's accession to power, the press was suppressed, political demonstrations banned, freedom of expression curtailed, other political parties gradually excluded from power, and the Constitution changed along French lines to vest power in the Presidency, a post that M'ba assumed himself.
However, when M'ba dissolved the National Assembly in January 1964 to institute one-party rule, an army coup sought to oust him from power and restore parliamentary democracy.
French paratroopers flew in within 24 hours to restore M'ba to power.
After a few days of fighting, the coup ended and the opposition was imprisoned, despite widespread protests and riots.
French soldiers still remain in the Camp de Gaulle on the outskirts of Gabon's capital to this day.
When M'Ba died in 1967, Bongo replaced him as president.
In March 1968, Bongo declared Gabon a one-party state by dissolving the BDG and establishing a new party-the Parti Democratique Gabonais (PDG).
He invited all Gabonese, regardless of previous political affiliation, to participate.
Bongo sought to forge a single national movement in support of the government's development policies, using the PDG as a tool to submerge the regional and tribal rivalries that had divided Gabonese politics in the past.
Bongo was elected President in February 1975; in April 1975, the position of vice president was abolished and replaced by the position of prime minister, who had no right to automatic succession.
Bongo was re-elected President in both December 1979 and November 1986 to 7-year terms.
Government
Gabon is a republic with a presidential form of government under the 1961 constitution (revised in 1975, rewritten in 1991, and revised in 2003).
The president is elected by universal suffrage for a seven-year term; a 2003 constitutional amendment removed presidential term limits and facilitated a presidency for life.
The president can appoint and dismiss the prime minister, the cabinet, and judges of the independent Supreme Court.
The president also has other strong powers, such as authority to dissolve the National Assembly, declare a state of siege, delay legislation, and conduct referenda.
Interior Minister Jean-François Ndongou accused Mba Obame and his supporters of treason.
The 2016 presidential election was disputed, with very close official results reported.
Protests broke out in the capital and met a brutal repression which culminated in the alleged bombing of opposition party headquarters by the presidential guard.
Between 50 and 100 citizens were killed by security forces and 1,000 arrested.
International observers criticized irregularities, including unnaturally high turnout reported for some districts.
The country's supreme court threw out some suspect precincts, but a full recount was not possible because ballots had been destroyed.
The election was declared in favor of the incumbent Ondimba.
European Parliament issued 2 resolutions denouncing the unclear results of the election and calling for an independent investigation on the human rights violations.
Foreign relations
Since independence, Gabon has followed a nonaligned policy, advocating dialogue in international affairs and recognizing each side of divided countries.
In inter-African affairs, Gabon espouses development by evolution rather than revolution and favors regulated private enterprise as the system most likely to promote rapid economic growth.
Gabon played an important leadership role in the stability of Central Africa through involvement in mediation efforts in Chad, the Central African Republic, Angola, the Republic of the Congo, the Democratic Republic of the Congo (D.R.C.), and Burundi.
In December 1999, through the mediation efforts of President Bongo, a peace accord was signed in the Republic of the Congo (Brazzaville) between the government and most leaders of an armed rebellion.
President Bongo was also involved in the continuing D.R.C. peace process, and played a role in mediating the crisis in Ivory Coast.
Gabonese armed forces were also an integral part of the Central African Economic and Monetary Community (CEMAC) mission to the Central African Republic.
Gabon is a member of the United Nations (UN) and some of its specialized and related agencies, as well as of the World Bank; the IMF; the African Union (AU); the Central African Customs Union/Central African Economic and Monetary Community ; the Organization of the Islamic Conference (OIC); the Nonaligned Movement; and the Economic Community of Central African States (ECCAS/CEEAC), among others.
In 1995, Gabon withdrew from the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC), rejoining in 2016.
Gabon was elected to a non-permanent seat on the United Nations Security Council for January 2010 through December 2011 and held the rotating presidency in March 2010.
There are three distinct regions: the coastal plains (ranging between from the ocean's shore), the mountains (the Cristal Mountains to the northeast of Libreville, the Chaillu Massif in the centre), and the savanna in the east.
The coastal plains form a large section of the World Wildlife Fund's Atlantic Equatorial coastal forests ecoregion and contain patches of Central African mangroves especially on the Muni River estuary on the border with Equatorial Guinea.
Geologically, Gabon is primarily ancient Archean and Paleoproterozoic igneous and metamorphic basement rock, belonging to the stable continental crust of the Congo Craton, a remnant section of extremely old continental crust.
Some formations are more than two billion years old.
Ancient rock units are overlain by marine carbonate, lacustrine and continental sedimentary rocks as well as unconsolidated sediments and soils that formed in the last 2.5 million years of the Quaternary.
The rifting apart of the supercontinent Pangaea created rift basins that filled with sediments and formed the hydrocarbons which are now a keystone of the Gabonese economy.
Gabon is notable for the Oklo reactor zones, the only known natural nuclear fission reactor on Earth which was active two billion years ago.
The site was discovered during uranium mining in the 1970s to supply the French nuclear power industry.
Gabon's largest river is the Ogooué which is long.
Gabon has three karst areas where there are hundreds of caves located in the dolomite and limestone rocks.
Some of the caves include Grotte du Lastoursville, Grotte du Lebamba, Grotte du Bongolo, and Grotte du Kessipougou.
Many caves have not been explored yet.
A National Geographic Expedition visited the caves in the summer of 2008 to document them.
Gabon is also noted for efforts to preserve the natural environment.
In 2002, President Omar Bongo Ondimba designated roughly 10% of the nation's territory to be part of its national park system (with 13 parks in total), one of the largest proportions of nature parkland in the world.
The National Agency for National Parks manages Gabon's national park system.
Natural resources include petroleum, magnesium, iron, gold, uranium, and forests.
Economy
Gabon's economy is dominated by oil.
Oil revenues constitute roughly 46% of the government's budget, 43% of the gross domestic product (GDP), and 81% of exports.
Oil production is currently declining rapidly from its high point of 370,000 barrels per day in 1997.
Some estimates suggest that Gabonese oil will be expended by 2025.
In spite of the decreasing oil revenues, planning is only now beginning for an after-oil scenario.
The Grondin Oil Field was discovered in water depths offshore, in 1971 and produces from the Batanga sandstones of Maastrichtian age forming an anticline salt structural trap which is about deep.
Gabonese public expenditures from the years of significant oil revenues were not spent efficiently.
Overspending on the Trans-Gabon Railway, the CFA franc devaluation of 1994, and periods of low oil prices caused serious debt problems that still plague the country.
The richest 20% of the population earn over 90% of the income while about a third of the Gabonese population lives in poverty.
Gabon has one of the lowest population densities of any country in Africa,
In October 2012, just before the 14th summit of the Organisation internationale de la Francophonie, the country declared an intention to add English as a second official language, reportedly in response to an investigation by France into corruption in the African country, though a government spokesman insisted it was for practical reasons only.
It was later clarified that the country intended to introduce English as a first foreign language in schools, while keeping French as the general medium of instruction and the sole official language.
In October 2012 Gabon rejected French in favour of English.
Religion
Major religions practiced in Gabon include Christianity (Roman Catholicism and Protestantism), Bwiti, Islam, and indigenous animistic religion.
Many persons practice elements of both Christianity and traditional indigenous religious beliefs.
Health
Most of the health services of Gabon are public, but there are some private institutions, of which the best known is the hospital established in 1913 in Lambaréné by Albert Schweitzer.
Gabon's medical infrastructure is considered one of the best in West Africa.
By 1985 there were 28 hospitals, 87 medical centers, and 312 infirmaries and dispensaries.
, there were an estimated 29 physicians per 100,000 people.
Approximately 90% of the population had access to health care services.
In 2000, 70% of the population had access to safe drinking water and 21% had adequate sanitation.
A comprehensive government health program treats such diseases as leprosy, sleeping sickness, malaria, filariasis, intestinal worms, and tuberculosis.
Rates for immunization of children under the age of one were 97% for tuberculosis and 65% for polio.
Immunization rates for DPT and measles were 37% and 56% respectively.
Gabon has a domestic supply of pharmaceuticals from a factory in Libreville.
The total fertility rate has decreased from 5.8 in 1960 to 4.2 children per mother during childbearing years in 2000.
Ten percent of all births were low birth weight.
The maternal mortality rate was 520 per 100,000 live births as of 1998.
In 2005, the infant mortality rate was 55.35 per 1,000 live births and life expectancy was 55.02 years.
As of 2002, the overall mortality rate was estimated at 17.6 per 1,000 inhabitants.
The HIV AIDS.
There were an estimated 2,400 deaths from AIDS in 2009 - down from 3,000 deaths in 2003.
Education
Gabon's education system is regulated by two ministries: the Ministry of Education, in charge of pre-kindergarten through the last high school grade, and the Ministry of Higher Education and Innovative Technologies, in charge of universities, higher education, and professional schools.
Education is compulsory for children ages 6 to 16 under the Education Act.
Most children in Gabon start their school lives by attending nurseries or "Crèche", then kindergarten known as "Jardins d'Enfants".
At age 6, they are enrolled in primary school, "École Primaire" which is made up of six grades.
The next level is "École Secondaire", which is made up of seven grades.
The planned graduation age is 19 years old.
Those who graduate can apply for admission at institutions of higher learning, including engineering schools or business schools.
In Gabon as of 2012, the literacy rate of its population ages 15 and above was 82%.
The government has used oil revenue for school construction, paying teachers' salaries, and promoting education, including in rural areas.
However, maintenance of school structures, as well as teachers' salaries, has been declining.
In 2002 the gross primary enrollment rate was 132 percent, and in 2000 the net primary enrollment rate was 78 percent.
Gross and net enrollment ratios are based on the number of students formally registered in primary school and therefore do not necessarily reflect actual school attendance.
As of 2001, 69 percent of children who started primary school were likely to reach grade 5.
Problems in the education system include poor management and planning, lack of oversight, poorly qualified teachers, and overcrowded classrooms.
Culture
A country with a primarily oral tradition up until the spread of literacy in the 21st century, Gabon is rich in folklore and mythology.
"Raconteurs" are currently working to keep traditions alive such as the mvett among the Fangs and the ingwala among the Nzebis.
Gabon also features internationally celebrated masks, such as the n'goltang (Fang) and the reliquary figures of the Kota.
Each group has its own set of masks used for various reasons.
They are mostly used in traditional ceremonies such as marriage, birth and funerals.
Traditionalists mainly work with rare local woods and other precious materials.
Music
Gabonese music is lesser-known in comparison with regional giants like the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Cameroon.
The country boasts an array of folk styles, as well as pop stars like Patience Dabany and Annie-Flore Batchiellilys, a Gabonese singer and renowned live performer.
Also known are guitarists like Georges Oyendze, La Rose Mbadou and Sylvain Avara, and the singer Oliver N'Goma.
Imported rock and hip hop from the US and UK are popular in Gabon, as are rumba, makossa and soukous.
Gabonese folk instruments include the obala, the , the balafon and traditional drums.
Media
Radio-Diffusion Télévision Gabonaise (RTG), which is owned and operated by the government, broadcasts in French and indigenous languages.
Color television broadcasts have been introduced in major cities.
In 1981, a commercial radio station, Africa No. 1, began operations.
The most powerful radio station on the continent, it has participation from the French and Gabonese governments and private European media.
In 2004, the government operated two radio stations and another seven were privately owned.
There were also two government television stations and four privately owned.
In 2003, there were an estimated 488 radios and 308 television sets for every 1,000 people.
About 11.5 of every 1,000 people were cable subscribers.
Also in 2003, there were 22.4 personal computers for every 1,000 people and 26 of every 1,000 people had access to the Internet.
The national press service is the Gabonese Press Agency, which publishes a daily paper, Gabon-Matin (circulation 18,000 as of 2002).
L'Union in Libreville, the government-controlled daily newspaper, had an average daily circulation of 40,000 in 2002.
The weekly Gabon d'Aujourdhui is published by the Ministry of Communications.
There are about nine privately owned periodicals which are either independent or affiliated with political parties.
These publish in small numbers and are often delayed by financial constraints.
The constitution of Gabon provides for free speech and a free press, and the government supports these rights.
Several periodicals actively criticize the government and foreign publications are widely available.
Cuisine
Gabonese cuisine is influenced by French cuisine, but staple foods are also available.
Sports
The Gabon national football team has represented the nation since 1962.
The Under-23 football team won the 2011 CAF U-23 Championship and qualified for the 2012 London Olympics.
Gabon were joint hosts, along with Equatorial Guinea, of the 2012 Africa Cup of Nations, and the sole hosts of the competition's 2017 tournament.
Arsenal striker Pierre-Emerick Aubameyang plays for Gabon national team.
The Gabon national basketball team, nicknamed Les Panthères, finished 8th at the AfroBasket 2015, its best performance ever.
Gabon has competed at most Summer Olympics since 1972.
The country's sole Olympic medalist is Anthony Obame, who won a silver medal in taekwondo at the 2012 Olympics, held in London.
Gabon has excellent recreational fishing and is considered one of the best places in the world to catch Atlantic tarpon.
Footnotes
Bibliography
