Dame Agatha Mary Clarissa Christie, Lady Mallowan, (née Miller; 15 September 1890 - 12 January 1976) was an English writer.
She is known for her 66 detective novels and 14 short story collections, particularly those revolving around her fictional detectives Hercule Poirot and Miss Marple.
Christie also wrote the world's longest-running play, a murder mystery, The Mousetrap, and, under the pen name Mary Westmacott, six romances.
In 1971 she was appointed a Dame Commander of the Order of the British Empire (DBE) for her contribution to literature.
Christie was born into a wealthy upper-middle-class family in Torquay, Devon.
Before marrying and starting a family in London, she had served in a Devon hospital during the First World War, tending to troops coming back from the trenches.
She was initially an unsuccessful writer with six consecutive rejections, but this changed when The Mysterious Affair at Styles, featuring Hercule Poirot, was published in 1920.
During the Second World War, she worked as a pharmacy assistant at University College Hospital, London, acquiring a good knowledge of poisons which feature in many of her novels.
Guinness World Records lists Christie as the best-selling novelist of all time.
Her novels have sold roughly 2 billion copies, and her estate claims that her works come third in the rankings of the world's most-widely published books,
In 1955, Christie was the first recipient of the Mystery Writers of America's highest honour, the Grand Master Award.
Later the same year, Witness for the Prosecution received an Edgar Award by the MWA for Best Play.
In 2013, The Murder of Roger Ackroyd was voted the best crime novel ever by 600 fellow writers of the Crime Writers' Association.
On 15 September 2015, coinciding with her 125th birthday, And Then There Were None was named the "World's Favourite Christie" in a vote sponsored by the author's estate.
Most of her books and short stories have been adapted for television, radio, video games and comics, and more than thirty feature films have been based on her work.
Life and career
Childhood and adolescence: 1890-1910
Agatha Mary Clarissa Miller was born on 15 September 1890 into a wealthy upper-middle-class family in Torquay, Devon.
She was the youngest of three children born to Frederick Alvah ("Fred") Miller, "a gentleman of substance", and his wife Clarissa Margaret ("Clara")
Miller née Boehmer.
Christie's mother Clara was born in Dublin in 1854 to Lieutenant (later Captain) Frederick Boehmer (91st Regiment of Foot) and his second wife Mary Ann Boehmer née West.
Boehmer died aged 49 of bronchitis (although biographers often claim he was killed in a riding accident) in Jersey in April 1863, leaving his widow to raise Clara and her three brothers alone on a meagre income.
Two weeks after Boehmer's death, Mary's sister Margaret West married widowed dry goods merchant Nathaniel Frary Miller, a U.S. citizen.
To assist Mary financially, the newlyweds agreed to foster nine year old Clara.
The family settled in Timperley, , in April 1878.
where the couple were renting lodgings.
Their second child, Louis Montant ("Monty"), was born in Morristown, New Jersey, in 1880 while they were making an extended visit to the United States.
When Fred's father died in 1869, he left Clara £2000; they used this money to purchase the leasehold of a villa in Torquay named Ashfield in which to raise their family.
It was here that their third and final child, Agatha, was born in 1890.
Although she devoted much time to her pets, Christie spent much of her childhood apart from other children.
She eventually made friends with a group of other girls in Torquay, noting that "one of the highlights of my existence" was her appearance with them in a youth production of Gilbert and Sullivan's The Yeomen of the Guard, in which she played the hero, Colonel Fairfax.
By 1901, Christie's father's health had deteriorated, due to what he believed were heart problems.
The family's financial situation had by this time declined significantly.
Christie and her mother Clara continued to live in their Torquay home.
Christie's sister Madge married the year after their father's death and moved to Cheadle, (historic county of) Cheshire.
Christie's brother Monty was overseas, serving in a British regiment.
Christie later claimed that her father's death, occurring when she was 11 years old, marked the end of her childhood.)
while recovering in bed from an undisclosed illness.
This was about 6,000 words on the topic of "madness and dreams", a subject of fascination for her.
One of her biographers has commented that, despite "infelicities of style", the story was nevertheless "compelling".
Rising through the ranks, he was eventually stationed back to Britain in September 1918 as a colonel in the Air Ministry.
Christie involved herself in the war effort as a member of the Voluntary Aid Detachment.
From October 1914 to May 1915, then from June 1916 to September 1918, she worked a total of 3400 hours in the Town Hall Red Cross Hospital, Torquay, first as a nurse (unpaid) then as a dispenser (at £16 a year from 1917) after qualifying as an apothecaries' assistant.
They learned to surf prone in South Africa; then, in Waikiki, they were among the first Britons to surf standing up.
Following their return to England, Archie resumed work in the City, while Christie continued to work hard at her writing.
After a series of apartments in London, they moved to the country, eventually purchasing a house in Sunningdale, Berkshire, which they renamed Styles after the mansion in Christie's first detective novel.
The disappearance caused a public outcry.
The home secretary, William Joynson-Hicks, pressured police, and a newspaper offered a £100 reward.
Over a thousand police officers, 15,000 volunteers, and several aeroplanes scoured the rural landscape.
Sir Arthur Conan Doyle gave a spirit medium one of Christie's gloves to find her.
Christie's disappearance was featured on the front page of The New York Times.
Despite the extensive manhunt, she was not found for 10 days.
On 14 December 1926, she was found at the Swan Hydropathic Hotel in Harrogate, Yorkshire, registered as Mrs Tressa Neele (the surname of her husband's lover) from "Capetown S.A." (i.e. Cape Town, South Africa).
The next day, Christie left for her sister's residence, Abney Hall, Cheadle, where she was sequestered "in guarded hall, gates locked, telephone cut off, and callers turned away."
yet opinion remains divided over the reason for her disappearance.
Some, including authorised biographer Janet Morgan, believe that she disappeared during a fugue state.
In contrast, Jared Cade's research led him to conclude that Christie deliberately planned the event to embarrass her husband, but did not anticipate the public melodrama that resulted.
Laura Thompson provides the alternative view that Christie disappeared during a nervous breakdown, conscious of her actions but not in emotional control of herself.
Second marriage and later life: 1927-1976
In January 1927, Christie, looking "very pale", sailed with her daughter and secretary to Las Palmas, Canary Islands, to "complete her convalescence", returning three months later.
Christie petitioned for divorce and was granted a decree nisi against her husband in April 1928 which was made absolute in October 1928.
Archie married Nancy Neele a week later.
Christie retained custody of their daughter Rosalind and the Christie surname for her writing.
During their marriage, she published six novels, a collection of short stories, and a number of short stories in magazines.
Some years later, reflecting on the whole period, Christie said, "So, after illness, came sorrow, despair and heartbreak.
There is no need to dwell on it."
Max Edgar Lucien Mallowan.
In a 1977 interview, Mallowan recounted his first meeting with Christie, when he took her and a group of tourists on a tour of his expedition site in Iraq.
Christie and Mallowan married in September 1930.
Christie frequently used settings that were familiar to her for her stories.
She often accompanied Mallowan on his archaeological expeditions, and her travels with him contributed background to several of her novels set in the Middle East.
The Greenway Estate in Devon, acquired by the couple as a summer residence in 1938, is now in the care of the National Trust.
Christie often stayed at Abney Hall, Cheshire, owned by her brother-in-law, James Watts, basing at least two stories there: a short story "The Adventure of the Christmas Pudding" in the story collection of the same name, and the novel After the Funeral.
"Abney became Agatha's greatest inspiration for country-house life, with all its servants and grandeur being woven into her plots.
The descriptions of the fictional Chimneys, Stoneygates, and other houses in her stories are mostly Abney Hall in various forms."
During the Second World War, Christie worked in the pharmacy at University College Hospital, London, where she acquired a knowledge of poisons that she put to good use in her post-war crime novels.
For example, the use of thallium as a poison was suggested to her by UCH Chief Pharmacist Harold Davis (later appointed Chief Pharmacist at the UK Ministry of Health), and in The Pale Horse, published in 1961, she employed it to dispatch a series of victims, the first clue to the murder method coming from the victims' loss of hair.
So accurate was her description of thallium poisoning that on at least one occasion it helped solve a case that was baffling doctors.
Christie lived in Chelsea, first in Cresswell Place and later in Sheffield Terrace.
Both properties are now marked by blue plaques.
In 1934, she and Max Mallowan purchased Winterbrook House in Winterbrook, a hamlet adjoining the small market town of Wallingford, then within the bounds of Cholsey and in Berkshire.
This was their main residence for the rest of their lives and the place where Christie did much of her writing.
where she was for many years President of the local amateur dramatic society.
Around 1941-42, the British intelligence agency MI5 investigated Christie after a character called Major Bletchley appeared in her 1941 thriller N or M?, which was about a hunt for a pair of deadly fifth columnists in wartime England.
MI5 was afraid that Christie had a spy in Britain's top-secret codebreaking centre, Bletchley Park.
The agency's fears were allayed when Christie told her friend, the codebreaker Dilly Knox, "I was stuck there on my way by train from Oxford to London and took revenge by giving the name to one of my least lovable characters."
Personal qualities
Chrisitie's obituary in The Times notes that "she never cared much for the cinema, or for wireless and television".
Further,Dame Agatha's private pleasures were gardening - she won local prizes for horticulture - and buying furniture for her various houses.
She was a shy person: she disliked public appearances: but she was friendly and sharp-witted to meet.
By inclination as well as breeding she belonged to the English upper middle-class.
She wrote about, and for, people like herself.
That was an essential part of her charm.
She was survived by her second husband, Sir Max Mallowan; by her only child, Rosalind Hicks (formerly Prichard, née Christie);
Christie's estate and subsequent ownership of works
Although Christie was rather unhappy about becoming "an employed wage slave" In 1968, when Christie was almost 80 years old, she sold a 51% stake in Agatha Christie Limited (and therefore the works it owned) to Booker Books (better known as Booker Author's Division), a subsidiary of the for literature, which later increased its stake to 64%.
In 1993, Hicks founded the Agatha Christie Society and became its first president.
The Society is now chaired and managed by Christie's great-grandson James Prichard.
Christie's family and family trusts, including James Prichard, continue to own the remaining 36% stake in Agatha Christie Limited, and remain associated with the company.
James Prichard became the company's chairman in October 2015.
The development of Christie's work continues apace.
Mathew Prichard in his own right holds the copyright to some of his grandmother's later literary works (including The Mousetrap).
In 2014, RLJ Entertainment Inc. acquired Acorn Media U.K., renamed it Acorn Media Enterprises, and incorporated it as the RLJE UK development arm.
RLJ Entertainment Inc. was founded by American entrepreneur Robert L. Johnson.
In late February 2014, media reports stated that the BBC had acquired exclusive TV rights to Christie's works in the UK (previously associated with ITV) and made plans with Acorn's co-operation to air new productions for the 125th anniversary of Christie's birth in 2015.
As part of that deal, the BBC broadcast Partners In Crime
and
And Then There Were None, both in 2015.
Subsequent productions have included The Witness for the Prosecution but plans to televise Ordeal by Innocence at Christmas 2017 were delayed due to controversy surrounding one of the cast members.
The three-part adaptation aired in April 2018.
A three-part adaptation of The A.B.C. Murders starring John Malkovich and Rupert Grint began filming in June 2018 for later broadcast.
Writings
Works of fiction
Hercule Poirot and Miss Marple
Christie's first book, The Mysterious Affair at Styles, was published in 1920 and introduced the detective Hercule Poirot, who became a long-running character in Christie's works, appearing in 33 novels and 54 short stories.
Miss Jane Marple was introduced in the short-story collection The Thirteen Problems in 1927.
Although Christie states that, "Miss Marple was not in any way a picture of my grandmother; she was far more fussy and spinsterish than my grandmother ever was", her autobiography does establish a firm connection between the fictional character and Christie's maternal great-aunt Margaret Miller ("Auntie-Grannie") and her "Ealing cronies".
Both Marple and Miller "always expected the worst of everyone and everything, and were, with almost frightening accuracy, usually proved right."
Christie became increasingly tired of Poirot, much as Sir Arthur Conan Doyle had grown weary of his character Sherlock Holmes.
By the end of the 1930s, Christie wrote in her diary that she was finding Poirot "insufferable", and by the 1960s she felt that he was "an egocentric creep".
However, unlike Conan Doyle, Christie resisted the temptation to kill her detective off while he was still popular.
She saw herself as an entertainer whose job was to produce what the public liked, and the public liked Poirot.
She did marry off Poirot's companion Captain Hastings in an attempt to trim her cast commitments.
Poirot is the only fictional character to date to be given an obituary in The New York Times, following the publication of Curtain.
It appeared on the front page of the paper on 6 August 1975.
Following the great success of Curtain, Christie gave permission for the release of Sleeping Murder sometime in 1976 but died in January 1976 before the book could be released.
This may explain some of the inconsistencies compared to the rest of the Marple series-for example, Colonel Arthur Bantry, husband of Miss Marple's friend Dolly, is still alive and well in Sleeping Murder although he is noted as having died in books published earlier.
It may be that Christie simply did not have time to revise the manuscript before she died.
In 2013, the Christie family gave their "full backing" to the release of a new Poirot story, The Monogram Murders, which was written by British author Sophie Hannah.
Hannah later released a second Poirot mystery, Closed Casket, in 2016 and https:/ w/index.php?title
Agatha_Christie&action
edit&section=11 The Mystery of the Three Quarters in 2018.
Formula and plot devices
Christie's reputation as "The Queen of Crime" was built upon the large number of classic motifs that she introduced, or for which she provided the most famous example.
Christie built these tropes into what is now considered classic mystery structure: a murder is committed, there are multiple suspects who are all concealing secrets, and the detective gradually uncovers these secrets over the course of the story, discovering the most shocking twists towards the end.
Culprits in Christie's mysteries have included children, policemen, narrators, already deceased individuals, and sometimes comprise no known suspects (And Then There Were None) or all of the suspects (Murder on the Orient Express).
At the end, in a Christie hallmark, the detective usually gathers the surviving suspects into one room, explains the course of their deductive reasoning, and reveals the guilty party, although there are exceptions in which it is left to the guilty party to explain all (such as
And Then There Were None and Endless Night).
Christie allows some culprits to escape earthly justice for a variety of reasons, such as the passage of time (retrospective cases), in which the most important characters have already died, or by active prescription.
Such cases include The Witness for the Prosecution, Murder on the Orient Express, The Man in the Brown Suit, Elephants Can Remember, and The Unexpected Guest.
There are instances in which a killer is not brought to justice in the legal sense but does die as a direct result of their plot, sometimes by their own hand at the direction or with the collusion of the detective (usually Hercule Poirot).
This occurs in The Murder of Roger Ackroyd, Death on the Nile, Dumb Witness, Crooked House, The Hollow, The Mirror Crack'd from Side to Side, Cat Among the Pigeons, Peril at End House, Nemesis, Appointment with Death, The Secret Adversary, and Curtain.
In the last of these (Curtain), no fewer than three culprits die during the course of the story.
In The A.B.C. Murders, the murderer has killed four innocent people and attempted to frame an unstable man for the crimes.
Hercule Poirot, however, prevents this easy way out, ensuring a trial and hanging.
And Then There Were None, the killer's own death is intrinsic to the plot; the red herring is when and how the killer actually died.
However, stage, film, and television productions of some of these mysteries were traditionally sanitized with the culprits not evading some form of justice, for a variety of reasons - e.g., censors, plot clarity, and Christie's own changing tastes.
In Death Comes as the End, set in ancient Egypt, the culprit is killed by one of the few surviving characters before he can claim another victim.
In some stories, the question remains unresolved of whether formal justice will ever be delivered, such as Five Little Pigs and Endless Night.
According to P. D. James, Christie often, but not always, made the unlikeliest character the guilty party.
Savvy readers could sometimes identify the culprit by simply identifying the least likely suspect.
On an edition of Desert Island Discs in 2007, Brian Aldiss claimed that Christie had told him that she wrote her books up to the last chapter, then decided who the most unlikely suspect was, after which she would go back and make the necessary changes to "frame" that person.
However, John Curran describes different working methods for every book in Christie's bibliography, contradicting the claim by Aldiss.
Titles
Christie's mature novels, from 1940 onwards, often have titles drawn from literature.
Four are from Shakespeare:
* Sad Cypress from a song in Twelfth Night: "Come away, come away, death Something wicked this way comes".
* There is a Tide...
(later Taken at the Flood) from Brutus' speech in Julius Caesar: "There is a tide in the affairs of men / Which, taken at the flood, leads on to fortune".
* Absent in the Spring from Sonnet 98: "From you have I been absent in the spring ..."
Three are from the Bible:
* Evil Under the Sun from Ecclesiastes 5:13 (and restated in 6:1): "There is a sore evil which I have seen under the sun, namely, riches kept for the owners thereof to their hurt".
The Burden from Jesus' words: "Take my yoke upon you, and learn of me ...
For my yoke is easy, and my burden is light."
(Matthew: 11: 29-30).
The Pale Horse from the Revelation of St John (6:8): "I looked, and there before me was a pale horse!
Its rider was named Death ...".
Another six are from other works of literature:
The Mirror Crack'd from Side to Side from Tennyson's "The Lady of Shalott": "Out flew the web, and floated wide 'The curse is come upon me," cried/
The Lady of Shalott"
The Moving Finger from verse 51 of Edward FitzGerald's translation of the Rubáiyát of Omar Khayyám: "The Moving Finger writes; and, having writ/Moves on ..."
This, in turn, refers to the Biblical account of Belshazzar's feast , which is the origin of the expression "the writing on the wall".
* The Rose and the Yew Tree from Section V of "Little Gidding" from T. S. Eliot's Four Quartets: "The moment of the rose and the moment of the yew-tree/Are of equal duration".
* Postern of Fate from the poem "Gates of Damascus" by James Elroy Flecker: "Postern of Fate, the Desert Gate, Disaster's Cavern, Fort of Fear Some are born to endless night".
* N or M? from the Catechism in the Book of Common Prayer which asks, "What is your Christian name?
Answer N. or M." The "N. or M." stands for the Latin, "nomen vel nomina", meaning "name or names".
It is an accident of typography that "nomina" came to be represented by "m".
In such cases, the original context of the title is usually printed as an epigraph.
Similarly, the title of Christie's autobiographical travel book Come, Tell Me How You Live is a quote from verse three of the White Knight's poem, "Haddocks' Eyes" from chapter eight of Through the Looking-Glass by Lewis Carroll, and is a play on the word "tell", an archaeological mound.
The title of The Mousetrap is purportedly an allusion to Shakespeare's play Hamlet, in which "The Mousetrap" is Hamlet's answer to Claudius's inquiry about the name of the play whose prologue and first scene he and his court have just watched (III, ii).
However, many American characters are positive characters living in the UK, and are frequently misunderstood by their British associates.
The Fulbright scholar Sally Finch (Hickory Dickory Death, also published as Hickory Dickory Dock) is intelligent, attractive and innocent, even though Mrs. Nicoletis automatically assumes she will object to sharing house with students of other races.
Another (foreign) student falsely labels Sally as being a fanatical anti-Communist simply because she is American .
Anthony Browne (in Sparkling Cyanide, also titled Remembered Death), whom the book depicts as probably American, is suspected of being a spy.
However, he is actually in counter-intelligence, and deduces correctly who the murderer is.
In They Do it With Mirrors, Walter Hudd, though outwardly negative, appears so because he is unhappy with life on his in-laws’ estate and his wife's flirtations with other men.
His wife's aunt, Mildred, assumes he committed the murder, with the phrase “He’s probably one of those dreadful American gangsters”.
She is probably judging him by what a British character would have read in newspapers about American crime.
Christie's father was American.
She had trouble with an incompetent Swiss French nursery helper (Marcelle) for toddler Rosalind, and as a result she decided, "Scottish preferred ... good with the young.
The French were hopeless disciplinarians ...
Germans good and methodical, but it was not German that I really wanted Rosalind to learn.
The Irish were gay but made trouble in the house; the English were of all kinds."
Some critics, however, have regarded Christie's plotting as superior to her skill with other literary elements.
Novelist Raymond Chandler criticised her in his essay "The Simple Art of Murder", and American literary critic Edmund Wilson was dismissive of Christie and the detective fiction genre generally in his New Yorker essay, "Who Cares Who Killed Roger Ackroyd?"
In honour of the 125th anniversary of her birth, 25 contemporary mystery writers and one publisher revealed their views on Christie's works.
Many of the authors read Christie's novels first, before other mystery writers, in English or in their native language, influencing their own writing, and nearly all still view her as the "Queen of Crime", and creator of the plot twists used by mystery authors.
Nearly all had one or more favourites among Christie's mysteries, and find her books good to read now, nearly 100 years after her first novel was published.
Several of the authors would be very pleased to have their own novels in print in 100 years.
Just one of the 25 authors held with Edmund Wilson's views.
Harper Collins also published a souvenir magazine Shocking Real Murders: Behind Her Classic Mysteries.
The Guinness Book of World Records lists Christie as the best-selling novelist of all time.
Her novels have sold roughly 2 billion copies, and her estate claims that her works come third in the rankings of the world's most-widely published books, behind only Shakespeare's works and the Bible.
Half of the sales are of English language editions, and the other half in translation.
According to Index Translationum, she remains the most-translated individual author - having been translated into at least 103 languages.
And Then There Were None is Christie's best-selling novel, with 100 million sales to date, making it the world's best-selling mystery ever, and one of the best-selling books of all time.
In 2012, Christie was among the British cultural icons selected by artist Sir Peter Blake to appear in a new version of his most famous artwork - the Beatles' Sgt.
Pepper's Lonely Hearts Club Band album cover - to celebrate the British cultural figures of his life that he most admires.
Interests and influences
Archaeology
QTEMPLATE box
Christie had a lifelong interest in archaeology.
She met her second husband, Sir Max Mallowan, a distinguished archaeologist, on a trip to the excavation site at Ur in 1930.
But her fame as an author far surpassed his fame in archaeology.
Prior to meeting Mallowan, Christie had not had any extensive brushes with archaeology, but once the two married, they made sure to only go to sites where they could work together.
Christie accompanied Mallowan on countless archaeological trips, spending 3-4 months at a time in Syria and Iraq at excavation sites at Ur, Nineveh, Tell Arpachiyah, Chagar Bazar, Tell Brak, and Nimrud.
She wrote novels and short stories, but also contributed work to the archaeological sites, more specifically to the archaeological restoration and labelling of ancient exhibits, including tasks such as cleaning and conserving delicate ivory pieces, reconstructing pottery, developing photos from early excavations which later led to taking photographs of the site and its findings, and taking field notes.
Christie would always pay for her own board and lodging and her travel expenses so as to not influence the funding of the archaeological excavations, and she also supported excavations as an anonymous sponsor.
After the Second World War, she chronicled her time in Syria with fondness in Come Tell Me How You Live.
Anecdotes, memories, funny episodes are strung in a rough timeline, with more emphasis on eccentric characters and lovely scenery than on factual accuracy.
Christie has also been portrayed fictionally.
Some of these portrayals have explored and offered accounts of Christie's disappearance in 1926, including:
* the film Agatha (1979) with Vanessa Redgrave, in which she sneaks away to plan revenge against her husband (Christie's heirs sued unsuccessfully to prevent the film's distribution);
* the Doctor Who episode "The Unicorn and the Wasp" (17 May 2008), with Fenella Woolgar, in which her disappearance is the result of her suffering a temporary breakdown owing to a brief psychic link being formed between her and an alien wasp called the Vespiform; and
* Agatha and the Truth of Murder, in which she goes under cover to solve the murder of Florence Nightingale's goddaughter, Florence Nightingale Shore.
A fictionalised account of Christie's disappearance is also the central theme of a Korean musical, Agatha.
Other portrayals, such as Hungarian film, Kojak Budapesten (1980; not to be confused with the 1986 comedy of the same name) create their own scenarios involving Christie's criminal skill.
In the TV play, Murder by the Book (1986), Christie herself (Dame Peggy Ashcroft) murdered one of her fictional-turned-real characters, Poirot.
The heroine of Liar-Soft's visual novel Shikkoku no Sharnoth: What a Beautiful Tomorrow (2008), Mary Clarissa Christie, is based on the real-life Christie.
Christie features as a character in Gaylord Larsen's Dorothy and Agatha and The London Blitz Murders by Max Allan Collins.
A young Agatha is depicted in the Spanish historical television series Gran Hotel (2011).
Aiding the local detectives, Agatha finds inspiration to write her new novel.
* Agatha Christie: A Life in Pictures (her life story in a 2004 BBC drama)
* Abney Hall (home to her brother-in-law; several books use Abney as their setting)
* Greenway Estate (Christie's former home in Devon.
The house and grounds are now in the possession of the National Trust and open to the public)
* Agatha Christie indult (an oecumenical request to which Christie was signatory seeking permission for the occasional use of the Tridentine (Latin) mass in England and Wales)
Notes
Sources
