Malala Yousafzai (; ; born 12 July 1997), She is known for human rights advocacy, especially the education of women and children in her native Swat Valley in Khyber Pakhtunkhwa, northwest Pakistan, where the local Taliban had at times banned girls from attending school.
Her advocacy has grown into an international movement, and according to former Pakistani Prime Minister Shahid Khaqan Abbasi, she has become "the most prominent citizen" of the country.
Yousafzai was born to a Pashtun family in Mingora, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa, Pakistan.
Her family came to run a chain of schools in the region.
Considering Muhammad Ali Jinnah and Benazir Bhutto as her role models, she was particularly inspired by her father's thoughts and humanitarian work.
In early 2009, when she was 11-12, she wrote a blog under a pseudonym for the BBC Urdu detailing her life during the Taliban occupation of Swat.
The following summer, journalist Adam B. Ellick made a New York Times documentary about her life as the Pakistani military intervened in the region.
She rose in prominence, giving interviews in print and on television, and she was nominated for the International Children's Peace Prize by activist Desmond Tutu.
On 9 October 2012, while on a bus in the Swat District, after taking an exam, Yousafzai and two other girls were shot by a Taliban gunman in an assassination attempt in retaliation for her activism; the gunman fled the scene.
Yousafzai was hit in the head with a bullet and remained unconscious and in critical condition at the Rawalpindi Institute of Cardiology, but her condition later improved enough for her to be transferred to the Queen Elizabeth Hospital in Birmingham, UK.
The attempt on her life sparked an international outpouring of support for Yousafzai.
Deutsche Welle reported in January 2013 that Yousafzai may have become "the most famous teenager in the world".
Weeks after the attempted murder, a group of fifty leading Muslim clerics in Pakistan issued a fatwā against those who tried to kill her.
The Taliban was internationally denounced by governments, human rights organizations and feminist groups.
Taliban officials responded to condemnation by further denouncing Yousafzai, indicating plans for a possible second assassination attempt, which was justified as a religious obligation.
Their statements resulted in further international condemnation.
Following her recovery, Yousafzai became a prominent activist for the right to education.
Based in Birmingham, she founded the Malala Fund, a non-profit organisation, and in 2013 co-authored I Am Malala, an international best seller.
In 2012, she was the recipient of Pakistan's first National Youth Peace Prize and the 2013 Sakharov Prize.
In 2014, she was the co-recipient of the 2014 Nobel Peace Prize, along with Kailash Satyarthi of India.
Aged 17 at the time, she was the youngest-ever Nobel Prize laureate.
In 2015, Yousafzai was a subject of the Oscar-shortlisted documentary He Named Me Malala.
The 2013, 2014 and 2015 issues of Time magazine featured her as one of the most influential people globally.
In 2017, she was awarded honorary Canadian citizenship and became the youngest person to address the House of Commons of Canada.
Yousafzai attended Edgbaston High School from 2013 to 2017, and is currently studying for a bachelor's degree in Philosophy, Politics and Economics at Lady Margaret Hall, Oxford.
Early life
Childhood
Yousafzai was born on 12 July 1997 in the Swat District of Pakistan's northwestern Khyber Pakhtunkhwa province, into a lower-middle-class family.
She is the daughter of Ziauddin Yousafzai and Tor Pekai Yousafzai.
Her family is Sunni Muslim
The family did not have enough money for a hospital birth and as a result, Yousafzai was born at home with the help of neighbours.
She was given her first name Malala (meaning "grief-stricken") after Malalai of Maiwand, a famous Pashtun poet and warrior woman from southern Afghanistan.
Her last name, Yousafzai, is that of a large Pashtun tribal confederation that is predominant in Pakistan's Swat Valley, where she grew up.
At her house in Mingora, she lived with her two younger brothers, Khushal and Atal, her parents, Ziauddin and Toor Pekai, and two pet chickens.
and an educational activist himself, running a chain of private schools known as the Khushal Public School.
In an interview, Yousafzai once stated that she aspired to become a doctor, though later her father encouraged her to become a politician instead.
Inspired by Muhammad Ali Jinnah and Prime Minister Benazir Bhutto, Yousafzai started speaking about education rights as early as September 2008, when her father took her to Peshawar to speak at the local press club.
In 2009, Yousafzai began as a trainee and then a peer educator in the Institute for War and Peace Reporting's Open Minds Pakistan youth programme, which worked in schools in the region to help young people engage in constructive discussion on social issues through the tools of journalism, public debate and dialogue.
As a BBC blogger
In late 2008, Aamer Ahmed Khan of the BBC Urdu website and his colleagues came up with a novel way of covering the Taliban's growing influence in Swat.
They decided to ask a schoolgirl to blog anonymously about her life there.
Their correspondent in Peshawar, Abdul Hai Kakar, had been in touch with a local school teacher, Ziauddin Yousafzai, but could not find any students willing to do so, as it was considered too dangerous by their families.
Finally, Yousafzai suggested his own daughter, 11-year-old Malala.
At the time, Taliban militants led by Maulana Fazlullah were taking over the Swat Valley, banning television, music, girls' education, Bodies of beheaded policemen were being displayed in town squares.
Editors at the BBC unanimously agreed.
QTEMPLATE box
|quote = I had a terrible dream yesterday with military helicopters and the Taliban.
I have had such dreams since the launch of the military operation in Swat.
My mother made me breakfast and I went off to school.
I was afraid going to school because the Taliban had issued an edict banning all girls from attending schools.
Only 11 out of 27 pupils attended the class because the number decreased because of the Taliban's edict.
My three friends have shifted to Peshawar, Lahore and Rawalpindi with their families after this edict.
|source = Malala Yousafzai, 3 January 2009 BBC blog entry a name taken from a character in a Pashtun folktale.
On 3 January 2009, Yousafzai's first entry was posted to the BBC Urdu blog.
She would hand-write notes and then pass them on to a reporter who would scan and e-mail them.
QTEMPLATE box
quote=It seems that it is only when dozens of schools have been destroyed and hundreds others closed down that the army thinks about protecting them.
Had they conducted their operations here properly, this situation would not have arisen.
|align = right
In February 2009, girls' schools were still closed.
In solidarity, private schools for boys had decided not to open until 9 February, and notices appeared saying so.
Three days later, local Taliban leader Maulana Fazlulla announced on his FM radio station that he was lifting the ban on women's education, and girls would be allowed to attend school until exams were held on 17 March, but they had to wear burqas.
As a displaced person
After the BBC diary ended, Yousafzai and her father were approached by New York Times reporter Adam B. Ellick about filming a documentary.
Her BBC blogging identity was being revealed in articles by December 2009.
She also began appearing on television to publicly advocate for female education.
In 2011 Yousafzai trained with local girls' empowerment organisation, Aware Girls, run by Gulalai Ismail whose training includes advice on women's rights and empowerment to peacefully oppose radicalisation through education.
In October 2011, Archbishop Desmond Tutu, a South African activist, nominated Yousafzai for the International Children's Peace Prize of the Dutch international children's advocacy group KidsRights Foundation.
She was the first Pakistani girl to be nominated for the award.
The announcement said, "Malala dared to stand up for herself and other girls and used national and international media to let the world know girls should also have the right to go to school."
The award was won by Michaela Mycroft of South Africa.
Her public profile rose even further when she was awarded Pakistan's first National Youth Peace Prize two months later in December.
The prime minister directed the authorities to set up an IT campus in the Swat Degree College for Women at Yousafzai's request, and a secondary school was renamed in her honour.
By 2012, Yousafzai was planning to organise the Malala Education Foundation, which would help poor girls go to school.
Murder attempt
As Yousafzai became more recognised, the dangers facing her increased.
Death threats against her were published in newspapers and slipped under her door.
On Facebook, where she was an active user, she began to receive threats.
Two other girls were also wounded in the shooting: Kainat Riaz and Shazia Ramzan, both of whom were stable enough following the shooting, to speak to reporters and provide details of the attack.
Medical treatment
After the shooting, Yousafzai was airlifted to a military hospital in Peshawar, where doctors were forced to begin operating after swelling developed in the left portion of her brain, which had been damaged by the bullet when it passed through her head.
After a five-hour operation, doctors successfully removed the bullet, which had lodged in her shoulder near her spinal cord.
The day following the attack, doctors performed a decompressive craniectomy, in which part of her skull was removed to allow room for swelling.
On 11 October 2012, a panel of Pakistani and British doctors decided to move Yousafzai to the Armed Forces Institute of Cardiology in Rawalpindi.
Interior Minister Rehman Malik said that Yousafzai would be moved to Germany, where she could receive the best medical treatment, as soon as she was stable enough to travel.
A team of doctors would travel with her, and the government would bear the cost of her treatment.
Doctors reduced Yousafzai's sedation on 13 October, and she moved all four limbs.
Offers to treat Yousafzai came from around the world.
On 15 October, Yousafzai travelled to the United Kingdom for further treatment, approved by both her doctors and family.
Her plane landed in Birmingham, England where she was treated at the Queen Elizabeth Hospital, one of the specialties of this hospital being the treatment of military personnel injured in conflict.
According to media reports at the time, the UK Government stated that "the Pakistani government is paying all transport, migration, medical, accommodation and subsistence costs for Malala and her party."
Yousafzai had come out of her coma by 17 October 2012, was responding well to treatment, and was said to have a good chance of fully recovering without any brain damage.
Later updates on 20 and 21 October stated that she was stable, but was still battling an infection.
By 8 November, she was photographed sitting up in bed.
On 11 November, Yousafzai underwent surgery for eight and a half hours, in order to repair her facial nerve.
where she had weekly physiotherapy.
Yousafzai wrote in July 2014 that her facial nerve had recovered up to 96%.
Reaction
The murder attempt received worldwide media coverage and produced an outpouring of sympathy and anger.
Protests against the shooting were held in several Pakistani cities the day after the attack, and over 2 million people signed the Right to Education campaign's petition, which led to ratification of the first Right to Education Bill in Pakistan.
Pakistani officials offered a 10 million rupee (US$105,000) reward for information leading to the arrest of the attackers.
Responding to concerns about his safety, Yousafzai's father said: "We wouldn't leave our country if my daughter survives or not.
We have an ideology that advocates peace.
The Taliban cannot stop all independent voices through the force of bullets."
UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon called it a "heinous and cowardly act".
United States President Barack Obama found the attack "reprehensible, disgusting and tragic", while Secretary of State Hillary Clinton said Yousafzai had been "very brave in standing up for the rights of girls" and that the attackers had been "threatened by that kind of empowerment".
British Foreign Secretary William Hague called the shooting "barbaric" and that it had "shocked Pakistan and the world".
American singer Madonna dedicated her song "Human Nature" to Yousafzai at a concert in Los Angeles the day of the attack, as well had a temporary Malala tattoo on her back.
American actress Angelina Jolie wrote an article about explaining the event to her children and answering questions like "Why did those men think they needed to kill Malala?"
Jolie later donated $200,000 to the Malala Fund for girls' education.
Former First Lady of the United States Laura Bush wrote an op-ed piece in The Washington Post in which she compared Yousafzai to Holocaust diarist Anne Frank.
Indian director Amjad Khan announced that he would be making a biographical film based on Yousafzai.
Ehsanullah Ehsan, chief spokesman for the Pakistani Taliban, claimed responsibility for the attack, saying that Yousafzai "is the symbol of the infidels and obscenity", adding that if she survived, the group would target her again.
In the days following the attack, the Taliban reiterated its justification, saying Yousafzai had been brainwashed by her father: "We warned him several times to stop his daughter from using dirty language against us, but he didn't listen and forced us to take this extreme step."
On 12 October 2012, a group of 50 Islamic clerics in Pakistan issued a fatwā - a ruling of Islamic law - against the Taliban gunmen who tried to kill Yousafzai.
Islamic scholars from the Sunni Ittehad Council publicly denounced attempts by the Pakistani Taliban to mount religious justifications for the shooting of Yousafzai and two of her classmates.
Although the attack was roundly condemned in Pakistan, "some fringe Pakistani political parties and extremist outfits" have aired conspiracy theories, such as the shooting being staged by the American Central Intelligence Agency to provide an excuse for continuing drone attacks.
The Pakistani Taliban and some other pro-Taliban elements branded Yousafzai an "American spy".
United Nations petition
On 15 October 2012, UN Special Envoy for Global Education Gordon Brown, the former British Prime Minister, visited Yousafzai while she was in the hospital, and launched a petition in her name and "in support of what Malala fought for".
The petition contains three demands:
* We call on Pakistan to agree to a plan to deliver education for every child.
* We call on all countries to outlaw discrimination against girls.
* We call on international organisations to ensure the world's 61 million out-of-school children are in education by the end of 2015.
Criminal investigation, arrests, and acquittals
The day after the shooting, Pakistan's Interior Minister Rehman Malik stated that the Taliban gunman who shot Yousafzai had been identified.
Police named 23-year-old Atta Ullah Khan, a graduate student in chemistry, as the gunman in the attack.
he remained at large, possibly in Afghanistan.
In November 2012, US sources confirmed that Mullah Fazlullah, the cleric who ordered the attack on Yousafzai, was hiding in Eastern Afghanistan.
He was killed by a U.S.-Afghan air strike in June 2018.
On 12 September 2014, ISPR Director, Major General Asim Bajwa, told a media briefing in Islamabad that the 10 attackers belong to a militant group called "Shura".
General Bajwa said that Israrur Rehman was the first militant group member who was identified and apprehended by the troops.
Acting upon the information received during his interrogation, all other members of the militant group were arrested.
It was an intelligence-based joint operation conducted by ISI, police, and military.
In April 2015, the ten who were arrested were sentenced to life in prison by Judge Mohammad Amin Kundi, a counterterrorism judge, with the chance of eligibility for parole, and possible release, after 25 years.
It is not known if the actual would-be murderers were among the ten sentenced.
In June 2015, it was revealed that eight of the ten men tried in-camera for the attack had in fact been secretly acquitted, insiders revealed one of the men acquitted and freed was the murder bid's mastermind.
It is believed that all other men who shot Yousafzai fled to Afghanistan afterwards and were never even captured.
The information about the release of suspects came to light after the London Daily Mirror attempted to locate the men in prison.
Senior police official Salim Khan stated that the eight men were released because there was not enough evidence to connect them to the attack.
Continuing activism
QTEMPLATE box
QTEMPLATE box
Yousafzai spoke before the United Nations in July 2013, and had an audience with Queen Elizabeth II in Buckingham Palace.
In September, she spoke at Harvard University, In December, she addressed the Oxford Union.
In July 2014, Yousafzai spoke at the Girl Summit in London.
In October 2014, she donated $50,000 to the UNRWA for reconstruction of schools on the Gaza Strip.
Even though she was fighting for women's rights as well as children's rights, Yousafzai did not describe herself as a feminist when asked on Forbes Under 30 Summit in 2014.
In 2015, however, Yousafzai told Emma Watson she decided to call herself a feminist after hearing Watson's speech at the UN launching the HeForShe campaign.
On 12 July 2015, her 18th birthday, Yousafzai opened a school in the Bekaa Valley, Lebanon, near the Syrian border, for Syrian refugees.
The school, funded by the not-for-profit Malala Fund, offers education and training to girls aged 14 to 18 years.
Yousafzai called on world leaders to invest in "books, not bullets".
Yousafzai has repeatedly condemned the Rohingya persecution in Myanmar.
In June 2015, the Malala Fund released a statement in which Yousafzai argues that the Rohingya people deserve "citizenship in the country where they were born and have lived for generations" along with "equal rights and opportunities."
She urges world leaders, particularly in Myanmar, to "halt the inhuman persecution of Burma's Muslim minority Rohingya people."
In September 2017, speaking in Oxford, Yousafzai said: "This should be a human rights issue.
Governments should react to it.
People are being displaced, they're facing violence."
Yousafzai also posted a statement on Twitter calling for Nobel Peace Prize laureate Aung San Suu Kyi to condemn the treatment of the Rohingya people in Myanmar.
Suu Kyi has avoided taking sides in the conflict, or condemning violence against the Rohingya people, leading to widespread criticism.
In 2014, Yousafzai stated that she wished to return to Pakistan following her education in the U.K., and inspired by Benazir Bhutto, she would consider running for prime minister: "If I can help my country by joining the government or becoming the prime minister, I would definitely be up for this task."
She repeated this aim in 2015 and 2016.
However, Yousafzai noted in 2018 that her goal had changed, stating that "now that I have met so many presidents and prime ministers around the world, it just seems that things are not simple and there are other ways that I can bring the change that I want to see".
In an interview with David Letterman, for Netflix's show My Next Guest Needs No Introduction, Yousafzai was asked: "Would you ever want to hold a political position?" and replied "Me?
No."
Representation
Former British Prime Minister Gordon Brown arranged for Yousafzai's appearance before the United Nations in July 2013.
In November 2012, the consulting firm Edelman began work for Yousafzai on a pro bono basis, which according to the firm "involves providing a press office function for Malala".
leading the first ever Youth Takeover of the UN, with an audience of over 500 young education advocates from around the world.
QTEMPLATE |The terrorists thought they would change my aims and stop my ambitions, but nothing changed in my life except this: weakness, fear and hopelessness died.
Strength, power and courage was born ...
I am not against anyone, neither am I here to speak in terms of personal revenge against the Taliban or any other terrorist group.
I'm here to speak up for the right of education for every child.
I want education for the sons and daughters of the Taliban and all terrorists and extremists.
Yousafzai also presented the chamber with "The Education We Want", a Youth Resolution of education demands written by Youth for Youth, in a process co-ordinated by the UN Global Education First Youth Advocacy Group, telling her audience:
QTEMPLATE |Malala day is not my day.
Today is the day of every woman, every boy and every girl who have raised their voice for their rights.
The Pakistani government did not comment on Yousafzai's UN appearance, amid a backlash against her in Pakistan's press and social media.
Nobel Peace Prize
On 10 October 2014, Yousafzai was announced as the co-recipient of the 2014 Nobel Peace Prize for her struggle against the suppression of children and young people and for the right of all children to education.
Having received the prize at the age of 17, Yousafzai is the youngest Nobel laureate.
Yousafzai shared the prize with Kailash Satyarthi, a children's rights activist from India.
She is the second Pakistani to receive a Nobel Prize after 1979 Physics laureate Abdus Salam.
After she was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize, there was praise, but also some disapproval of the decision.
A Norwegian jurist, Fredrik Heffermehl, commented on being awarded the Nobel Prize: "This is not for fine people who have done nice things and are glad to receive it.
All of that is irrelevant.
What Nobel wanted was a prize that promoted global disarmament."
Adán Cortés, a college student from Mexico City and asylum seeker, interrupted Yousafzai's Nobel Peace Prize award ceremony in protest for the 2014 Iguala mass kidnapping in Mexico, but was quickly taken away by security personnel.
Yousafzai later sympathised, and acknowledged that problems are faced by young people all over the world, saying "there are problems in Mexico, there are problems even in America, even here in Norway, and it is really important that children raise their voices".
David Letterman interview
In March 2018, Yousafzai was the subject of an interview with David Letterman for his Netflix show My Next Guest Needs No Introduction.
Speaking about the Taliban, she opined that their misogyny comes from a superiority complex, and is reinforced by finding "excuses" in culture or literature, such as by misinterpreting teachings of Islam.
Asked about the presidency of Donald Trump, Yousafzai said: "Some of the things have really disappointed me, like sexual harassment and the ban on Muslims and racism."
She also criticised the Trump administration's proposed budget cuts to education, saying that education is the first step to "eradicating extremism and ending poverty".
Throughout the episode, clips are shown of Yousafzai acting as a tour guide for prospective students to her college Lady Margaret Hall, Oxford.
Education
From March 2013 to July 2017, Yousafzai was a pupil at the all-girls Edgbaston High School in Birmingham.
At A Level, she studied Geography, History, Mathematics and Religious Studies.
Also applying to Durham, Warwick and the London School of Economics, Yousafzai was interviewed at Lady Margaret Hall, Oxford, in December 2016 and received a conditional offer of three As in her A Levels; in August 2017, she was accepted to study Philosophy, Politics and Economics (PPE).
Reception
Reception in Pakistan
Reception of Yousafzai in Pakistan is mostly negative.
Yousafzai's opposition to Taliban policy makes her unpopular among Taliban sympathisers.
A Dawn columnist alleges that she is scapegoated by the failing state government,
In 2015, the All Pakistan Private Schools Federation (APPSF) banned I Am Malala in all Pakistani private schools, and the president Mirza Kashif Ali released a book I Am Not Malala.
Conspiracy theorists in newspapers and on social media have alleged that Yousafzai staged her assassination attempt, or that she is an agent of the American Central Intelligence Agency.
Many Pakistanis view her as an "agent of the West", due to her Nobel prize, Oxford education and residence in England.
Another conspiracy theory alleges that Yousafzai is a Jewish agent.
However, Yousafzai does have some support in Pakistani media; Farman Nawaz argues that Yousafzai would have gained more fame in Pakistan if she belonged to the province of Punjab.
His opinion was not given importance by the mainstream media of Pakistan but his views in this regard were published by Daily Outlook Afghanistan.
Yousafzai is seen as courageous by some Pakistanis.
she gave a speech in which she said it had been her dream to return "without any fear".
Yousafzai then visited her hometown Mingora in Swat Valley.
The APPSF, a group representing the 173,000 private schools in Pakistan, organised "I am not Malala Day" on 30 March.
Yousafzai responded by saying "I am proud of my religion, and I am proud of my country."
On 14 September 2019, Malala posted a controversial tweet, in which she said that a Kashmiri girl told her: “I feel purposeless and depressed because I can’t go to school.
I missed my exams on August 12 and I feel my future is insecure now.”
However, many Twitter users pointed out that 12 August was Eid al-Adha, a public holiday in India when schools were closed across the country, so an exam would not be possible on that day.
After her tweet, she was trolled widely on Twitter.
Indian shooter Heena Sidhu responded to Malala: “Ok, so you propose handing over Kashmir to Pakistan because over there girls like yourself have had too good of an education that you nearly lost your life and ran away from your country, never to return.
Why don’t you show us by going back to Pakistan first?”
BJP MP Shobha Karandlaje asked Malala to spend time with minorities in Pakistan.
She was also being accused of spreading the "Pakistani agenda" over Kashmir and being selective in the protest.
Pakistani-Canadian writer Tahir Aslam Gora also criticized her and asked: "Have you ever spoken to lawyers and human rights activists who are aware of brutalities on Baloch, Pashtun, Muhajir, and Sindhis?
What's your agenda on Kashmir?"
British columnist Katie Hopkins lashed out at Malala over the alleged murder of Namrita Chandani, a Sindhi Hindu medical student in Sindh, Pakistan.
Hopkins wrote: "Another Hindu girl, butchered in Pakistan.
And suddenly the world is deaf and dumb.
Where are you now Malala?
Cat got your tongue?"
Awards and honours
Yousafzai has received the following national and international honours, listed by the date they were awarded:
* 2011: International Children's Peace Prize (nominee)
* October 2012: Sitara-e-Shujaat, Pakistan's third-highest civilian bravery award
* November 2012: Foreign Policy magazine top 100 global thinker
* December 2012: Time magazine Person of the Year shortlist for 2012
* November 2012: Mother Teresa Awards for Social Justice
* December 2012: Rome Prize for Peace and Humanitarian Action
* January 2013: Top Name in Annual Survey of Global English in 2012
* March 2013:
Memminger Freiheitspreis 1525 (conferred on 7 December 2013 in Oxford)
* March 2013:
Doughty Street Advocacy award of Index on Censorship
* March 2013:
Fred and Anne Jarvis Award of the UK National Union of Teachers
* April 2013:
Vital Voices Global Leadership Awards, Global Trailblazer
* April 2013: One of Times "100 Most Influential People in the World"
* May 2013:
Premi Internacional Catalunya Award of Catalonia, May 2013
* June 2013: Annual Award for Development of the OPEC Fund for International Development (OFID)
* June 2013: International Campaigner of the Year, 2013 Observer Ethical Awards
* August 2013:
Tipperary International Peace Award for 2012, Ireland Tipperary Peace Convention
* 2013:
Portrait of Yousafzai by Jonathan Yeo displayed at National Portrait Gallery, London
* September 2013:
Ambassador of Conscience Award from Amnesty International
* 2013: Clinton Global Citizen Awards from Clinton Foundation
* September 2013: Harvard Foundation's Peter Gomes Humanitarian Award from Harvard University
* 2013: Anna Politkovskaya Award - Reach All Women in War
* 2013: Reflections of Hope Award - Oklahoma City National Memorial & Museum
* 2013: Sakharov Prize for Freedom of Thought - awarded by the European Parliament
* 2013: Honorary Master of Arts degree awarded by the University of Edinburgh
* 2013: GG2 Hammer Award at GG2 Leadership Awards (November)
* 2013: International Prize for Equality and Non-Discrimination
* 2014:
Nominee for World Children's Prize also known as Children's Nobel Prize
* 2014:
Awarded Honorary Life Membership by the PSEU (Ireland)
* 2014:
Honorary Doctor of Civil Law, University of King's College, Halifax, Nova Scotia, Canada
* 2014: 2014 Nobel Peace Prize, shared with Kailash Satyarthi
* 2014:
One of Time Magazine "The 25 Most Influential Teens of 2014"
* 2016:
Honorary President of The Students' Union of the University of Sheffield
* 2017: Youngest ever United Nations Messenger of Peace
* 2017: Received honorary doctorate from the University of Ottawa
* 2017: Wonk of the Year 2017 from American University
* 2017: Harper's Bazaar inducted Malala in the list of "150 of the most influential female leaders in the UK".
* 2018: Advisor to Princess Zebunisa of Swat, Swat Relief Initiative Foundation, Princeton, New Jersey
*2018: Gleitsman Award from the Center for the Public Leadership at Harvard Kennedy School
* 2019:
For their first match of March 2019, the women of the United States women's national soccer team each wore a jersey with the name of a woman they were honoring on the back; Carli Lloyd chose the name of Yousafzai.
Works
Yousafzai's memoir I Am Malala: The Story of the Girl Who Stood Up for Education and Was Shot by the Taliban, co-written with British journalist Christina Lamb, was published in October 2013 by Little, Brown and Company in the US and by Weidenfeld & Nicolson in the UK.
A reviewer for The Guardian called the book "fearless" and stated that "the haters and conspiracy theorists would do well to read this book", though she criticised "the stiff, know-it-all voice of a foreign correspondent" that is interwoven with Yousafzai's.
A reviewer for The Washington Post called the book "riveting" and wrote "It is difficult to imagine a chronicle of a war more moving, apart from perhaps the diary of Anne Frank."
Entertainment Weekly gave the book a "B+", writing "Malala's bravely eager voice can seem a little thin here, in I Am Malala, likely thanks to her co-writer, but her powerful message remains undiluted."
A children's edition of the memoir was published in 2014 under the title I Am Malala: How One Girl Stood Up for Education and Changed the World.
According to Publishers Weekly, in 2017 the book had sold almost 2 million copies, and there were 750,000 copies of the children's edition in print.
Yousafzai was the subject of the 2015 documentary He Named Me Malala, which was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Documentary Feature.
In 2017, a Hindi biopic film Gul Makai was announced, with Reem Sameer Shaikh portraying her.
Yousafzai authored a picture book, Malala's Magic Pencil, which was illustrated by Kerascoët and published on 17 October 2017.
By March 2018, The Bookseller reported that the book had over 5,000 sales in the UK.
In a review for The Guardian, Imogen Carter describes the book as "enchanting", opining that it "strikes just the right balance" between "heavy-handed" and "heartfelt", and is a "welcome addition to the frustratingly small range of children's books that feature |date
23 October 2017|accessdate
25 October 2017|url-status
live|archiveurl
https:/ web http:/ 2017 23 |archivedate=25 October 2017
In March 2018, it was announced that Yousafzai's next book We Are Displaced: True Stories of Refugee Lives would be published on 4 September 2018 by Little, Brown and Company's Young Readers division.
The book is about refugees, and includes stories from Yousafzai's own life along with those of people she has met.
Speaking about the book, Yousafzai said that "What tends to get lost in the current refugee crisis is the humanity behind the statistics" and "people become refugees when they have no other option.
This is never your first choice."
Profits from the book will go to Yousafzai's charity Malala Fund.
The book was released on 8 January 2019.
Notes
