Winx Club is an Italian animated television series created by Iginio Straffi and co-produced by Rainbow SpA, Rai Fiction, and Nickelodeon.
It is set in a magical universe that is inhabited by fairies, witches, and other mythical creatures.
The show follows a fairy warrior named Bloom as she enrolls at Alfea College to train and hone her skills.
The series is presented in a style that combines Japanese anime with Western animation.
Common themes in Winx Club include romantic relationships and the transition to adulthood, which are juxtaposed with magical elements and action sequences.
Iginio Straffi conceived the show's concept in the late 1990s after working in the comic book industry.
While developing the series, Straffi drew inspiration from manga and the comics of Sergio Bonelli.
He consulted Italian fashion designers to create a futuristic clothing style for the characters.
Straffi's studio Rainbow finished a pilot episode in 2001,
The series has been a ratings success in Italy and on Nickelodeon networks internationally.
By 2014, Winx Club had been broadcast in over 150 countries.
The series has developed a following among comic and fashion fans, and its portrayal of gender roles has generated academic interest.
Critical reviews of the series have called attention to its themes of empowerment and positive relationships, as well as to the perceived sexualization of the character designs.
Three theatrical films based on the series have been released; the first two received David di Donatello Award nominations.
The franchise has spawned two spin-off series and licensed merchandise, including a comic book serial, platform video games, and lines of fashion dolls.
A of Winx Club aimed at young adults was announced in 2018.
Premise
The series follows the adventures of a group of girls known as the Winx, students (and later graduates) at the Alfea College for Fairies, who turn into fairies to fight villains.
The team consists of Bloom, the red-haired leader with flame-based powers; Stella, the fairy of the Sun and Moon; Flora, the fairy of nature; Tecna, the fairy of technology; Musa, the fairy of music; and Aisha, the fairy of waves.
In an interview with the Italian newspaper Corriere della Sera, psychotherapist professor Jeanne Prinsloo agreed, saying in 2014 that "in spite of the unrelenting bad press", Winx Club episodes "present complex narratives with active female protagonists and positive relationships that validate 'girl power'".
Il Sole 24 Ore also wrote positively about the show's feminist themes, commending how the characters "expose narcissistic masculinity".
As examples of women adopting traditionally male roles, they listed the female fairies fighting for their boyfriends, saving them from enemies, and inviting them on dates, while at the same time having difficulty performing household duties like cooking and cleaning.
citing the opposite personalities of Stella and Aisha.
They wrote that Stella's character incorporates stereotypically feminine passions for shopping and clothes while Aisha represents a more realistic character with an interest in male-dominated sports.
As of August 2019, the series is in pre-production with Brian Young set as showrunner and Judy Counihan set as executive producer.
Filming will begin in September 2019
Films
The Secret of the Lost Kingdom
On 8 October 2006, a Winx Club feature film was announced on Rainbow's website.
The Secret of the Lost Kingdom was released theatrically in Italy on 30 November 2007.
Its television premiere was on 11 March 2012 on Nickelodeon in the United States.
Winx Club 3D: Magical Adventure was released theatrically in Italy on October 29, 2010.
Its television premiere was on May 20, 2013, on Nickelodeon in the United States.
In the film, Sky proposes to Bloom, but Sky's father does not approve of their marriage.
The Mystery of the Abyss
A third film, titled Winx Club: The Mystery of the Abyss, was released theatrically in Italy on 4 September 2014.
The film made its television premiere on Nickelodeon Germany on 8 August 2015.
The plot follows the Winx venturing through the Infinite Ocean to rescue Sky, who has been imprisoned by the Trix.
According to Iginio Straffi, the film has a more comedic tone than the previous two films.
The series does not feature any of the original characters and is aimed at a younger audience than other Winx content.
World of Winx
World of Winx is a spin-off series that premiered in 2016; Straffi described it as one "with more adult graphics, a kind of story better suited to an older audience" than the original series.
It features the Winx travelling to Earth on an undercover mission to track down a kidnapper known as the Talent Thief.
26 episodes over two seasons were produced.
Merchandise
As of 2014, more than 6,000 pieces of Winx Club merchandise have been released by over 350 licensing companies.
From January 2004 to December 2007, merchandise sales generated .
Outside Europe, Mattel
The announcement followed a Winx Club advertising campaign on which Nickelodeon spent .
Doll collections based on the show's characters were first released in January 2004 to coincide with its debut.
In Italy, the dolls are manufactured by Witty Toys (a division of Rainbow) and distributed by Giochi Preziosi.
In 2013, Rainbow relaunched vintage dolls as collectors' items.
An ongoing comic book serial has been published since the series' premiere.
Theatre
In September 2005, a live stage musical called "Winx Power Show" began touring in Italy.
Games
Several console video games based on the show have been produced.
The first, Konami Europe's Winx Club, was released on 15 November 2005.
Other video games based on the franchise include Winx Club: The Quest for the Codex (2006), Winx Club: Join the Club (2007), Winx Club: Mission Enchantix (2008), Winx Club: Secret Diary (2009), Winx Club: Believix in You (2010), Winx Club: Magical Fairy Party (2012), and Winx Club: Saving Alfea (2014).
Magical Fairy Party was released as part of Nickelodeon's partnership with D3Publisher.
Notes
