American Gothic is a 1930 painting by Grant Wood in the collection of the Art Institute of Chicago.
Wood was inspired to paint what is now known as the American Gothic House in Eldon, Iowa, along with "the kind of people I fancied should live in that house".
It depicts a farmer standing beside his daughter - often mistakenly assumed to be his wife.
The figures were modeled by Wood's sister Nan Wood Graham and their dentist Dr. Byron McKeeby.
The woman is dressed in a colonial print apron evoking 20th-century rural Americana, and the man is holding a pitchfork.
The plants on the porch of the house are mother-in-law's tongue and beefsteak begonia, which are the same as the plants in Wood's 1929 portrait of his mother Woman with Plants.
American Gothic is one of the most familiar images in 20th-century American art and has been widely parodied in American popular culture.
In 2016-17, the painting was displayed in Paris at the Musée de l'Orangerie and in London at the Royal Academy of Arts in its first showings outside the United States.
Creation
In August 1930, Grant Wood, an American painter with European training, was driven around Eldon, Iowa, by a young painter from Eldon, John Sharp.
Looking for inspiration, Wood noticed the Dibble House, a small white house built in the Carpenter Gothic architectural style.
At the time, Wood classified it as one of the "cardboardy frame houses on Iowa farms" and considered it "very paintable".
After obtaining permission from the Jones family, the house's owners, Wood made a sketch the next day in oil on paperboard from the house's front yard.
This sketch displayed a steeper roof and a longer window with a more pronounced ogive than on the actual house, features which eventually adorned the final work.
Wood decided to paint the house along with "the kind of people I fancied should live in that house".
Dr. Byron McKeeby (1867-1950) from Cedar Rapids, Iowa.
Nan told people that her brother had envisioned the couple as father and daughter, not husband and wife, which Wood himself confirmed ("The prim lady with him is his grown-up daughter") in his letter to a Mrs. Nellie Sudduth in 1941.
Elements of the painting stress the vertical that is associated with Gothic architecture.
The three-pronged pitchfork is echoed in the stitching of the man's overalls, the Gothic window of the house, and the structure of the man's face.
However, Wood did not add figures to his sketch until he returned to his studio in Cedar Rapids.
He would not return to Eldon again before his death in 1942, although he did request a photograph of the home to complete his painting.
Reception
Wood entered the painting in a competition at the Art Institute of Chicago.
One judge deemed it a "comic valentine", but a museum patron persuaded the jury to award the painting the bronze medal and $300 cash prize.
The patron also persuaded the Art Institute to buy the painting, and it remains part of the museum's collection.
Wood protested that he had not painted a caricature of Iowans but a depiction of his appreciation, stating "I had to go to France to appreciate Iowa."
In 2019, culture writer Kelly Grovier described it as a portrait of Pluto and Proserpina, the Roman gods of the underworld.
Parodies and other references
The Depression-era understanding of the painting as a depiction of an authentically American scene prompted the first well-known parody, a 1942 photo by Gordon Parks of cleaning woman Ella Watson, shot in Washington, D.C.
American Gothic is a frequently parodied image.
It has been lampooned in Broadway shows such as The Music Man, movies such as The Rocky Horror Picture Show, and television shows such as Green Acres (in the final scene of the pop culture-famous opening credits) and the Dick Van Dyke Show episode "The Masterpiece".
It has also been parodied in marketing campaigns, pornography, and by couples who recreate the image by facing a camera, one of them holding a pitchfork or other object in its place.
File:Gordon Parks - American Gothic.jpg|alt=Man holding up a broom and mop with an American flag hanging in the background, in imitation of the original American Gothic.|American Gothic, Washington, D.C. (1942) by Gordon Parks was the first prominent parody of the painting.
File:American Gothic Dress-Up.jpg|alt=Visitors wearing period-style clothing, and with props such as a pitchfork and glasses|Visitors dress up for photographs outside the American Gothic House in Eldon, Iowa.
File:
Works
Further reading
* (contains image of first Wood sketch of the house)
