Caligula (; ; 31 August 12 - 24 January 41 AD) was Roman emperor from 37 to 41 AD.
The son of the popular Roman general Germanicus and Augustus's granddaughter Agrippina the Elder, Caligula was born into the first ruling family of the Roman Empire, conventionally known as the Julio-Claudian dynasty.
Germanicus's uncle and adoptive father, Tiberius, succeeded Augustus as emperor of Rome in 14.
Although he was born Gaius Caesar, after Julius Caesar, he acquired the nickname "Caligula" (meaning "little soldier's boot", the diminutive form of caliga) from his father's soldiers during their campaign in Germania.
When Germanicus died at Antioch in 19, Agrippina returned with her six children to Rome, where she became entangled in a bitter feud with Tiberius.
The conflict eventually led to the destruction of her family, with Caligula as the sole male survivor.
Untouched by the deadly intrigues, Caligula accepted an invitation in 31 to join the emperor on the island of Capri, where Tiberius had withdrawn five years earlier.
Following the death of Tiberius, Caligula succeeded his adoptive grandfather as emperor in 37.
There are few surviving sources about the reign of Caligula, although he is described as a noble and moderate emperor during the first six months of his rule.
After this, the sources focus upon his cruelty, sadism, extravagance, and sexual perversion, presenting him as an insane tyrant.
While the reliability of these sources is questionable, it is known that during his brief reign, Caligula worked to increase the unconstrained personal power of the emperor, as opposed to countervailing powers within the principate.
He directed much of his attention to ambitious construction projects and luxurious dwellings for himself, and initiated the construction of two aqueducts in Rome: the Aqua Claudia and the Anio Novus.
During his reign, the empire annexed the client kingdom of Mauretania as a province.
In early 41, Caligula was assassinated as a result of a conspiracy by officers of the Praetorian Guard, senators, and courtiers.
The conspirators' attempt to use the opportunity to restore the Roman Republic was thwarted, however.
On the day of the assassination of Caligula, the Praetorians declared Caligula's uncle, Claudius, the next Roman emperor.
Although the Julio-Claudian dynasty continued to rule the empire until the fall of his nephew Nero in 68, Caligula's death marked the official end of the Julii Caesares in the male line.
Early life
:See Julio-Claudian family tree.
Gaius Julius Caesar (named in honor of his famous relative) was born in Antium (modern Anzio and Nettuno) on 31 August 12 AD, the third of six surviving children born to Germanicus and his second cousin Agrippina the Elder.
Gaius had two older brothers, Nero and Drusus, He was also a nephew of Claudius, Germanicus' younger brother and the future emperor.
Agrippina the Elder was the daughter of Marcus Vipsanius Agrippa and Julia the Elder.
The soldiers were amused that Gaius was dressed in a miniature soldier's outfit, including boots and armour.
Gaius, though, reportedly grew to dislike this nickname.
Suetonius claims that Germanicus was poisoned in Syria by an agent of Tiberius, who viewed Germanicus as a political rival.
After the death of his father, Caligula lived with his mother until her relations with Tiberius deteriorated.
Tiberius would not allow Agrippina to remarry for fear her husband would be a rival.
The adolescent Caligula was then sent to live with his great-grandmother (and Tiberius's mother) Livia.
Suetonius writes that after the banishment of his mother and brothers, Caligula and his sisters were nothing more than prisoners of Tiberius under the close watch of soldiers.
In 31, Caligula was remanded to the personal care of Tiberius on Capri, where he lived for six years.
According to historians, Caligula was an excellent natural actor and, recognizing danger, hid all his resentment towards Tiberius.
An observer said of Caligula, "Never was there a better servant or a worse master!"
Suetonius claims that Caligula was already cruel and vicious: he writes that, when Tiberius brought Caligula to Capri, his purpose was to allow Caligula to live in order that he "... prove the ruin of himself and of all men, and that he was rearing a viper for the Roman people and a Phaethon for the world."
In 33, Tiberius gave Caligula an honorary quaestorship, a position he held until his rise to emperor.
Meanwhile, both Caligula's mother and his brother Drusus died in prison.
In 35, Caligula was named joint heir to Tiberius's estate along with Tiberius Gemellus.
Emperor
Early reign
When Tiberius died on 16 March 37 AD, his estate and the titles of the principate were left to Caligula and Tiberius's own grandson, Gemellus, who were to serve as joint heirs.
Although Tiberius was 77 and on his death bed, some ancient historians still conjecture that he was murdered.
Backed by Macro, Caligula had Tiberius's will nullified with regard to Gemellus on grounds of insanity, but otherwise carried out Tiberius's wishes.
Caligula accepted the powers of the principate as conferred by the Senate and entered Rome on 28 March amid a crowd that hailed him as "our baby" and "our star", among other nicknames.
Caligula is described as the first emperor who was admired by everyone in "all the world, from the rising to the setting sun."
Caligula's first acts were said to be generous in spirit, though many were political in nature.
He helped those who had been harmed by the imperial tax system, banished certain sexual deviants, and put on lavish spectacles for the public, including gladiatorial games.
Caligula collected and brought back the bones of his mother and of his brothers and deposited their remains in the tomb of Augustus.
In October 37, Caligula fell seriously ill, or perhaps was poisoned.
He soon recovered from his illness, but many believed that the illness turned the young emperor toward the diabolical: he started to kill off or exile those who were close to him or whom he saw as a serious threat.
Perhaps his illness reminded him of his mortality and of the desire of others to advance into his place.
He had his cousin and adopted son Tiberius Gemellus executed - an act that outraged Caligula's and Gemellus's mutual grandmother Antonia Minor.
She is said to have committed suicide, although Suetonius hints that Caligula actually poisoned her.
He had his father-in-law Marcus Junius Silanus and his brother-in-law Marcus Lepidus executed as well.
His uncle Claudius was spared only because Caligula preferred to keep him as a laughing stock.
His favourite sister Julia Drusilla died in 38 of a fever: his other two sisters, Livilla and Agrippina the Younger, were exiled.
He hated being the grandson of Agrippa and slandered Augustus by repeating a falsehood that his mother was actually conceived as the result of an incestuous relationship between Augustus and his daughter Julia the Elder.
Public reform
In 38, Caligula focused his attention on political and public reform.
He published the accounts of public funds, which had not been made public during the reign of Tiberius.
He aided those who lost property in fires, abolished certain taxes, and gave out prizes to the public at gymnastic events.
He allowed new members into the equestrian and senatorial orders.
Perhaps most significantly, he restored the practice of democratic elections.
Cassius Dio said that this act "though delighting the rabble, grieved the sensible, who stopped to reflect, that if the offices should fall once more into the hands of the many ... many disasters would result".
During the same year, though, Caligula was criticized for executing people without full trials and for forcing the Praetorian prefect, Macro, to commit suicide.
Macro had fallen out of favor with the emperor, probably due to an attempt to ally himself with Gemellus when it appeared that Caligula might die of fever.
Financial crisis and famine
According to Cassius Dio, a financial crisis emerged in 39.
Caligula's political payments for support, generosity and extravagance had exhausted the state's treasury.
Ancient historians state that Caligula began falsely accusing, fining and even killing individuals for the purpose of seizing their estates.
Historians describe a number of Caligula's other desperate measures.
In order to gain funds, Caligula asked the public to lend the state money.
He levied taxes on lawsuits, weddings and prostitution.
Caligula began auctioning the lives of the gladiators at shows.
Wills that left items to Tiberius were reinterpreted to leave the items instead to Caligula.
Centurions who had acquired property by plunder were forced to turn over spoils to the state.
His nephew Nero Caesar both envied and admired the fact that Gaius had run through the vast wealth Tiberius had left him in so short a time.
However, some historians have shown skepticism towards the large number of sesterces quoted by Suetonius and Dio.
According to Wilkinson, Caligula's use of precious metals to mint coins throughout his principate indicates that the treasury most likely never fell into bankruptcy.
He does point out, however, that it is difficult to ascertain whether the purported 'squandered wealth' was from the treasury alone due to the blurring of "the division between the private wealth of the emperor and his income as head of state."
A brief famine of unknown extent occurred, perhaps caused by this financial crisis, but Suetonius claims it resulted from Caligula's seizure of public carriages;
Construction
Despite financial difficulties, Caligula embarked on a number of construction projects during his reign.
Some were for the public good, though others were for himself.
Josephus describes Caligula's improvements to the harbours at Rhegium and Sicily, allowing increased grain imports from Egypt, as his greatest contributions.
These improvements may have been in response to the famine.
Caligula completed the temple of Augustus and the theatre of Pompey and began an amphitheatre beside the Saepta.
He expanded the imperial palace.
He began the aqueducts Aqua Claudia and Anio Novus, which Pliny the Elder considered engineering marvels.
He built a large racetrack known as the circus of Gaius and Nero and had an Egyptian obelisk (now known as the "Vatican Obelisk") transported by sea and erected in the middle of Rome.
At Syracuse, he repaired the city walls and the temples of the gods.
He had planned to rebuild the palace of Polycrates at Samos, to finish the temple of Didymaean Apollo at Ephesus and to found a city high up in the Alps.
It was said that the bridge was to rival the Persian king Xerxes' pontoon bridge crossing of the Hellespont.
then proceeded to ride his favourite horse Incitatus across, wearing the breastplate of Alexander the Great.
The ships burned in 1944 after an attack in the Second World War; almost nothing remains of their hulls, though many archaeological treasures remain intact in the museum at Lake Nemi and in the Museo Nazionale Romano (Palazzo Massimo) at Rome.
Feud with the senate
In 39, relations between Caligula and the Roman Senate deteriorated.
The subject of their disagreement is unknown.
A number of factors, though, aggravated this feud.
The Senate had become accustomed to ruling without an emperor between the departure of Tiberius for Capri in 26 and Caligula's accession.
Additionally, Tiberius' treason trials had eliminated a number of pro-Julian senators such as Asinius Gallus.
Suetonius reports that other senators were degraded by being forced to wait on him and run beside his chariot.
A conspiracy involving his brother-in-law was foiled in late 39.
Mauretania was annexed by Caligula and subsequently divided into two provinces, Mauretania Tingitana and Mauretania Caesariensis, separated by the river Malua.
Pliny claims that division was the work of Caligula, but Dio states that in 42 an uprising took place, which was subdued by Gaius Suetonius Paulinus and Gnaeus Hosidius Geta, and the division only took place after this.
This confusion might mean that Caligula decided to divide the province, but the division was postponed because of the rebellion.
The first known equestrian governor of the two provinces was Marcus Fadius Celer Flavianus, in office in 44.
Caligula's move seemingly had a strictly personal political motive - fear and jealousy of his cousin Ptolemy - and thus the expansion may not have been prompted by pressing military or economic needs.
However, the rebellion of Tacfarinas had shown how exposed Africa Proconsularis was to its west and how the Mauretanian client kings were unable to provide protection to the province, and it is thus possible that Caligula's expansion was a prudent response to potential future threats.
The few primary sources disagree on what precisely occurred.
Modern historians have put forward numerous theories in an attempt to explain these actions.
This trip to the English Channel could have merely been a training and scouting mission.
The mission may have been to accept the surrender of the British chieftain Adminius.
"Seashells", or conchae in Latin, may be a metaphor for something else such as female genitalia (perhaps the troops visited brothels) or boats (perhaps they captured several small British boats).
Claims of divinity
When several client kings came to Rome to pay their respects to him and argued about their nobility of descent, he allegedly cried out the Homeric line: "Let there be one lord, one king."
In 40, Caligula began implementing very controversial policies that introduced religion into his political role.
Caligula began appearing in public dressed as various gods and demigods such as Hercules, Mercury, Venus and Apollo.
Reportedly, he began referring to himself as a god when meeting with politicians and he was referred to as "Jupiter" on occasion in public documents.
A sacred precinct was set apart for his worship at Miletus in the province of Asia and two temples were erected for worship of him in Rome.
He would appear there on occasion and present himself as a god to the public.
Caligula had the heads removed from various statues of gods located across Rome and replaced them with his own.
It is said that he wished to be worshipped as Neos Helios, the "New Sun".
Indeed, he was represented as a sun god on Egyptian coins.
Caligula's religious policy was a departure from that of his predecessors.
According to Cassius Dio, living emperors could be worshipped as divine in the east and dead emperors could be worshipped as divine in Rome.
Augustus had the public worship his spirit on occasion, but Dio describes this as an extreme act that emperors generally shied away from.
Eastern policy
Caligula needed to quell several riots and conspiracies in the eastern territories during his reign.
Aiding him in his actions was his good friend, Herod Agrippa, who became governor of the territories of Batanaea and Trachonitis after Caligula became emperor in 37.
The cause of tensions in the east was complicated, involving the spread of Greek culture, Roman Law and the rights of Jews in the empire.
Caligula did not trust the prefect of Egypt, Aulus Avilius Flaccus.
Flaccus had been loyal to Tiberius, had conspired against Caligula's mother and had connections with Egyptian separatists.
In 38, Caligula sent Agrippa to Alexandria unannounced to check on Flaccus.
According to Philo, the visit was met with jeers from the Greek population who saw Agrippa as the king of the Jews.
Flaccus tried to placate both the Greek population and Caligula by having statues of the emperor placed in Jewish synagogues.
In 39, Agrippa accused Herod Antipas, the tetrarch of Galilee and Perea, of planning a rebellion against Roman rule with the help of Parthia.
Herod Antipas confessed and Caligula exiled him.
Agrippa was rewarded with his territories.
Riots again erupted in Alexandria in 40 between Jews and Greeks.
Scandals
Philo of Alexandria and Seneca the Younger, contemporaries of Caligula, describe him as an insane emperor who was self-absorbed, was angry, killed on a whim, and indulged in too much spending and sex.
He is accused of sleeping with other men's wives and bragging about it, killing for mere amusement, deliberately wasting money on his bridge, causing starvation, and wanting a statue of himself in the Temple of Jerusalem for his worship.
While repeating the earlier stories, the later sources of Suetonius and Cassius Dio provide additional tales of insanity.
They accuse Caligula of incest with his sisters, Agrippina the Younger, Drusilla, and Livilla, and say he prostituted them to other men.
They state he sent troops on illogical military exercises, turned the palace into a brothel,
and actually appointed him a priest.
Assassination and aftermath
Caligula's actions as emperor were described as being especially harsh to the Senate, to the nobility and to the equestrian order.
According to Josephus, these actions led to several failed conspiracies against Caligula.
The situation had escalated when, in 40, Caligula announced to the Senate that he planned to leave Rome permanently and to move to Alexandria in Egypt, where he hoped to be worshiped as a living god.
The prospect of Rome losing its emperor and thus its political power was the final straw for many.
Such a move would have left both the Senate and the Praetorian Guard powerless to stop Caligula's repression and debauchery.
With this in mind Chaerea convinced his fellow conspirators, who included Marcus Vinicius and Lucius Annius Vinicianus, to put their plot into action quickly.
According to Josephus, Chaerea had political motivations for the assassination.
On 22 January 41 (Suetonius gives the date as 24 January), Cassius Chaerea and other guardsmen accosted Caligula as he addressed an acting troupe of young men beneath the palace, during a series of games and dramatics being held for the Divine Augustus.
Details recorded on the events vary somewhat from source to source, but they agree that Chaerea stabbed Caligula first, followed by a number of conspirators.
The senate attempted to use Caligula's death as an opportunity to restore the Republic.
Claudius became emperor after procuring the support of the Praetorian Guard.
He ordered the execution of Chaerea and of any other known conspirators involved in the death of Caligula.
According to Suetonius, Caligula's body was placed under turf until it was burned and entombed by his sisters.
He was buried within the Mausoleum of Augustus; in 410, during the Sack of Rome, the ashes in the tomb were scattered.
Legacy
Historiography
The facts and circumstances of Caligula's reign are mostly lost to history.
Only two sources contemporary with Caligula have survived - the works of Philo and Seneca.
Philo's works, On the Embassy to Gaius and Flaccus, give some details on Caligula's early reign, but mostly focus on events surrounding the Jewish population in Judea and Egypt with whom he sympathizes.
Seneca's various works give mostly scattered anecdotes on Caligula's personality.
Seneca was almost put to death by Caligula in AD 39 likely due to his associations with conspirators.
At one time, there were detailed contemporaneous histories on Caligula, but they are now lost.
Additionally, the historians who wrote them are described as biased, either overly critical or praising of Caligula.
Nonetheless, these lost primary sources, along with the works of Seneca and Philo, were the basis of surviving secondary and tertiary histories on Caligula written by the next generations of historians.
A few of the contemporaneous historians are known by name.
Fabius Rusticus and Cluvius Rufus both wrote condemning histories on Caligula that are now lost.
Fabius Rusticus was a friend of Seneca who was known for historical embellishment and misrepresentation.
Cluvius Rufus was a senator involved in the assassination of Caligula.
Caligula's sister, Agrippina the Younger, wrote an autobiography that certainly included a detailed explanation of Caligula's reign, but it too is lost.
Agrippina was banished by Caligula for her connection to Marcus Lepidus, who conspired against him.
Philo of Alexandria, Josephus and Seneca state that Caligula was insane, but describe this madness as a personality trait that came through experience.
Seneca states that Caligula became arrogant, angry and insulting once he became emperor and uses his personality flaws as examples his readers can learn from.
According to Josephus, power made Caligula incredibly conceited and led him to think he was a god.
Juvenal reports he was given a magic potion that drove him insane.
Suetonius said that Caligula suffered from "falling sickness", or epilepsy, when he was young.
Modern historians have theorized that Caligula lived with a daily fear of seizures.
Despite swimming being a part of imperial education, Caligula could not swim.
Epileptics are discouraged from swimming in open waters because unexpected fits in such difficult rescue circumstances can be fatal.
Additionally, Caligula reportedly talked to the full moon:
On physical appearance and health, Suetonius described Caligula as sickly-looking, skinny and pale: "he was tall, very pale, ill-shaped, his neck and legs very slender, his eyes and temples hollow, his brows broad and knit, his hair thin, and the crown of the head bald.
The other parts of his body were much covered with hair ...
He was crazy both in body and mind, being subject, when a boy, to the falling sickness.
When he arrived at the age of manhood he endured fatigue tolerably well; but still, occasionally, he was liable to a faintness, during which he remained incapable of any effort".
Based on scientific reconstructions of his official painted busts, Caligula had brown hair, brown eyes, and fair skin.
Some modern historians think that Caligula suffered from hyperthyroidism.
This diagnosis is mainly attributed to Caligula's irritability and his "stare" as described by Pliny the Elder.
Possible rediscovery of burial site
On 17 January 2011, police in Nemi, Italy, announced that they believed they had discovered the site of Caligula's burial, after arresting a thief caught smuggling a statue which they believed to be of the emperor.
The claim has been met with scepticism by Cambridge historian Mary Beard.
Gallery
File:RIC 0039.jpg|Quadrans celebrating the abolition of a tax in AD 38 by Caligula.
The obverse of the coin contains a picture of a Pileus which symbolizes the liberation of the people from the tax burden.
Caption: C. CAESAR DIVI AVG.
PRONEPOS (great-grandson of) AVG. /
PON.
M., TR. P. III, P. P., COS. DES. RCC.
File:Roman gold coins excavated in Pudukottai India one coin of Caligula 31 41 and two coins of Nero 54 68.jpg|Roman gold coins excavated in Pudukottai, India, examples of Indo-Roman trade during the period.
One coin of Caligula (AD 37-41), and two coins of Nero (AD 54-68).
British Museum.
Caption: C. CAESAR AVG.
PON.
M., TR. POT.
III, COS. III. - NERO CAESAR.
AVG.
IMP. - NERO CAESAR AVG.
IMP.
In popular culture
In film
Welsh actor Emlyn Williams was cast as Caligula in the never-completed 1937 film I, Claudius.
American actor Jay Robinson famously portrayed a sinister and scene-stealing Caligula in two epic films of the 1950s, The Robe (1953) and its sequel Demetrius and the Gladiators (1954).
A feature-length historical film Caligula was completed in 1979, in which Malcolm McDowell played the lead role.
The film alienated audiences with explicit sex and violence, but despite negative reviews is considered a cult classic.
In literature and theatre
Caligula, by French author Albert Camus, is a play in which Caligula returns after deserting the palace for three days and three nights following the death of his beloved sister, Drusilla.
The young emperor then uses his unfettered power to "bring the impossible into the realm of the likely".
In the novel I, Claudius by English writer Robert Graves, Caligula is presented as being a murderous sociopath from his childhood, who became clinically insane early in his reign.
At the age of only ten, he drove his father Germanicus to despair and death by secretly terrorising him.
Graves's Caligula commits incest with all three of his sisters and is implied to have murdered Drusilla.
Notes
Bibliography
Primary sources
*Cassius Dio, http:/ Thayer Roman Cassius_Dio ccel works works.html Antiquities of the Jews, (trans. W.Whiston), Books XVIII-XIX
* Philo of Alexandria, (trans. C.D.Yonge, London, H. G. Bohn, 1854-1890):
**http:/ yonge yonge seneca_essays_book_1.html
On Firmness
**http:/ seneca_essays_book_1.html On Anger
**http:/ seneca_essays_book_2.html To Marcia, On Consolation
**http:/ seneca_essays_book_2.html On Tranquility of Mind
**http:/ seneca_essays_book_2.html
On the Shortness of Life
**http:/ seneca_essays_book_2.html To Polybius, On Consolation
**http:/ seneca_essays_book_2.html To Helvia, On Consolation
**http:/ seneca_essays_book_3.html
On Benefits
**http:/ seneca_epistles_book_1.html On the Terrors of Death (Epistle IV)
**http:/ seneca_epistles_book_2.html On Taking One's Own Life (Epistle LXXVII)
**http:/ seneca_epistles_book_3.html
On the Value of Advice (Epistle XCIV)
*Suetonius, http:/ Thayer Roman Suetonius Caligula*.html
The Lives of Twelve Caesars, Life of Caligula
Secondary material
