Osteoporosis is a disease in which bone weakening increases the risk of a broken bone.
Bones that commonly break include the vertebrae in the spine, the bones of the forearm, and the hip.
Until a broken bone occurs there are typically no symptoms.
Prevention of osteoporosis includes a proper diet during childhood and efforts to avoid medications that increase the rate of bone loss.
A number of other medications may also be useful.
Osteoporosis becomes more common with age.
It is more common in women than men.
About 22 million women and 5.5 million men in the European Union had osteoporosis in 2010.
In the United States in 2010, about eight million women and one to two million men had osteoporosis.
White and Asian people are at greater risk.
Signs and symptoms
Osteoporosis itself has no symptoms; its main consequence is the increased risk of bone fractures.
Osteoporotic fractures occur in situations where healthy people would not normally break a bone; they are therefore regarded as fragility fractures.
Typical fragility fractures occur in the vertebral column, rib, hip and wrist.
Fractures
Fractures are a common symptom of osteoporosis and can result in disability.
Acute and chronic pain in the elderly is often attributed to fractures from osteoporosis and can lead to further disability and early mortality.
These fractures may also be asymptomatic.
The most common osteoporotic fractures are of the wrist, spine, shoulder and hip.
The symptoms of a vertebral collapse ("compression fracture") are sudden back pain, often with radicular pain (shooting pain due to nerve root compression) and rarely with spinal cord compression or cauda equina syndrome.
Multiple vertebral fractures lead to a stooped posture, loss of height, and chronic pain with resultant reduction in mobility.
Fractures of the long bones acutely impair mobility and may require surgery.
Hip fracture, in particular, usually requires prompt surgery, as serious risks are associated with it, such as deep vein thrombosis and pulmonary embolism, and increased mortality.
Fracture risk calculators assess the risk of fracture based upon several criteria, including bone mineral density, age, smoking, alcohol usage, weight, and gender.
Recognized calculators include FRAX and Dubbo.
The term "established osteoporosis" is used when a broken bone due to osteoporosis has occurred.
Osteoporosis is a part of frailty syndrome.
Risk of falls
There is an increased risk of falls associated with aging.
These falls can lead to skeletal damage at the wrist, spine, hip, knee, foot, and ankle.
Part of the fall risk is because of impaired eyesight due to many causes, (e.g. glaucoma, macular degeneration), balance disorder, movement disorders (e.g. Parkinson's disease), dementia, and sarcopenia (age-related loss of skeletal muscle).
Collapse (transient loss of postural tone with or without loss of consciousness).
Causes of syncope are manifold, but may include cardiac arrhythmias , vasovagal syncope, orthostatic hypotension (abnormal drop in blood pressure on standing up), and seizures.
Removal of obstacles and loose carpets in the living environment may substantially reduce falls.
Those with previous falls, as well as those with gait or balance disorders, are most at risk.
Risk factors
Risk factors for osteoporotic fracture can be split between nonmodifiable and (potentially) modifiable.
In addition, osteoporosis is a recognized complication of specific diseases and disorders.
Medication use is theoretically modifiable, although in many cases, the use of medication that increases osteoporosis risk may be unavoidable.
Caffeine is not a risk factor for osteoporosis.
It is more common in females than males.
* Ethnicity: While osteoporosis occurs in people from all ethnic groups, European or Asian ancestry predisposes for osteoporosis.
* Heredity: Those with a family history of fracture or osteoporosis are at an increased risk; the heritability of the fracture, as well as low bone mineral density, is relatively high, ranging from 25 to 80%.
At least 30 genes are associated with the development of osteoporosis.
* Those who have already had a fracture are at least twice as likely to have another fracture compared to someone of the same age and sex.
* Build: A small stature is also a nonmodifiable risk factor associated with the development of osteoporosis.
Potentially modifiable
* Excessive alcohol:
Although small amounts of alcohol are probably beneficial (bone density increases with increasing alcohol intake), chronic heavy drinking (alcohol intake greater than three units/day) probably increases fracture risk despite any beneficial effects on bone density.
* Vitamin D deficiency: Low circulating Vitamin D is common among the elderly worldwide.
Smoking also results in increased breakdown of exogenous estrogen, lower body weight and earlier menopause, all of which contribute to lower bone mineral density.
Some have identified low protein intake as associated with lower peak bone mass during adolescence and lower bone mineral density in elderly populations.
* High dietary protein from animal sources: Research has found an association between diets high in animal protein and increased urinary calcium, and have been linked to an increase in fractures.
However, the relevance of this observation to bone density is unclear, since higher protein diets tend to increase absorption of calcium from the diet and are associated with higher bone density.
Indeed, it has recently been argued that low protein diets cause poor bone health.
No interventional trials have been performed on dietary protein in the prevention and treatment of osteoporosis.
* Underweight/inactive: Bone remodeling occurs in response to physical stress, so physical inactivity can lead to significant bone loss.
The incidence of osteoporosis is lower in overweight people.
* Endurance training: In female endurance athletes, large volumes of training can lead to decreased bone density and an increased risk of osteoporosis.
This effect might be caused by intense training suppressing menstruation, producing amenorrhea, and it is part of the female athlete triad.
However, for male athletes, the situation is less clear, and although some studies have reported low bone density in elite male endurance athletes, others have instead seen increased leg bone density.
* Heavy metals: A strong association between cadmium and lead with bone disease has been established.
Low-level exposure to cadmium is associated with an increased loss of bone mineral density readily in both genders, leading to pain and increased risk of fractures, especially in the elderly and in females.
Higher cadmium exposure results in osteomalacia (softening of the bone).
* Soft drinks: Some studies indicate soft drinks (many of which contain phosphoric acid) may increase risk of osteoporosis, at least in women.
Others suggest soft drinks may displace calcium-containing drinks from the diet rather than directly causing osteoporosis.
* Proton pump inhibitors (such as lansoprazole, esomeprazole, or omeprazole) that decrease stomach acid, are a risk for bone fractures if taken for two or more years, due to decreased absorption of calcium in the stomach.
Medical disorders
Many diseases and disorders have been associated with osteoporosis.
For some, the underlying mechanism influencing the bone metabolism is straightforward, whereas for others the causes are multiple or unknown.
* In general, immobilization causes bone loss (following the 'use it or lose it' rule).
For example, localized osteoporosis can occur after prolonged immobilization of a fractured limb in a cast.
This is also more common in active people with a high bone turn-over (for example, athletes).
Other examples include bone loss during space flight or in people who are bedridden or use wheelchairs for various reasons.
Hypogonadal states can cause secondary osteoporosis.
These include Turner syndrome, Klinefelter syndrome, Kallmann syndrome, anorexia nervosa, andropause, acromegaly, and adrenal insufficiency.
Crohn's disease, ulcerative colitis, Individuals with bulimia can also develop osteoporosis.
Those with an otherwise adequate calcium intake can develop osteoporosis due to the inability to absorb calcium and/or vitamin D. Other micronutrients such as vitamin K or vitamin B12 deficiency may also contribute.
* People with rheumatologic disorders such as rheumatoid arthritis, systemic lupus erythematosus and polyarticular juvenile idiopathic arthritis are at increased risk of osteoporosis, either as part of their disease or because of other risk factors (notably corticosteroid therapy).
Systemic diseases such as amyloidosis and sarcoidosis can also lead to osteoporosis.
* Chronic kidney disease can lead to renal osteodystrophy.
* Hematologic disorders linked to osteoporosis are multiple myeloma (for which it is often misdiagnosed), glycogen storage diseases, homocystinuria, In Parkinson’s disease there may be a link between the loss of dopaminergic neurons and altered calcium metabolism (and iron metabolism) causing a stiffening of the skeleton and kyphosis.
Medication
Certain medications have been associated with an increase in osteoporosis risk; only glucocorticosteroids and anticonvulsants are classically associated, but evidence is emerging with regard to other drugs.
* Steroid-induced osteoporosis (SIOP) arises due to use of glucocorticoids - analogous to Cushing's syndrome and involving mainly the axial skeleton.
The synthetic glucocorticoid prescription drug prednisone is a main candidate after prolonged intake.
Some professional guidelines recommend prophylaxis in patients who take the equivalent of more than 30 mg hydrocortisone (7.5 mg of prednisolone), especially when this is in excess of three months.
It is recommended to use calcium or Vitamin D as prevention.
Alternate day use may not prevent this complication.
* Barbiturates, phenytoin and some other enzyme-inducing antiepileptics - these probably accelerate the metabolism of vitamin D.
* L-Thyroxine over-replacement may contribute to osteoporosis, in a similar fashion as thyrotoxicosis does.
and warfarin (and related coumarins) have been linked with an increased risk in osteoporotic fracture in long-term use.
* Proton pump inhibitors - these drugs inhibit the production of stomach acid; this is thought to interfere with calcium absorption.
Chronic phosphate binding may also occur with aluminium-containing antacids.
* Chronic lithium therapy has been associated with osteoporosis.
Because of the more porous bones of humans, frequency of severe osteoporosis and osteoporosis related fractures is higher.
The human vulnerability to osteoporosis is an obvious cost but it can be justified by the advantage of bipedalism inferring that this vulnerability is the byproduct of such.
Pathogenesis
The underlying mechanism in all cases of osteoporosis is an imbalance between bone resorption and bone formation.
In normal bone, matrix remodeling of bone is constant; up to 10% of all bone mass may be undergoing remodeling at any point in time.
The process takes place in bone multicellular units (BMUs) as first described by Frost & Thomas in 1963.
Osteoclasts are assisted by transcription factor PU.1 to degrade the bone matrix, while osteoblasts rebuild the bone matrix.
Low bone mass density can then occur when osteoclasts are degrading the bone matrix faster than the osteoblasts are rebuilding the bone.
The three main mechanisms by which osteoporosis develops are an inadequate peak bone mass (the skeleton develops insufficient mass and strength during growth), excessive bone resorption, and inadequate formation of new bone during remodeling, likely due to MSC biasing away from the osteoblast and toward the marrow adipocyte lineage.
An interplay of these three mechanisms underlies the development of fragile bone tissue.
The most popular method of measuring BMD is dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry.
In addition to the detection of abnormal BMD, the diagnosis of osteoporosis requires investigations into potentially modifiable underlying causes; this may be done with blood tests.
Depending on the likelihood of an underlying problem, investigations for cancer with metastasis to the bone, multiple myeloma, Cushing's disease and other above-mentioned causes may be performed.
Conventional radiography
Conventional radiography is useful, both by itself and in conjunction with CT or MRI, for detecting complications of osteopenia (reduced bone mass; pre-osteoporosis), such as fractures; for differential diagnosis of osteopenia; or for follow-up examinations in specific clinical settings, such as soft tissue calcifications, secondary hyperparathyroidism, or osteomalacia in renal osteodystrophy.
However, radiography is relatively insensitive to detection of early disease and requires a substantial amount of bone loss (about 30%) to be apparent on X-ray images.
The main radiographic features of generalized osteoporosis are cortical thinning and increased radiolucency.
Frequent complications of osteoporosis are vertebral fractures for which spinal radiography can help considerably in diagnosis and follow-up.
Vertebral height measurements can objectively be made using plain-film X-rays by using several methods such as height loss together with area reduction, particularly when looking at vertical deformity in T4-L4, or by determining a spinal fracture index that takes into account the number of vertebrae involved.
Involvement of multiple vertebral bodies leads to kyphosis of the thoracic spine, leading to what is known as dowager's hump.
Dual-energy X-ray
Dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry (DEXA scan) is considered the gold standard for the diagnosis of osteoporosis.
Osteoporosis is diagnosed when the bone mineral density is less than or equal to 2.5 standard deviations below that of a young (30-40-year-old
Biomarkers
Chemical biomarkers are a useful tool in detecting bone degradation.
The enzyme cathepsin K breaks down type-I collagen, an important constituent in bones.
Prepared antibodies can recognize the resulting fragment, called a neoepitope, as a way to diagnose osteoporosis.
Increased urinary excretion of C-telopeptides, a type-I collagen breakdown product, also serves as a biomarker for osteoporosis.
Other measuring tools
Quantitative computed tomography (QCT) differs from DXA in that it gives separate estimates of BMD for trabecular and cortical bone and reports precise volumetric mineral density in mg/cm3 rather than BMD's relative Z-score.
Among QCT's advantages: it can be performed at axial and peripheral sites, can be calculated from existing CT scans without a separate radiation dose, is sensitive to change over time, can analyze a region of any size or shape, excludes irrelevant tissue such as fat, muscle, and air, and does not require knowledge of the patient's subpopulation in order to create a clinical score (e.g. the Z-score of all females of a certain age).
Among QCT's disadvantages: it requires a high radiation dose compared to DXA, CT scanners are large and expensive, and because its practice has been less standardized than BMD, its results are more operator-dependent.
Peripheral QCT has been introduced to improve upon the limitations of DXA and QCT.
Screening
The U.S. Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF) recommend that all women 65 years of age or older be screened by bone densitometry.
There is insufficient evidence to make recommendations about the intervals for repeated screening and the appropriate age to stop screening.
In men the harm versus benefit of screening for osteoporosis is unknown.
The International Society for Clinical Densitometry suggest BMD testing for men 70 or older, or those who are indicated for risk equal to that of a 70-year-old.
A number of tools exist to help determine who is reasonable to test.
Prevention
Lifestyle prevention of osteoporosis is in many aspects the inverse of the potentially modifiable risk factors.
As tobacco smoking and high alcohol intake have been linked with osteoporosis, smoking cessation and moderation of alcohol intake are commonly recommended as ways to help prevent it.
and increases bone density.
Studies of the benefits of supplementation with calcium and vitamin D are conflicting, possibly because most studies did not have people with low dietary intakes.
A 2018 review by the USPSTF found low-quality evidence that the routine use of calcium and vitamin D supplements (or both supplements together) did not reduce the risk of having an osteoporotic fracture in male and female adults living in the community who had no known history of vitamin D deficiency, osteoporosis, or a fracture.
Furthermore, the same review found moderate-quality evidence that the combination of vitamin D and calcium supplementation increases the risk for developing kidney stones in this population.
A 2015 review found little data that supplementation of calcium decreases the risk of fractures.
While some meta-analyses have found a benefit of vitamin D supplements combined with calcium for fractures, they did not find a benefit of vitamin D supplements (800 IU/day or less) alone.
While supplementation does not appear to affect the risk of death, kidney stones,
Good dietary sources of calcium include dairy, leafy greens, legumes, and beans.
There is conflicting evidence about whether or not dairy is an adequate source of calcium to prevent fractures.
The National Academy of Sciences recommends 1,000 mg of calcium for those ages 19-50, and 1,200 mg for those ages 50 and above.
However, this would equate to 2-3 glasses of milk, which is over the required amount or a healthy diet.
Currently, there is not sufficient evidence to show that drinking more than 1 glass of milk a day prevents fractures, and due to evidence about possible increased risks of ovarian and prostate cancer with increased dairy, it is recommended to avoid high intakes of dairy.
Physical exercise
There is limited evidence indicating that exercise is helpful in promoting bone health.
A 2011 review reported a small benefit of physical exercise on bone density of postmenopausal women.
The chances of having a fracture were also slightly reduced (absolute difference 4%).
Low-quality evidence suggests that exercise may improve pain and quality of life of people with vertebral fractures.
Management
Lifestyle
Weight-bearing endurance exercise and/or exercises to strengthen muscles improve bone strength in those with osteoporosis.
Aerobics, weight bearing, and resistance exercises all maintain or increase BMD in postmenopausal women.
Medications
Bisphosphonates are useful in decreasing the risk of future fractures in those who have already sustained a fracture due to osteoporosis.
They do not appear to change the overall risk of death.
Tentative evidence does not support the use of bisphosphonates as a standard treatment for secondary osteoporosis in children.
With evidence of little benefit when used for more than three to five years and in light of the potential adverse events, it may be appropriate to stop treatment after this time.
For those with osteoporosis but who have not had a fracture evidence does not support a reduction in fracture risk with risedronate When on treatment with bisphosphonates rechecking bone mineral density is not needed.
Fluoride supplementation does not appear to be effective in postmenopausal osteoporosis, as even though it increases bone density, it does not decrease the risk of fractures.
Teriparatide (a recombinant parathyroid hormone) has been shown to be effective in treatment of women with postmenopausal osteoporosis.
Some evidence also indicates strontium ranelate is effective in decreasing the risk of vertebral and nonvertebral fractures in postmenopausal women with osteoporosis.
Hormone replacement therapy, while effective for osteoporosis, is only recommended in women who also have menopausal symptoms.
It is not recommended for osteoporosis by itself.
Raloxifene, while effective in decreasing vertebral fractures, does not affect the risk of nonvertebral fracture.
Certain medications like alendronate, etidronate, risedronate, raloxifene, and strontium ranelate can help to prevent osteoporotic fragility fractures in postmenopausal women with osteoporosis.
Tentative evidence suggests that Chinese herbal medicines may have potential benefits on bone mineral density.
Prognosis
Although people with osteoporosis have increased mortality due to the complications of fracture, the fracture itself is rarely lethal.
Hip fractures can lead to decreased mobility and additional risks of numerous complications (such as deep venous thrombosis and/or pulmonary embolism, and pneumonia).
The six-month mortality rate for those aged 50 and above following hip fracture was found to be around 13.5%, with a substantial proportion (almost 13%) needing total assistance to mobilize after a hip fracture.
Vertebral fractures, while having a smaller impact on mortality, can lead to a severe chronic pain of neurogenic origin, which can be hard to control, as well as deformity.
Though rare, multiple vertebral fractures can lead to such severe hunch back (kyphosis), the resulting pressure on internal organs can impair one's ability to breathe.
Apart from risk of death and other complications, osteoporotic fractures are associated with a reduced health-related quality of life.
The condition is responsible for millions of fractures annually, mostly involving the lumbar vertebrae, hip, and wrist.
Fragility fractures of ribs are also common in men.
Hip fractures
Hip fractures are responsible for the most serious consequences of osteoporosis.
In the United States, more than 250,000 hip fractures annually are attributable to osteoporosis.
A 50-year-old white woman is estimated to have a 17.5% lifetime risk of fracture of the proximal femur.
The incidence of hip fractures increases each decade from the sixth through the ninth for both women and men for all populations.
The highest incidence is found among men and women ages 80 or older.
Wrist fractures
In the United States, 250,000 wrist fractures annually are attributable to osteoporosis.
Rib fractures
Fragility fractures of the ribs are common in men as young as age 35.
These are often overlooked as signs of osteoporosis, as these men are often physically active and suffer the fracture in the course of physical activity.
An example would be as a result of falling while water skiing or jet skiing.
However, a quick test of the individual's testosterone level following the diagnosis of the fracture will readily reveal whether that individual might be at risk.
Epidemiology
It is estimated that 200 million people have osteoporosis.
Osteoporosis becomes more common with age.
Postmenopausal women have decreased estrogen which contributes to their higher rates of osteoporosis.
Globally, 1 in 3 women and 1 in 5 men over the age of 50 will have an osteoporotic fracture.
White and Asian people are at greater risk.
Areas of higher latitude such as Northern Europe receive less Vitamin D through sunlight compared to regions closer to the equator, and consequently have higher fracture rates in comparison to lower latitudes.
There is also an association between Celiac Disease and increased risk of osteoporosis.
In studies with premenopausal females and males, there was a correlation between Celiac Disease and osteoporosis and osteopenia.
Celiac Disease can decrease absorption of nutrients in the small intestine such as calcium, and a gluten-free diet can help people with Celiac Disease to revert to normal absorption in the gut.
About 22 million women and 5.5 million men in the European Union had osteoporosis in 2010.
The American endocrinologist Fuller Albright linked osteoporosis with the postmenopausal state.
Bisphosphonates were discovered in the 1960s.
Anthropologists have studied skeletal remains that showed loss of bone density and associated structural changes that were linked to a chronic malnutrition in the agricultural area in which these individuals lived.
"It follows that the skeletal deformation may be attributed to
their heavy labor in agriculture as well as to their chronic malnutrition", causing the osteoporosis seen when radiographs of the remains were made.
Osteoporosis means "porous bones", from Greek: οστούν poros meaning "pore".
