Kazi Nazrul Islam (, ; 25 May 189929 August 1976) was a Bengali poet, writer, musician, anti-colonial revolutionary and the national poet of Bangladesh.
Popularly known as Nazrul, he produced a large body of poetry and music with themes that included religious devotion and rebellion against oppression.
Nazrul's activism for political and social justice earned him the title of "Rebel Poet" (; Bidrohi Kobi).
His compositions form the avant-garde genre of Nazrul Sangeet (Music of Nazrul).
Born in a Bengali Muslim Kazi family, Nazrul Islam received religious education and as a young man worked as a muezzin at a local mosque.
He learned about poetry, drama, and literature while working with the rural theatrical group Letor Dal.
He joined the British Indian Army in 1917.
After serving in the British Indian Army in the Middle East (Mesopotamian campaign) during World War I, Nazrul established himself as a journalist in Calcutta.
He criticised the British Raj and called for revolution through his poetic works, such as "Bidrohi" ("বিদ্রোহী", 'The Rebel') and "Bhangar Gaan" ("ভাঙার গান", 'The Song of Destruction'), as well as in his publication Dhumketu ('The Comet').
His nationalist activism in Indian independence movement led to his frequent imprisonment by the colonial British authorities.
While in prison, Nazrul wrote the "Rajbandir Jabanbandi" ("রাজবন্দীর জবানবন্দী", 'Deposition of a Political Prisoner').
His writings greatly inspired Bengalis of East Pakistan during the Bangladesh Liberation War.
Nazrul's writings explored themes such as freedom, humanity, love, and revolution.
He opposed all forms of bigotry and fundamentalism, including religious, caste-based and gender-based.
Nazrul wrote short stories, novels, and essays but is best known for his songs and poems.
He profusely enriched ghazals in the Bengali language.
He is also known to have experimented with Arabic, Persian, and Sanskrit words in his works to produce rhythmic effects.
Nazrul wrote and composed music for nearly 4,000 songs (many recorded on HMV and gramophone records), collectively known as Nazrul Geeti.
In 1942 at the age of 43, he began to suffer from an unknown disease, losing his voice and memory.
A medical team in Vienna diagnosed the disease as Pick's disease, a rare incurable neurodegenerative disease.
It caused Nazrul's health to decline steadily and forced him to live in isolation in India.
He was also admitted in Ranchi (Jharkhand) psychiatric hospital for many years.
At the invitation of the Government of Bangladesh, Nazrul and his family moved to Dhaka in 1972.
He died four years later on 29 August 1976 in Bangladesh.
in the village of Churulia, Asansol Sadar, Paschim Bardhaman district of the Bengal Presidency (now in West Bengal, India).
He was born into a Bengali Muslim Taluqdar family and was the second of three sons and a daughter.
Nazrul's father Kazi Faqeer Ahmed was the imam and caretaker of the local mosque and mausoleum.
Nazrul's mother was Zahida Khatun.
Nazrul had two brothers, Kazi Saahibjaan and Kazi Ali Hussain, and a sister, Umme Kulsum.
He was nicknamed Dukhu Miañ (দুখু মিঞা literally, 'the one with grief', or 'Mr. Sad Man').
Nazrul studied at a maktab and madrasa, run by a mosque and a dargah respectively, where he studied the Quran, Hadith, Islamic philosophy, and theology.
His father died in 1908 and at the age of ten, Nazrul took his father's place as a caretaker of the mosque to support his family.
He also assisted teachers in the school.
He later worked as the muezzin at the mosque.
Attracted to folk theatre, Nazrul joined a leto (travelling theatrical group) run by his uncle Fazle Karim.
He worked and travelled with them, learning to act, as well as writing songs and poems for the plays and musicals.
Nazrul studied up to grade10 but did not appear for the matriculation pre-test examination; instead in 1917, he joined the British Indian Army at the age of eighteen.
He had two primary motivations for joining the British Indian Army: first, a youthful desire for adventure and, second, an interest in the politics of the time.
Attached to the 49th Bengal Regiment, he was posted to the Karachi Cantonment, where he wrote his first prose and poetry.
Although he never saw active fighting, he rose in rank from corporal to havildar (sergeant), and served as quartermaster for his battalion.
During this period, Nazrul read extensively the works of Rabindranath Tagore and Sarat Chandra Chattopadhyay, as well as the Persian poets Hafez, Omar Khayyam, and Rumi.
He learned Persian poetry from the regiment's Punjabi Moulvi, practiced music, and pursued his literary interests.
His first prose work, "Life of a Vagabond" ( 'Baunduler Atmakahini), was published in May 1919.
His poem "Mukti" ("মুক্তি", 'Freedom') was published by the Bengali Muslim Literary Journal (Bangiya Mussalman Sahitya Samiti) in July 1919. and settled in Calcutta.
He joined the staff of the Bangiya Mussalman Sahitya Samiti ("Bengali Muslim Literary Society").
He published his first novel Bandhan-hara (বাঁধন-হারা, 'Freedom from Bondage') in 1920, on which he continued to work over the next seven years.
Despite their differences, Nazrul looked to Rabindranath Tagore as a mentor.
In 1921, Nazrul was engaged to Nargis, the niece of a well-known Muslim publisher, Ali Akbar Khan, in Daulatpur, Comilla.
On 18 June 1921, the day of the wedding, upon public insistence by Khan that the term "Nazrul must reside in Daulatpur after marriage" be included in the marriage contract, Nazrul walked away from the wedding ceremony.
Nazrul reached the peak of his fame in 1922 with Bidrohi (The Rebel), which remains his most famous work, winning the admiration of India's literary society for his description of a rebel.
Published in the Bijli (বিজলী, "Lightning") magazine, the rebellious language and theme were well received, coinciding with the Non-Cooperation Movementthe first mass nationalist campaign of civil disobedience against British rule.
and Yugbani ("যুগবাণী"), an anthology of essays.
Nazrul started a bi-weekly magazine, Dhumketu ("ধূমকেতু", 'Comet') on 12 August 1922 that was critical of the British Empire.
Earning the moniker of the "rebel poet", Nazrul aroused the suspicion of British Raj authorities.
The Police raided the office of Dhumketu after it published "Anondomoyeer Agomone" ("আনন্দময়ীর আগমনে"), a political poem, in September 1922.
Nazrul was arrested on 23 January 1923 and charged with sedition.|sign
|source
On 14 April 1923, he was moved from Alipore Jail to a jail in Hooghly.
He began a 40-day fast to protest mistreatment by the British jail superintendent, breaking his fast more than a month later and eventually being released from prison in December 1923.
Nazrul composed numerous poems and songs during his period of imprisonment.
In the 1920s, the British Indian government banned many of his writings.
In 1924, his book Bisher Banshi ('The Flute of Poison'), published in August 1924, was banned by the British Raj.
Bisher Banshi called for rebellion in India against the British Raj.
Bisher Banshi was read and distributed in secret following the ban.
Nazrul was a critic of the Khilafat Movement in British India which he condemned as "hollow religious fundamentalism".
He also criticised the Indian National Congress for not embracing outright political independence from the British Empire.
Nazrul became active in encouraging people to agitate against British rule, and joined the Bengal state unit of the Indian National Congress.
With his wife and young son Bulbul, Nazrul settled in Krishnanagar in 1926.
His work began to transform as he wrote poetry and songs that articulated the aspirations of the working class, a sphere of his work known as "mass music".
QTEMPLATE box
Thou hast made me honoured like Christ
With his crown of thorns.
Thou hast given me
Courage to reveal all.
To thee I owe
My insolent, naked eyes and sharp tongue.
Thy curse has turned my violin to a sword...
O proud saint, thy terrible fire
Has rendered my heaven barren.
O my child, my darling one
I could not give thee even a drop of milk
No right have I to rejoice.
Poverty weeps within my doors forever
As my spouse and my child.
Who will play the flute?
In what his contemporaries regarded as one of his greatest flairs of creativity, Nazrul vastly contributed in profusely enriching ghazals in Bengali, transforming a form of poetry written mainly in Persian and Urdu.
His Islamic songs are popular during Ramadan in Bangladesh.
He also wrote devotional songs on the Hindu Goddess Kali.
Nazrul also composed a number of notable Shyamasangeet, Bhajan and Kirtan, combining Hindu devotional music.
In 1928, Nazrul began working as a lyricist, composer, and music director for His Master's Voice Gramophone Company.
The songs written and music composed by him were broadcast on radio stations across India, including on the Indian Broadcasting Company.
QTEMPLATE box
Between a man and woman
Whatever great or benevolent achievements
That are in this world
Half of that was by woman,
The other half by man.
Nazrul believed in the equality of women, a view his contemporaries considered revolutionary, as expressed in his poem Naari (women).
In the poem, Nazrul accepts the prostitute as a human being first, reasoning that this person was breastfed by a noble woman and belonged to the race of "mothers and sisters"; he criticises society's negative views on prostitutes.
An advocate of women rights, Nazrul portrayed both traditional and nontraditional women in his work.
Nazrul wrote thousands of songs, known collectively as Nazrul Geeti.
The exact number is uncertain.
The complete text of 2,260 is known, and the first lines of 2,872 have been collected, but according to musicologist Karunamaya Goswami, it is popularly believed that the total is much higher.
Goswami has written that some contemporaries put the number near 4,000.
Religious beliefs
Nazrul wrote an editorial in Joog Bani in 1920 about religious pluralism, QTEMPLATE |Come brother Hindu!
Come Musalman!
Come Buddhist!
Come Christian!
Let us transcend all barriers, let us forsake forever all smallness, all lies, all selfishness and let us call brothers as brothers.
We shall quarrel no more.|sign
|source
In another article entitled Hindu Mussalman, published in Ganabani on 2 September 1922, he wrote that the religious quarrels were between priests and Imams and not between individual Muslims and Hindus.
He wrote that the Prophets had become property like cattle but they should instead be treated like light that is for all men.
Nazrul's mother died in 1928, and his second son, Bulbul, died of smallpox the following year.
His first son, Krishna Mohammad, had died prematurely.
Pramila gave birth to two more sonsSabyasachi in 1928 and Aniruddha in 1931but Nazrul remained grief-stricken and aggrieved for a long time.
His works changed significantly from the rebellious exploration of society to deeper examination of religious themes.
His works in these years led Islamic devotional songs into the mainstream of Bengali folk music, exploring the Islamic practices of namaz (prayer), roza (fasting), hajj (pilgrimage), and zakat (charity).
He wrote the song "O Mon Romzaner Oi Rozar Sheshe" on fasting during Ramadan.
This was regarded by his contemporaries as a significant achievement, as Bengali Muslims had been strongly averse to devotional music.
Nazrul was not limited to Islamic devotional music but also wrote Hindu devotional music.
He composed Agamanis, Bhajans, Shyama sangeet, and kirtan.
Nazrul wrote over 500 Hindu devotional songs.
Nazrul's poetry and songs explored the philosophy of Islam and Hinduism.
Nazrul's poetry imbibed the passion and creativity of Shakti, which is identified as the Brahman, the personification of primordial energy.
He also composed many songs of invocation to Lord Shiva and the goddesses Lakshmi and Saraswati and on the love of Radha and Krishna.
Although a Muslim, he named his sons with both Hindu and Muslim names: Krishna Mohammad, Arindam Khaled (Bulbul), Kazi Sabyasachi and Kazi Aniruddha.
Later life
In 1930, his book Pralayshikhm was banned and he faced charges of sedition by the British Indian colonial government.
He was sent to jail and released in 1931, after the Gandhi-Irwin Pact was signed.
He worked on the plays "Jahangir" and "Annyapurna" by Monilal Gangopadhyay.
Illness and death
Nazrul's wife Pramila fell seriously ill in 1939 and was paralysed from the waist down.
To provide for his wife's medical treatment, he mortgaged the royalties of his gramophone records and literary works for 400 rupees.
He returned to journalism in 1940 by working as chief editor for the daily newspaper Nabayug ('New Age'), founded by the Bengali politician A. K. Fazlul Huq.
Within months, Nazrul himself fell ill and gradually began losing his power of speech.
His behaviour became erratic, he started spending recklessly and fell into financial difficulties.
In spite of her own illness, his wife constantly cared for her husband.
However, Nazrul's health had seriously deteriorated and he grew increasingly depressed.
He received treatment under homeopathy as well as Ayurveda, but little progress was achieved before mental dysfunction intensified and he was admitted to a mental asylum in 1942.
Spending four months there without making progress, Nazrul and his family began living a quiet life in India.
In 1952, he was transferred to a psychiatric hospital in Ranchi.
Through the efforts of a large group of admirers who called themselves the "Nazrul Treatment Society", Nazrul and Promila were sent to London, then to Vienna for treatment.
The examining doctors said he had received poor care, and Dr. Hans Hoff, a leading neurosurgeon in Vienna, diagnosed that Nazrul was suffering from Pick's disease.
His condition was judged to be incurable, Nazrul returned to Calcutta on 15 December 1953.
On 24 May 1972, the newly independent nation of Bangladesh brought Nazrul to live in Dhaka with the consent of the Government of India.
In January 1976, he was accorded the citizenship of Bangladesh.
and Nazrul soon succumbed to his long-standing ailments on 29 August 1976.
In accordance with a wish he had expressed in one of his poems, he was buried beside a mosque on the campus of the University of Dhaka.
Tens of thousands of people attended his funeral; Bangladesh observed two days of national mourning, and the parliament of India observed a minute of silence in his honour.
Criticism
According to literary critic Serajul Islam Choudhury, Nazrul's poetry is characterised by an abundant use of rhetorical devices, which he employed to convey conviction and sensuousness.
He often wrote without care for organisation or polish.
His works have often been criticized for egotism, but his admirers counter that they carry more a sense of self-confidence than ego.
They cite his ability to defy God yet maintain an inner, humble devotion to him.
Nazrul Sanskriti Parishad is a cultural organisation in India that has been promoting the work of Kazi Nazrul Islam since 2000.
The Nazrul Endowment provides funding for research into the life and work of Kazi Nazrul Islam in U.S. Universities like California State University, Northridge and Connecticut State University.
Nazrul was awarded the Jagattarini Gold Medal in 1945the highest honour for work in Bengali literature by the University of Calcuttaand awarded the Padma Bhushan, the third-highest civilian award of India, in 1960.
His poetry has been translated to languages English, Spanish, and Portuguese.
A major avenue is named after him in Dhaka, Bangladesh.
Kazi Nazrul University in Asansol, West Bengal, India is named after him.
Jatiya Kabi Kazi Nazrul Islam University in Mymensingh, Bangladesh is a public university named after him.
Kazi Nazrul Islam Airport in Andal, West Bengal, is India's first private greenfield airport.
* Shiulimala, book of short stories, written by Kazi Nazrul Islam.
