Manila (; , or ), officially the City of Manila ( ), is the capital of the Philippines and a highly urbanized city.
It is the most densely populated city proper in the world as of 2018.
It was the first chartered city by virtue of the Philippine Commission Act 183 on July 31, 1901 and gained autonomy with the passage of Republic Act No. 409 or the "Revised Charter of the City of Manila" on June 18, 1949.
Manila, alongside Mexico City and Madrid are considered the world's original set of Global Cities due to Manila's commercial networks being the first to traverse the Pacific Ocean, thus connecting Asia with the Spanish Americas, marking the first time in world history when an uninterrupted chain of trade routes circled the planet.
Manila has been damaged by and rebuilt from wars more times than the famed city of Troy and it is also the second most natural disaster-afflicted capital city in the world next to Tokyo, yet it is simultaneously among the most populous and wealthiest cities in Southeast Asia.
The Spanish city of Manila was founded on June 24, 1571, by Spanish conquistador Miguel López de Legazpi.
The date is regarded as the city's official founding date; however, a settlement has already existed dating back as far as 1258.
Manila was also the seat of power for most of the country's colonial rulers.
It is home to many historic sites, some of which were built during the 16th century.
Manila has many of the Philippines' firsts, including the first university (1590), light station (1642), lighthouse tower (1846), water system (1878), hotel (1889), electricity (1895), oceanarium (1913), stock exchange (1927), flyover (1930s), zoo (1959), pedestrian underpass (1960), science high school (1963), city-run university (1965), city-run hospital (1969), and rapid transit system (1984; also considered as the first rapid transit system in Southeast Asia).
The term "Manila" is commonly used to refer to the whole metropolitan area, the greater metropolitan area or the city proper.
The officially defined metropolitan area called Metro Manila, the capital region of the Philippines, includes the much larger Quezon City and the Makati Central Business District.
It is the most populous region of the country, one of the most populous urban areas in the world, and is one of the wealthiest regions in Southeast Asia.
The city proper is home to people in , and is the historic core of a built-up area that extends well beyond its administrative limits.
With 71,263 people per square kilometer, Manila is also the most densely populated city proper in the world.
Etymology
Maynilà, the Filipino name for the city, comes from the phrase may-nilà, which translates to "where indigo is found."
Nilà is derived from the Sanskrit word nīla is also among the top sources of missionaries worldwide.
This is explained by the fact that the Philippines is the most fervently Christian country in the world and is ranked as the 5th most religious country, globally.
Post-war years and the martial law era (1945-1986)
In 1948, President Elpidio Quirino moved the seat of government of the Philippines to Quezon City, a new capital in the suburbs and fields northeast of Manila, created in 1939 during the administration of President Manuel L. Quezon.
The move ended any implementation of the Burnham Plan's intent for the government centre to be at Luneta.
With the Visayan-born Arsenio Lacson as its first elected mayor in 1952 (all mayors were appointed before this), Manila underwent The Golden Age, once again earning its status as the "Pearl of the Orient", a moniker it earned before the Second World War.
After Lacson's term in the 1950s, Manila was led by Antonio Villegas for most of the 1960s.
Ramon Bagatsing (an Indian-Filipino) was mayor for nearly the entire 1970s until the 1986 People Power Revolution.
Mayors Lacson, Villegas, and Bagatsing are collectively known as the "Big Three of Manila" for their contribution to the development of the city and their lasting legacy in improving the quality of life and welfare of the people of Manila.
During the administration of Ferdinand Marcos, the region of Metro Manila was created as an integrated unit with the enactment of Presidential Decree No. 824 on November 7, 1975.
The area encompassed four cities and thirteen adjoining towns, as a separate regional unit of government.
On the 405th anniversary of the city's foundation on June 24, 1976, Manila was reinstated by President Marcos as the capital of the Philippines for its historical significance as the seat of government since the Spanish Period.
Presidential Decree No. 940 states that Manila has always been to the Filipino people and in the eyes of the world, the premier city of the Philippines being the center of trade, commerce, education and culture.
Concurrent with the reinstatement of Manila as the capital, Ferdinand Marcos designated his wife, Imelda Marcos, as the first governor of Metro Manila.
She started the rejuvenation of the city as she re-branded Manila as the "City of Man".
During the martial law era, Manila became a hot-bed of resistance activity as youth and student demonstrators repeatedly clashed with the police and military which were subservient to the Marcos regime.
After decades of resistance, the non-violent People Power Revolution (predecessor to the peaceful-revolutions that toppled the iron-curtain in Europe), led by Maria Corazon Aquino and Cardinal Jaime Sin, ousted the dictator Marcos from power.
Contemporary period (1986-present)
From 1986-1992, Mel Lopez was mayor of Manila.
During his early years, his administration was faced with 700 million pesos worth of debt and inherited an empty treasury.
In the first eleven months, however, the debt was reduced to 365 million pesos and the city's income rose by around 70% eventually leaving the city with positive income until the end of his term.
Lopez closed down numerous illegal gambling joints and jueteng.
In January 1990, Lopez padlocked two Manila casinos operated by the Philippine Amusement and Gaming Corporation (PAGCOR), saying the billions it gained cannot make up for the negative effects gambling inflicts upon the people, particularly the youth.
He also revived the Boys’ Town Haven (now referred to as “Boys Town”), rehabilitating its facilities to accommodate underprivileged children and provide them with livelihood and education.
In 1992, Alfredo Lim was elected mayor, the first Chinese-Filipino to hold the office.
He was known for his anti-crime crusades.
Lim was succeeded by Lito Atienza, who served as his vice mayor.
Atienza was known for his campaign (and city slogan) "Buhayin ang Maynila" (Revive Manila), which saw the establishment of several parks and the repair and rehabilitation of the city's deteriorating facilities.
He was the city's mayor for 3 terms (9 years) before being termed out of office.
Lim once again ran for mayor and defeated Atienza's son Ali in the 2007 city election and immediately reversed all of Atienza's projects claiming Atienza's projects made little contribution to the improvements of the city.
The relationship of both parties turned bitter, with the two pitting again during the 2010 city elections in which Lim won against Atienza.
Lim was sued by councilor Dennis Alcoreza on 2008 over human rights, charged with graft over the rehabilitation of public schools, and was heavily criticized for his haphazard resolution of the Rizal Park hostage taking incident, one of the deadliest hostage crisis in the Philippines.
Later on, Vice Mayor Isko Moreno and 28 city councilors filed another case against Lim in 2012, stating that Lim's statement in a meeting were "life-threatening" to them.
In 2012, DMCI Homes began constructing Torre de Manila, which became controversial for ruining the sight line of Rizal Park.
The tower is infamously known as "Terror de Manila" or the "national photobomber."
The Torre de Manila controversy is regarded as one of the most sensationalized heritage issues of the country.
In 2017, the National Historical Commission of the Philippines erected a 'comfort woman' statue along Roxas Boulevard, which made Japan express regret that such statue was erected in the city despite the healthy relationship between Japan and the Philippines.
In the 2013 elections, former President Joseph Estrada defeated Lim in the mayoral race.
During his term, Estrada allegedly paid ₱5 billion in city debts and increased the city's revenues.
In 2015, in line with President Noynoy Aquino's administration progress, the city became the most competitive city in the Philippines, making the city the best place for doing business and for living in.
In the 2016 elections, Estrada narrowly won over Lim in their electoral rematch.
Throughout Estrada's term, numerous Filipino heritage sites were demolished, gutted out, or approved for demolition.
Among such sites are the post-war Santa Cruz Building, Capitol Theater, El Hogar, old Magnolia Ice Cream Plant, and Rizal Memorial Stadium, among many others Some of these sites were saved upon the intervention of various cultural agencies of government and heritage advocate groups against Estrada's orders.
In May 2019, Estrada claimed that Manila was debt-free, however, two months later, the Commission on Audit verified that Manila has a total of 4.4 billion pesos in debt.
Estrada, who was seeking for reelection for his third and final term lost to Isko Moreno in the 2019 local elections.
Moreno has served as the Vice Mayor under both the Lim and Estrada Administration.
Estrada's defeat was seen as the end of their reign as a political clan, whose other family members run for various national and local positions.
After assuming office, Moreno initiated a city-wide cleanup against illegal vendors, signed an executive order promoting open governance, and vowed to stop bribery and corruption in the city.
The city has an ordinance penalizing cat-calling since 2018, and is the second city in the Philippines to do so after Quezon City passed a similar ordinance in 2016.
Recently, the City Government is planning to revise existing curfew ordinance since the Supreme Court declared it unconstitutional on August 2017.
Out of the three cities reviewed by the Supreme Court, namely: the City of Manila, Navotas and Quezon City; only the curfew ordinance of Quezon City was approved.
Under the proposed form of federalism in the Philippines, Manila may no longer be the capital or Metro Manila may no longer be the seat of government.
The committee has not yet decided on the federal capital and states that they are open to other proposals.
Geography
The City of Manila is situated on the eastern shore of Manila Bay, on the western edge of Luzon, from mainland Asia.
One of Manila's greatest natural resources is the protected harbor upon which it sits, regarded as the finest in all of Asia.
The Pasig River flows through the middle of city, dividing it into the north and south.
and Horizon Manila (419 hectares).
Once completed, it will increase the city's total area from to .
Another reclamation project is possible and when built, it will contain the in-city housing relocation projects.
Reclamation projects have been criticized by environmental activists and the Philippine Catholic Church, claiming that these are not sustainable and would put communities at risk of flooding.
In line of the upcoming reclamation projects, the Philippines and the Netherlands forged a cooperation to craft the ₱250 million Manila Bay Sustainable Development Master Plan to guide future decisions on programs and projects on Manila Bay.
Climate
Under the Köppen climate classification system, Manila has a tropical savanna climate (Köppen Aw), bordering closely on a tropical monsoon climate (Köppen Am).
Together with the rest of the Philippines, Manila lies entirely within the tropics.
Its proximity to the equator means that temperatures are hot year-round especially during the daytime, rarely going below or above .
Temperature extremes have ranged from on January 11, 1914, to on May 7, 1915.
Humidity levels are usually very high all year round, making the temperature feel hotter than it is.
Manila has a distinct cool dry season from late November through early March, and a relatively lengthy wet season that covers the remaining period with slightly cooler temperatures during the daytime.
In the wet season, it rarely rains all day, but rainfall is very heavy during short periods.
Typhoons usually occur from June to September.
Natural hazards
Swiss Re ranked Manila as the second riskiest capital city to live in, citing its exposure to natural hazards such as earthquakes, tsunamis, typhoons, floods and landslides.
to Metro Manila and nearby provinces.
Manila has endured several deadly earthquakes, notably in 1645 and in 1677 which destroyed the stone and brick medieval city.
The Earthquake Baroque style was used by architects during the Spanish colonial period in order to adapt to the frequent earthquakes.
Manila is hit with five to seven typhoons yearly.
In 2009, Typhoon Ketsana (Ondoy) struck the Philippines.
It led to one of the worst floodings in Metro Manila and several provinces in Luzon with an estimated damages worth ₱11 billion ($237 million).
The floodings caused 448 deaths in Metro Manila alone.
Following the aftermath of Typhoon Ketsana, the city began to dredge its rivers and improve its drainage network.
The south of Manila is also home to a now dormant volcano, Taal Volcano which in the past threatened the capital with landslides and volcanic eruptions.
Pollution
Due to industrial waste and automobiles, Manila suffers from air pollution, affecting 98% of the population.
Air pollution alone causes more than 4,000 deaths yearly.
On a 1995 report, Ermita is regarded as Manila's most air polluted district due to open dump sites and industrial waste.
According to a report in 2003, the Pasig River is one of the most polluted rivers in the world with 150 tons of domestic waste and 75 tons of industrial waste dumped daily.
The city is the second biggest waste producer in the country with 1,151.79 tons (7,500.07 cubic meters) per day, after Quezon City which yields 1,386.84 tons or 12,730.59 cubic meters per day.
Both cities were cited as having poor management in garbage collection and disposal.
The Pasig River Rehabilitation Commission is in charge of cleaning up the Pasig River and tributaries for transportation, recreation and tourism purposes.
Rehabilitation efforts have resulted in the creation of parks along the riverside, along with stricter pollution controls.
Cityscape
Manila is a planned city.
In 1905, American Architect and Urban Planner Daniel Burnham was commissioned to design the new capital.
His design for the city was based on the City Beautiful movement, which features broad streets and avenues radiating out from rectangles.
The city is made up of fourteen city districts, according to Republic Act No. 409-the Revised Charter of the City of Manila-the basis of which officially sets the present-day boundary of the city.
Two districts were later created, which are Santa Mesa and San Andres .
Manila's mix of architectural styles reflects the turbulent history of the city and country.
During the Second World War, Manila was razed to the ground by the Japanese forces and the shelling of American forces.
After the liberation, rebuilding began and most of the historical buildings were thoroughly reconstructed.
However, some of the historic buildings from the 19th century that had been preserved in reasonably reconstructible form were nonetheless eradicated or otherwise left to deteriorate.
Manila's current urban landscape is one of modern and contemporary architecture.
Architecture
Manila is known for its eclectic mix of architecture that shows a wide range of styles spanning different historical and cultural periods.
Architectural styles reflect American, Spanish, Chinese, and Malay influences.
Prominent Filipino architects such as Antonio Toledo, Felipe Roxas, Juan M. Arellano and Tomás Mapúa have designed significant buildings in Manila such as churches, government offices, theaters, mansions, schools and universities.
Manila is also famed for its Art Deco theaters.
Some of these were designed by National Artists for Architecture such as Juan Nakpil and Pablo Antonio.
Unfortunately most of these theaters were neglected, and some of it have been demolished.
The historic Escolta Street in Binondo features many buildings of Neoclassical and Beaux-Arts architectural style, many of which were designed by prominent Filipino architects during the American Rule in the 1920s to the late 1930s.
Many architects, artists, historians and heritage advocacy groups are pushing for the rehabilitation of Escolta Street, which was once the premier street of the Philippines.
Almost all of Manila's prewar and Spanish colonial architecture were destroyed during its battle for liberation by the intensive bombardment of the United States Air Force during World War II.
Reconstruction took place afterwards, replacing the destroyed historic Spanish-era buildings with modern ones, erasing much of the city's character.
Some buildings destroyed by the war have been reconstructed, such as the Old Legislative Building , Ayuntamiento de Manila (now the Bureau of the Treasury) and the currently under construction San Ignacio Church and Convent (as the Museo de Intramuros).
There are plans to rehabilitate and/or restore several neglected historic buildings and places such as Plaza Del Carmen, San Sebastian Church and the Manila Metropolitan Theater.
Spanish-era shops and houses in the districts of Binondo, Quiapo, and San Nicolas are also planned to be restored, as a part of a movement to restore the city to its former glory and its beautiful prewar state.
Since Manila is prone to earthquakes, the Spanish colonial architects invented the style called Earthquake Baroque which the churches and government buildings during the Spanish colonial period adopted.
Demographics
According to the , the population of the city was , making it the second most populous city in the Philippines.
Manila is the most densely populated city in the world, with 41,515 inhabitants per km in 2015.
Manila's population density dwarfs that of Kolkata (24,252 inhabitants per km), Mumbai (20,482 inhabitants per km), Paris (20,164 inhabitants per km), Dhaka (29,069 inhabitants per km), Shanghai (16,364 inhabitants per km, with its most dense district, Nanshi, having a density of 56,785 inhabitants per km), and Tokyo (10,087 inhabitants per km).
Its population increased dramatically since the 1903 census as the population tended to move from rural areas to towns and cities.
In the 1960 census, Manila became the first Philippine city to breach the one million mark (more than 5 times of its 1903 population).
The city continued to grow until the population somehow "stabilized" at 1.6 million and experienced alternating increase and decrease starting the 1990 census year.
This phenomenon may be attributed to the higher growth experience by suburbs and the already very high population density of city.
As such, Manila exhibited a decreasing percentage share to the metropolitan population from as high as 63% in the 1950s to 27.5% in 1980 and then to 13.8% in 2015.
The much larger Quezon City marginally surpassed the population of Manila in 1990 and by the 2015 census already has 1.1 million people more.
Nationally, the population of Manila is expected to be overtaken by cities with larger territories such as Caloocan and Davao City by 2020.
The vernacular language is Filipino, based mostly on the Tagalog language of surrounding areas, and this Manila form of spoken Tagalog has essentially become the lingua franca of the Philippines, having spread throughout the archipelago through mass media and entertainment.
English is the language most widely used in education, business, and heavily in everyday usage throughout Metro Manila and the Philippines itself.
A number of older residents can still speak basic Spanish, which used to be a mandatory subject in the curriculum of Philippine universities and colleges, and many children of Japanese, Korean, Indian, and other origins also speak their parents' languages at home, aside from English and/or Filipino for everyday use.
A variant of Southern Min, Hokkien (locally known as Lan'nang-oe) is mainly spoken by the city's Chinese-Filipino community.
According to data provided by the Bureau of Immigration, a total of https:/ headlines 06 1823064/more-3-million-chinese-allowed-entry-philippines-2016-immigration-data 3.12 million Chinese citizens arrived in the Philippines from January 2016 to May 2018.
Crime
Crime in Manila is concentrated in areas associated with poverty, drug abuse, and gangs.
Crime in the city is also directly related to its changing demographics and unique criminal justice system.
The illegal drug trade is a major problem of the city.
In Metro Manila alone, 92% of the barangays are affected by illegal drugs.
From 2010 to 2015, the city had the second highest index crime rates in the Philippines, with 54,689 cases or an average of about 9,100 cases per year.
By October 2017, the Manila Police District (MPD) reported a 38.7% decrease in index crimes, from 5,474 cases in 2016 to only 3,393 in 2017.
MPD's crime solution efficiency also improved, wherein six to seven out of 10 crimes have been solved by the city police force.
MPD was cited was the Best Police District in Metro Manila in 2017 for registering the highest crime solution efficiency.
Religion
Christianity
As a result of Spanish cultural influence, Manila is a predominantly Christian city.
, Roman Catholics were 93.5% of the population, followed by adherents of the Philippine Independent Church (2.4%); Iglesia ni Cristo (1.9%); various Protestant churches (1.8%); and Buddhists (1.1%).
Members of Islam and other religions make up the remaining 1.4% of its population.
Manila is the seat of prominent Catholic churches and institutions.
There are 113 Catholic churches within the city limits; 63 are considered as major shrines, basilicas, or a cathedral.
The Manila Cathedral is the seat of the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Manila and the oldest established church in the country.
Aside from the Manila Cathedral, there are also three other basilicas in the city: Quiapo Church, Binondo Church, and the Minor Basilica of San Sebastián.
The San Agustín Church in Intramuros is a UNESCO
World Heritage Site and is one of the two fully air-conditioned Catholic churches in the city.
Manila also has other parishes located throughout the city, with some of them dating back to the Spanish Colonial Period when the city serves as the base for numerous Catholic missions both within the Philippines and to Asia beyond.
Several Mainline Protestant denominations are headquartered in the city.
St. Stephen's Parish pro-cathedral in the Santa Cruz district is the see of the Episcopal Church in the Philippines' Diocese of Central Philippines, while align Taft Avenue are the main cathedral and central offices of the Iglesia Filipina Independiente (also called the Aglipayan Church, a national church that was a product of the Philippine Revolution).
Other faiths like The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (Mormons) has several churches in the city.
The indigenous Iglesia ni Cristo has several locales (akin to parishes) in the city, including its very first chapel (now a museum) in Punta, Santa Ana.
Evangelical, Pentecostal and Seventh-day Adventist denominations also thrive within the city.
The headquarters of the Philippine Bible Society is in Manila.
Also, the main campus of the Cathedral of Praise is located along Taft Avenue.
Jesus Is Lord Church Worldwide also has several branches and campuses in Manila, and celebrates its anniversary yearly at the Burnham Green and Quirino Grandstand in Rizal Park.
File:02237jfManila Cathedral Intramuros Manila
Palacio del Gobernador Landmarksfvf 12.jpg|Manila
Cathedral is the seat of Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Manila
File:Basílica de San Sebastián, (Agustinos Recoletos) Manila, Filipinas..
jpg|The Minor Basilica of San Sebastián is the only all-steel church in Asia.
File:Ph-mm-manila-intramuros-san agustin church (2014).JPG|San Agustín Church in Intramuros, a UNESCO World Heritage Site.
File:0728jfBuildings Streets Binondo Plaza Lorenzo Ruiz Landmarks Manilafvf 06.jpg|Binondo Church serves the Roman Catholic Chinese community
File:09620jfQuiapo Central Church Plaza Manila Bridge Riverfvf 06.jpg|Quiapo Church is the home to the iconic Black Nazarene which celebrates its feasts every January 9
Other faiths
There are many Buddhist and Taoist temples in the city serving the Chinese Filipino community.
Quiapo is home to a sizable Muslim population which worships at Masjid Al-Dahab.
Members of the Indian expatriate population have the option of worshiping at the large Hindu temple in the city, or at the Sikh gurdwara along United Nations Avenue.
The National Spiritual Assembly of the Bahá'ís of the Philippines, the governing body of the Filipino Bahá'í community, is headquartered near Manila's eastern border with Makati.
Economy
Manila is a major center for commerce, banking and finance, retailing, transportation, tourism, real estate, new media as well as traditional media, advertising, legal services, accounting, insurance, theater, fashion, and the arts in the Philippines.
Around 60,000 establishments operate in the city.
The National Competitiveness Council of the Philippines which annually publishes the Cities and Municipalities Competitiveness Index (CMCI), ranks the cities, municipalities and provinces of the country according to their economic dynamism, government efficiency and infrastructure.
According to the 2016 CMCI, Manila was the second most competitive city in the Philippines.
Manila placed third in the Highly Urbanized City (HUC) category.
Manila held the title country's most competitive city in 2015, and since then has been making it to the top 3, assuring that the city is consistently one of the best place to live in and do business.
Lars Wittig, the country manager of Regus Philippines, hailed Manila as the third best city in the country to launch a start-up business.
The Port of Manila is the largest seaport in the Philippines, making it the premier international shipping gateway to the country.
The Philippine Ports Authority is the government agency responsible to oversee the operation and management of the ports.
The International Container Terminal Services Inc. cited by the Asian Development Bank as one of the top five major maritime terminal operators in the world has its headquarters and main operations on the ports of Manila.
Another port operator, the Asian Terminal Incorporated, has its corporate office and main operations in the Manila South Harbor and its container depository located in Santa Mesa.
Binondo, the oldest and one of the largest Chinatowns in the world, was the center of commerce and business activities in the city.
Numerous residential and office skyscrapers are found within its medieval streets.
Plans to make the Chinatown area into a business process outsourcing (BPO) hub progresses and is aggressively pursued by the city government of Manila.
30 buildings are already identified to be converted into BPO offices.
These buildings are mostly located along the Escolta Street of Binondo, which are all unoccupied and can be converted into offices.
Divisoria in Tondo is known as the "shopping mecca of the Philippines."
Numerous shopping malls are located in this place, which sells products and goods at bargain price.
Small vendors occupy several roads that causes pedestrian and vehicular traffic.
A famous landmark in Divisoria is the Tutuban Center, a large shopping mall that is a part of the Philippine National Railways' Main Station.
It attracts 1 million people every month, but is expected to add another 400,000 people when the Line 2 West Extension is constructed, which is set to make it as Manila's busiest transfer station.
Diverse manufacturers within the city produce industrial-related products such as chemicals, textiles, clothing, and electronic goods.
Food and beverages and tobacco products also produced.
Local entrepreneurs continue to process primary commodities for export, including rope, plywood, refined sugar, copra, and coconut oil.
The food-processing industry is one of the most stable major manufacturing sector in the city.
The Pandacan Oil Depot houses the storage facilities and distribution terminals of the three major players in the country's petroleum industry, namely Caltex Philippines, Pilipinas Shell and Petron Corporation.
The oil depot has been a subject of various concerns, including its environmental and health impact to the residents of Manila.
The Supreme Court has ordered that the oil depot to be relocated outside the city by July 2015, but it failed to meet this deadline.
Most of the oil depot facility inside the 33 hectare compound have been demolished, and plans are put into place to transform it into a transport hub or even a food park.
Manila is a major publishing center in the Philippines.
Manila Bulletin, the Philippines' largest broadsheet newspaper by circulation, is headquartered in Intramuros.
Other major publishing companies in the country like The Manila Times, The Philippine Star and Manila Standard Today are headquartered in the Port Area.
The Chinese Commercial News, the Philippines' oldest existing Chinese-language newspaper, and the country's third-oldest existing newspaper is headquartered in Binondo.
Manila serves as the headquarters of the Central Bank of the Philippines which is located along Roxas Boulevard.
Some universal banks in the Philippines that has its headquarters in the city are the Landbank of the Philippines and Philippine Trust Company.
Unilever Philippines used to have its corporate office along United Nations Avenue in Paco before transferring to Bonifacio Global City in 2016.
Toyota, a company listed in the Forbes Global 2000, also has its regional office along UN Avenue.
Tourism
Manila welcomes over 1 million tourists each year.
Both the historic Walled City of Intramuros and Rizal Park were designated as flagship destinations and as a tourism enterprise zones in the Tourism Act of 2009.
Rizal Park, also known as Luneta Park, is the national park and the largest urban park in Asia with an area of , The park was constructed as an honor and dedication to the country's national hero José Rizal, who was executed by the Spaniards on charges of subversion.
The flagpole west of the Rizal Monument is the Kilometer Zero marker for distances to the rest of the country.
The park was managed by the National Parks and Development Committee.
The Walled City of Intramuros is the historic center of Manila.
It is administered by the Intramuros Administration, an attached agency of the Department of Tourism.
It contains the famed Manila Cathedral and the 18th Century San Agustin Church, a UNESCO World Heritage Site.
Kalesa is a popular mode of transportation for tourists in Intramuros and nearby places including Binondo, Ermita and Rizal Park.
Known as the oldest chinatown in the world, Binondo was established on 1521 and it was already a hub of Chinese commerce even before the Spaniards colonized the Philippines.
Its main attractions are Binondo Church, Filipino-Chinese Friendship Arch, Seng Guan Buddhist temple and authentic Chinese restaurants.
Manila is designated as the country's pioneer of medical tourism, expecting it to generate $1 billion in revenue annually.
However, lack of progressive health system, inadequate infrastructure and the unstable political environment are seen as hindrances for its growth.
Shopping
Manila is regarded as one of the best shopping destinations in Asia.
Major shopping malls, department stores, markets, supermarkets and bazaars thrive within the city.
One of the city's famous shopping destinations is Divisoria, home to numerous shopping malls in the city, including the famed Tutuban Center and the Lucky Chinatown Mall.
It is also dubbed as the shopping mecca of the Philippines where everything is sold at bargain price.
There are almost 1 million shoppers in Divisoria according to the Manila Police District.
Binondo, the oldest Chinatown in the world, The mall was the second and the largest Robinsons Malls built.
SM Supermall operates two shopping malls in the city which are the SM City Manila and SM City San Lazaro.
SM City Manila is located on the former grounds of YMCA Manila beside the Manila City Hall in Ermita, while SM City San Lazaro is built on the site of the former San Lazaro Hippodrome in Santa Cruz.
The building of the former Manila Royal Hotel in Quiapo, which is famed for its revolving restaurant atop, is now the SM Clearance Center that was established in 1972.
The site of the first SM Store is located at Carlos Palanca Sr. (formerly Echague) Street in San Miguel.
Culture
Museums
As the cultural center of the Philippines, Manila is the home to a number of museums.
The National Museum Complex of the National Museum of the Philippines, located in Rizal Park, is composed of the National Museum of Fine Arts, the National Museum of Anthropology, the National Museum of Natural History, and the National Planetarium.
The famous painting of Juan Luna, the Spoliarium, can be found in the complex.
The city also hosts the repository of the country's printed and recorded cultural heritage and other literary and information resources, the National Library.
Museums established or run by educational institutions are the Mabini Shrine, the DLS-CSB Museum of Contemporary Art and Design, UST Museum of Arts and Sciences, and the UP Museum of a History of Ideas.
Bahay Tsinoy, one of Manila's most prominent museums, documents the Chinese lives and contributions in the history of the Philippines.
The Intramuros Light and Sound Museum chronicles the Filipinos desire for freedom during the revolution under Rizal's leadership and other revolutionary leaders.
The Metropolitan Museum of Manila is a museum of modern and contemporary visual arts exhibits the Filipino arts and culture.
Other museums in the city are the Museum of Manila, the city-owned museum that exhibits the city's culture and history, Museo Pambata, a children's museum and a place of hands-on discovery and fun learning, and Plaza San Luis which is an outdoor heritage public museum that contains a collection of nine Spanish Bahay na Bató houses.
Ecclesiastical museums in the located in the city are the Parish of the Our Lady of the Abandoned in Santa Ana, the San Agustin Church Museum and the Museo de Intramuros which houses the ecclesiastical art collection of the Intramuros Administration in the reconstructed San Ignacio Church and Convent.
Sports
Sports in Manila have a long and distinguished history.
The city's, and in general the country's main sport is basketball, and most barangays have a basketball court or at least a makeshift basketball court, with court markings drawn on the streets.
Larger barangays have covered courts where inter-barangay leagues are held every summer (April to May).
Manila has many sports venues, such as the Rizal Memorial Sports Complex and San Andres Gym, the home of the now defunct Manila Metrostars.
The Rizal Memorial Sports Complex houses the Rizal Memorial Track and Football Stadium, the Baseball Stadium, Tennis Courts, the Rizal Memorial Coliseum and the Ninoy Aquino Stadium (the latter two are indoor arenas).
The Rizal complex had hosted several multi-sport events, such as the 1954 Asian Games and the 1934 Far Eastern Games.
Whenever the country hosts the Southeast Asian Games, most of the events are held at the complex, but in the 2005 Games, most events were held elsewhere.
The 1960 ABC Championship and the 1973 ABC Championship, forerunners of the FIBA Asia Championship, was hosted by the memorial coliseum, with the national basketball team winning on both tournaments.
The 1978 FIBA World Championship was held at the coliseum although the latter stages were held in the Araneta Coliseum in Quezon City, Southeast Asia's largest indoor arena at that time.
Manila also hosts several well-known sports facilities such as the Enrique M. Razon Sports Center and the University of Santo Tomas Sports Complex, both of which are private venues owned by a university; collegiate sports are also held, with the University Athletic Association of the Philippines and the National Collegiate Athletic Association basketball games held at Rizal Memorial Coliseum and Ninoy Aquino Stadium, although basketball events had transferred to San Juan's Filoil Flying V Arena and the Araneta Coliseum in Quezon City.
Other collegiate sports are still held at the Rizal Memorial Sports Complex.
Professional basketball also used to play at the city, but the Philippine Basketball Association now holds their games at Araneta Coliseum and Cuneta Astrodome at Pasay; the now defunct Philippine Basketball League played some of their games at the Rizal Memorial Sports Complex.
The Manila Storm are the city's rugby league team training at Rizal Park (Luneta Park) and playing their matches at Southern Plains Field, Calamba, Laguna.
Previously a widely played sport in the city, Manila is now the home of the only sizable baseball stadium in the country, at the Rizal Memorial Baseball Stadium.
The stadium hosts games of Baseball Philippines; Lou Gehrig and Babe Ruth were the first players to score a home run at the stadium at their tour of the country on December 2, 1934.
Another popular sport in the city are cue sports, and billiard halls are a feature in most barangays.
The 2010 World Cup of Pool was held at Robinsons Place Manila.
The Rizal Memorial Track and Football Stadium hosted the first FIFA World Cup qualifier in decades when the Philippines hosted Sri Lanka in July 2011.
The stadium, which was previously unfit for international matches, had undergone a major renovation program before the match.
The stadium also hosted its first rugby test when it hosted the 2012 Asian Five Nations Division I tournaments.
Festivities and holidays
Manila celebrates civic and national holidays.
Since most of the city's citizens are Roman Catholics as a result of the Spanish colonization, most of the festivities are religious in nature.
Manila Day, which celebrates the city's founding on June 24, 1571 by Spanish conquistador Miguel López de Legazpi, was first proclaimed by Herminio A. Astorga (then Vice Mayor of Manila) on June 24, 1962.
It has been annually commemorated under the patronage of John the Baptist, and has always been declared by the national government as a special non-working holiday through Presidential Proclamations.
Each of the city's 896 barangays also have their own festivities guided by their own patron saint.
The city is also the host to the Procession of the Feast of the Black Nazarene (Traslacíon), held every January 9, which draws millions of Catholic devotees.
Other religious festivities held in Manila are the Feast of Santo Niño in Tondo and Pandacan held on the third Sunday of January, the Feast of the Nuestra Señora de los Desamparados de Manila (Our Lady of the Abandoned), the patron saint of Santa Ana which was held every May 12, and the Flores de Mayo.
Non-religious holidays include the New Year's Day, National Heroes' Day, Bonifacio Day and Rizal Day.
Law and government
Manila-officially known as the City of Manila-is the national capital of the Philippines and is classified as a Special City (according to its income) and a Highly Urbanized City (HUC).
The mayor is the chief executive, and is assisted by the vice mayor, the 36-member City Council, six Congressmen, the President of the Association of Barangay Captains, and the President of the Sangguniang Kabataan.
The members of the City Council are elected as representatives of specific congressional districts within the city.
The city, however, have no control over Intramuros and the Manila North Harbor.
The historic Walled City is administered by the Intramuros Administration, while the Manila North Harbor is managed by the Philippine Ports Authority.
Both are national government agencies.
The barangays that have jurisdictions over these places only oversee the welfare of the city's constituents and cannot exercise their executive powers.
Manila has a total of 15,489 personnel complement by the end of 2018.
Finance
In the 2018 Annual Audit Report published by the Commission on Audit, it is stated that the total revenue of the City of Manila amounts to ₱14.1 billion.
It is one of the cities with the highest tax collection and internal revenue allotment.
Manila collects an annual tax revenue amounting to ₱7.3 billion.
The city's total Internal Revenue Allotment (IRA), coming from the National Treasury, is at ₱2.94 billion.
Meanwhile, its total assets was worth ₱40.7 billion in 2018.
which are grouped into 100 Zones for statistical convenience.
Manila has the most number of barangays in the Philippines.
Attempts at reducing its number have not prospered despite local legislation-Ordinance 7907, passed on April 23, 1996-reducing the number from 896 to 150 by merging existing barangays, because of the failure to hold a plebiscite.
* District I (2015 population: 415,906) covers the western part of Tondo and is the most densely populated Congressional District.
It is the home to one of the biggest urban poor communities.
The Smokey Mountain in Balut Island is once known as the largest landfill where thousands of impoverished people lives in the slums.
After the closure of the landfill in 1995, mid-rise housing buildings were built in place.
This district also contains the Manila North Harbour Centre, the Manila North Harbor, and the Manila International Container Terminal of the Port of Manila.
* District II (2015 population: 215,457)
Recently, Mayor Isko Moreno plans to retrofit dilapidated tenements within the city.
A meeting was held with the National Housing Authority for the relocation of affected residents.
Transportation
One of the more famous modes of transportation in Manila is the jeepney.
Patterned after U.S. Army jeeps, these have been in use since the years immediately following World War II.
The Tamaraw FX, the third generation Toyota Kijang, which competed directly with jeepneys and followed fixed routes for a set price, once plied the streets of Manila.
They were replaced by the UV Express.
All types of public road transport plying Manila are privately owned and operated under government franchise.
On a for-hire basis, the city is served by numerous taxicabs, "tricycles" (motorcycles with sidecars, the Philippine version of the auto rickshaw), and "trisikads" or "sikads", which are also known as "kuligligs" (bicycles with a sidecars, the Philippine version of pedicabs).
In some areas, especially in Divisoria, motorized pedicabs are popular.
Spanish-era horse-drawn calesas are still a popular tourist attraction and mode of transportation in the streets of Binondo and Intramuros.
Manila will phase out all gasoline-run tricycles and pedicabs and replace them with electric tricycles (e-trikes), and plans to distribute 10,000 e-trikes to qualified tricycle drivers from the city.
As of January 2018, the city has already distributed e-trikes to a number of drivers and operators in Binondo, Ermita, Malate and Santa Cruz.
The city is serviced by Line 1 and Line 2, which form the Manila Light Rail Transit System, as well as the Manila Metro Rail Transit System, currently made up of one line (Line 3) with several more in development.
Development of the railway system began in the 1970s under the presidency of Ferdinand Marcos, when Line 1 was built, making it the first light rail transport in Southeast Asia, though despite the name "light rail", Line 1 operates as a Light Metro running on dedicated right-of-way.
Line 2 on the other hand, operates as a full-metro heavy-rail system.
These systems are currently undergoing a multibillion-dollar expansion.
Line 1 runs along the length of Taft Avenue , and Line 2 runs along Claro M. Recto Avenue from Santa Cruz, through Quezon City, up to Masinag in Antipolo, Rizal.
Line 3 runs from Taft Avenue, where it intersects with the EDSA station on Line 1, northward through the eastern part of the city, eventually meeting with Line 2 at Araneta Center-Cubao Station before eventually terminating in the north of the city at North Avenue Station, with plans to extend the line to link up with Roosevelt Station at the northern terminus of Line 1.
The main terminal of the Philippine National Railways lies within the city.
One commuter railway within Metro Manila is in operation.
The line runs in a general north-south direction from Tutuban (Tondo) toward the province of Laguna.
The Port of Manila, located at the western section of the city at the vicinity of Manila Bay, is the chief seaport of the Philippines.
The Pasig River Ferry Service which runs on the Pasig River is another form of transportation.
The city is also served by the Ninoy Aquino International Airport and Clark International Airport.
In 2006, Forbes magazine ranked Manila the world's most congested city.
According to Waze's 2015 "Global Driver Satisfaction Index", Manila is the town with the worst traffic worldwide.
Manila is notorious for its frequent traffic jams and high densities.
The government has undertaken several projects to alleviate the traffic in the city.
Some of the projects include: the proposed construction of a new viaduct or underpass at the intersection of España Boulevard and Lacson Avenue, the construction of the Metro Manila Skyway Stage 3, the proposed Line 2 West Extension Project from Recto Avenue to Pier 4 of the Manila North Harbor, the proposed construction of the PNR East-West line which will run through España Boulevard up to Quezon City, and the expansion and widening of several national and local roads.
However, such projects have yet to make any meaningful impact, and the traffic jams and congestion continue unabated.
The Metro Manila Dream Plan seeks to address these urban transport problems.
It consists of a list of short term priority projects and medium to long term infrastructure projects that will last up to 2030.
Water and electricity
Water services used to be provided by the Metropolitan Waterworks and Sewerage System, which served 30% of the city with most other sewage being directly dumped into storm drains, septic tanks, or open canals.
MWSS was privatized in 1997, which split the water concession into the east and west zones.
The Maynilad Water Services took over the west zone of which Manila is a part.
It now provides the supply and delivery of potable water and sewerage system in Manila, but it does not provide service to the southeastern part of the city which belongs to the east zone that is served by Manila Water.
Electric services are provided by Meralco, the sole electric power distributor in Metro Manila.
Healthcare
The Manila Health Department is responsible for the planning and implementation of the health care programs provided by the city government.
It operates 59 health centers and six city-run hospitals, which are free of charge for the city's constituents.
The six public city-run hospitals are the Ospital ng Maynila Medical Center, Ospital ng Sampaloc, Gat Andres Bonifacio Memorial Medical Center, Ospital ng Tondo, Santa Ana Hospital, and Justice Jose Abad Santos General Hospital.
Manila is also the site of the Philippine General Hospital, the tertiary state-owned hospital administered and operated by the University of the Philippines Manila.
The city is also planning to put up an education, research and hospital facility for cleft-palate patients.
Manila's healthcare is also provided by private corporations.
Private hospitals that operates in the city are the Manila Doctors Hospital, Chinese General Hospital and Medical Center, Dr. José R. Reyes Memorial Medical Center, Metropolitan Medical Center, Our Lady of Lourdes Hospital, and the University of Santo Tomas Hospital.
The Department of Health (DOH) has its main office in Manila.
The national health department operates the San Lazaro Hospital, a special referral tertiary hospital.
DOH also operates the Dr. Jose Fabella Memorial Hospital, Jose R. Reyes Memorial Medical Center and the Tondo Medical Center.
Manila is the home to the headquarters of the World Health Organization's Regional Office for the Western Pacific and Country Office for the Philippines.
The city has free immunization programs for children, specifically targeted against the seven major diseases - smallpox, diphtheria, tetanus, yellow fever, whooping cough, polio, and measles.
As of 2016, a total of 31,115 children age one and below has been “fully immunized”.
The Manila Dialysis Center that provides free services for the poor has been cited by the United Nations Committee on Innovation, Competitiveness and Public-Private Partnerships as a model for public-private partnership (PPP) projects.
In 2019, the dialysis facility was named as the Flora V. Valisno de Siojo Dialysis Center.
It was inaugurated as the largest free dialysis facility in the Philippines with 91 dialysis machines, which can be expanded up to 100, matching the capabilities of the National Kidney and Transplant Institute (NKTI).
Education
The center of education since the colonial period, Manila - particularly Intramuros - is home to several Philippine universities and colleges as well as its oldest ones.
It served as the home of the University of Santo Tomas (1611), Colegio de San Juan de Letran (1620), Ateneo de Manila University (1859), Lyceum of the Philippines University and the Mapua Institute of Technology.
Only Colegio de San Juan de Letran (1620) remains at Intramuros; the University of Santo Tomas transferred to a new campus at Sampaloc in 1927, and Ateneo left Intramuros for Loyola Heights, Quezon City (while still retaining "de Manila" in its name) in 1952.
The University of the City of Manila (Pamantasan ng Lungsod ng Maynila) located at Intramuros, and Universidad de Manila located just outside the walled city, are both owned and operated by the Manila city government.
The University of the Philippines (1908), the premier state university, was established in Ermita, Manila.
It moved its central administrative offices from Manila to Diliman in 1949 and eventually made the original campus the University of the Philippines Manila - the oldest of the constituent universities of the University of the Philippines System and the center of health sciences education in the country.
The city is also the site of the main campus of the Polytechnic University of the Philippines, the largest university in the country in terms of student population.
The University Belt refers to the area where there is a high concentration or a cluster of colleges and universities in the city and it is commonly understood as the one where the San Miguel, Quiapo and Sampaloc districts meet.
Generally, it includes the western end of España Boulevard, Nicanor Reyes St. (formerly Morayta St.), the eastern end of Claro M. Recto Avenue (formerly Azcarraga), Legarda Avenue, Mendiola Street, and the different side streets.
Each of the colleges and universities found here are at a short walking distance of each other.
Another cluster of colleges lies along the southern bank of the Pasig River, mostly at the Intramuros and Ermita districts, and still a smaller cluster is found at the southernmost part of Malate near the city limits such as the private co-educational institution of De La Salle University, the largest of all De La Salle University System of schools.
The Division of the City Schools of Manila, a branch of the Department of Education, refers to the city's three-tier public education system.
It governs the 71 public elementary schools, 32 public high schools.
The city also contains the Manila Science High School, the pilot science high school of the Philippines.
Notable people
Sister cities
Asia
Europe
Americas
* New York City, New York, United States
International relations
Consulates
Notes
Sources
* Moore, Charles (1921).
https:/ books?id
aR7iAAAAMAAJ&pg
PA162
"Daniel H. Burnham: Planner of Cities".
Houghton Mifflin and Co., Boston and New York.
