Dylan Martin Alcott, (born 4 December 1990)
He was named the 2016 Australian Paralympian of the Year due to his outstanding achievements at Rio Paralympics.
The tumor was successfully cut out; however, it left Alcott a paraplegic, requiring him to use a wheelchair.
Alcott attended Brighton Grammar School from grade 6, and competed for Victoria in swimming, and Australia for wheelchair tennis and wheelchair basketball.
Alcott graduated Brighton Grammar school in 2008.
Alcott made his debut for the Rollers at the World Championship, where they won a bronze medal.
Alcott continued to hold his spot and was a member of the Rollers who travelled to the Beijing Olympic warm-up tournament in January 2008.
Alcott made his name in basketball through his performances in the national league competition, competing for the Dandenong Rangers and being selected in the all star team for 2008.
He has achieved success through junior competition as well; being named the Most Valuable Player at the Junior National Basketball Championships.
Alcott was part of the gold medal winning Australia men's national wheelchair basketball team at the 2008 Summer Paralympics, for which he received a Medal of the Order of Australia.
In his first Paralympics Dylan was quoted; "To be 17 and win gold...
well it just doesn't get any better than that".
In 2009, Alcott accepted a scholarship at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, where he went on to win the College Championship division with the University of Illinois wheelchair basketball team.
After one year of study, he decided to move back to Melbourne to train for the 2012 London Paralympic Games.
In 2010, Alcott was a part of the Rollers success at the 2010 World Championships in Birmingham, England.
It was the first world championship the Australian wheelchair basketball team had ever won, and Alcott was named in the World All Star 5 for the tournament.
At the 2012 Summer Paralympics, Alcott was part of the Australian men's wheelchair team that won silver.
Tennis
In 2014, Alcott returned to wheelchair tennis.
In July 2014, he defeated world number three Andy Lapthorne 7-5, 6-1 in the British Open Wheelchair Tennis Championship final in Nottingham to win his first Super Series crown.
Early in the year, he won the New Zealand Open in just his second tournament appearance.
It was his maiden grand slam title.
In 2018, Alcott won his first Wheelchair Tennis Masters title in the Quads singles event.
Grand Slam tournament finals
Quad singles: 10 (9 titles, 1 runner-up)
Source:
Quad doubles: 12 (5 titles, 7 runner-ups)
Source: They defeated the reigning champions David Wagner and Nick Taylor in the gold medal match 4-6, 6-4, 7-5.
In his spare time, Alcott attends music festivals, and has become known for his 'wheelchair crowdsurfing'.
In 2018, he launched Ability Fest, a universally accessible music festival, featuring pathways for wheelchairs, quiet areas for people with sensory disabilities, and Auslan (Australian Sign Language) interpreters.
He was a panel member on the AFL Footy Show until the show was cancelled in 2019
Alcott's advice to young people with a disability is: "The biggest thing is that for every one thing you can’t do, there are 10,000 others you can.
For every one idiot to give you a hard time, there are 10,000 others worth your time."
In September 2017, Alcott was appointed Australian Patron for International Day of People with Disability.
The book Able: gold medals, grand slams and smashing glass ceilings, written with Grantlee Kieza, was published by ABC Books in 2018.
Recognition
* 2015 - Tennis Australia Most Outstanding Athlete with a Disability
* 2015 - Victorian Institute of Sport Award of Excellence
* 2016 - Governor's Award for Victorian Sportsperson of the Year
* 2016 - Finalist for 'The Don Award' Sport Australia Hall of Fame awards
* 2016 - Australian Paralympian of the Year and Australian Male Paralympian of the Year
* 2016 - Tennis Australia Awards - Newcombe Medal and shared the Most Outstanding Athlete with a Disability with doubles partner Heath Davidson
* 2016 - Victorian Institute of Sport Elite Athlete with a Disability Award
*2018 - International Tennis Federation Quad Wheelchair World Champion
* 2019 - Logie Awards - Graham Kennedy Award for Most Popular New Talent
