Slovak () or less frequently Slovakian, is a West Slavic language (together with Czech, Polish, and Sorbian).
Recently, it is also influenced by English.
Czech
Although most dialects of Czech and Slovak are mutually intelligible (see Comparison of Slovak and Czech), eastern Slovak dialects are less intelligible to speakers of Czech and closer to Polish, Ruthenian and Ukrainian and contact between speakers of Czech and speakers of the eastern dialects is limited.
Since the dissolution of Czechoslovakia it has been permitted to use Czech in TV broadcasting and during court proceedings 6, contained the variously interpreted unclear provision saying that "When applying this act, it holds that the use of the Czech language fulfills the requirement of fundamental intelligibility with the state language"; the state language is Slovak and the Minority Language Act basically refers to municipalities with more than 20% ethnic minority population (no such Czech municipalities are found in Slovakia).
Since 1 September 2009 (due to an amendment to the State Language Act 270/1995 Z.z.)
a language "fundamentally intelligible with the state language" (i.e. the Czech language) may be used in contact with state offices and bodies by its native speakers, and documents written in it and issued by bodies in the Czech Republic are officially accepted.
Regardless of its official status, Czech is used commonly both in Slovak mass media and in daily communication by Czech natives as an equal language.
Czech and Slovak have a long history of interaction and mutual influence well before the creation of Czechoslovakia in 1918, a state which existed until 1993.
Literary Slovak shares significant orthographic features with Czech, as well as technical and professional terminology dating from the Czechoslovak period, but phonetic, grammatical, and vocabulary differences do exist.
Other Slavic languages
Slavic language varieties are relatively closely related, and have had a large degree of mutual influence, due to the complicated ethnopolitical history of their historic ranges.
This is reflected in the many features Slovak shares with neighboring language varieties.
Standard Slovak shares high degrees of mutual intelligibility with many Slavic varieties.
Despite this closeness to other Slavic varieties, significant variation exists among Slovak dialects.
In particular, eastern varieties differ significantly from the standard language, which is based on central and western varieties.
Eastern Slovak dialects have the greatest degree of mutual intelligibility with Polish of all the Slovak dialects, followed by Rusyn, but both Eastern Slovak and Rusyn lack familiar technical terminology and upper register expressions.
Polish and Sorbian also differ quite considerably from Czech and Slovak in upper registers, but non-technical and lower register speech is readily intelligible.
Some mutual intelligibility occurs with spoken Rusyn, Ukrainian, and even Russian (in this order), although their orthographies are based on the Cyrillic script.
Latin
English
Sports:
* futbal: Football (Association football; it can also mean American football, especially when specified as americký futbal)
Food:
Clothing:
Exclamations:
German
Nouns:
Verbs:
* študovať: studieren (to study (as in, to major in))
** Note: colloquially, the standard term in Slovak is želať
Greetings:
Servus is commonly used as a greeting or upon parting in Slovak-speaking regions and some German-speaking regions, particularly Austria.
Papa is also commonly used upon parting in these regions.
Both servus and papa are used in colloquial, informal conversation.
Hungarian
Hungarians and Slovaks have had a language interaction ever since the settlement of Hungarians in the Carpathian area.
Hungarians also adopted many words from various Slavic languages related to agriculture and administration, and a number of Hungarian loanwords are found in Slovak.
Some examples are as follows:
*"wicker whip": Slovak korbáč - Hungarian korbács;
*"dragon/kite": Slovak šarkan (rather rare, drak is far more common in this meaning; šarkan often means only "kite", esp.
a small one that is flown for fun and this term is far more common than drak in this meaning; for the "dragon kite", the term drak is still used almost exclusively) - Hungarian sárkány.
Dialects
There are many Slovak dialects, which are divided into the following four basic groups:
*Eastern Slovak dialects (in Spiš, Šariš, Zemplín and Abov)
*Central Slovak dialects (in Liptov, Orava, Turiec, Tekov, Hont, Novohrad, Gemer and the historic Zvolen county)
*Western Slovak dialects (in remaining Slovakia: Kysuce, Trenčín, Trnava, Nitra, Záhorie)
*Lowland (dolnozemské) Slovak dialects
The fourth group of dialects is often not considered a separate group, but a subgroup of Central and Western Slovak dialects (see e.g. Štolc, 1968), but it is currently undergoing changes due to contact with surrounding languages (Serbo-Croatian, Romanian, and Hungarian) and long-time geographical separation from Slovakia (see the studies in Zborník Spolku vojvodinských slovakistov, e.g. Dudok, 1993).
For an external map of the three groups in Slovakia see http:/ ~armata/dialects.htm here.
The dialect groups differ mostly in phonology, vocabulary, and tonal inflection.
Syntactic differences are minor.
Central Slovak forms the basis of the present-day standard language.
Not all dialects are fully mutually intelligible.
It may be difficult for an inhabitant of the western Slovakia to understand a dialect from eastern Slovakia and the other way around.
The dialects are fragmented geographically, separated by numerous mountain ranges.
The first three groups already existed in the 10th century.
All of them are spoken by the Slovaks outside Slovakia (USA, Canada, Croatian Slavonia, and elsewhere), and central and western dialects form the basis of the lowland dialects (see above).
The western dialects contain features common with the Moravian dialects in the Czech Republic, the southern central dialects contain a few features common with South Slavic languages, and the eastern dialects a few features common with Polish and the East Slavonic languages (cf. Štolc, 1994).
Lowland dialects share some words and areal features with the languages surrounding them (Serbo-Croatian, Hungarian, and Romanian).
Regulation
Standard Slovak () is defined by an Act of Parliament on the State Language of the Slovak Republic (language law).
According to this law, Ministry of Culture approves and publishes the codified form of the Slovak language based on the judgment of specialised slovakistic linguistic institutes and specialists in the area of the state language.
This is traditionally Ľudovit Štúr Institute of Linguistics, which is part of the Slovak Academy of Sciences.
In practice, Ministry of Culture publishes a document that specifies authoritative reference books for standard Slovak usage.
There are four such publications:
*List of language regulators for a list of languages with a regulated standard variety
Bibliography
*Dudok, D. (1993)
Vznik a charakter slovenských nárečí v juhoslovanskej Vojvodine
The emergence and character of the Slovak dialects in Yugoslav Vojvodina.
Zborník spolku vojvodinských slovakistov 15.
Nový Sad: Spolok vojvodinských slovakistov, pp. 19-29.
*Musilová, K. and Sokolová, M. (2004) Funkčnost česko-slovenských kontaktových jevů v současnosti
The functionality of Czech-Slovak contact phenomena in the present-time.
In Fiala, J. and Machala, L. (eds.)
Studia Moravica I (AUPO, Facultas Philosophica Moravica 1).
Olomouc: Univerzita Palackého v Olomouci, pp.
*Nábělková, M. (2003)
Súčasné kontexty slovensko-českej a česko-slovenskej medzijazykovosti Contemporary contexts of the Slovak-Czech and Czech-Slovak interlinguality.
In Pospíšil, I. - Zelenka, M. (eds.)
Česko-slovenské vztahy v slovanských a středoevropských souvislostech (meziliterárnost a areál).
Brno: ÚS FF MU, pp. 89-122.
*Nábělková, M. (2006) V čom bližšie, v čom ďalej...
Spisovná slovenčina vo vzťahu k spisovnej češtine a k obecnej češtine
In what closer, in what further...
Standard Slovak in relation to Standard Czech and Common Czech.
In Gladkova, H. and Cvrček, V. (eds.)
Sociální aspekty spisovných jazyků slovanských.
Praha: Euroslavica, pp.
*Nábělková, M. (2007) https:/ 10.1515/IJSL.2007.004 Closely related languages in contact: Czech, Slovak, "Czechoslovak".
International Journal of the Sociology of Language 183, pp. 53-73.
*Nábělková, M. (2008)
Slovenčina a čeština v kontakte: Pokračovanie príbehu.
Slovak and Czech in Contact: Continuation of the Story.
Bratislava Filozofická fakulta Univerzity Karlovy.
364 pp.,
*Sloboda, M. (2004) Slovensko-česká (semi)komunikace a vzájemná (ne)srozumitelnost Slovak-Czech (semi)communication and the mutual (un)intelligibility.
Čeština doma a ve světě XII, No. 3-4, pp.
*Sokolová, M. (1995)
České kontaktové javy v slovenčine Czech contact phenomena in Slovak.
In Ondrejovič, S. and Šimková, M. (eds.)
Sociolingvistické aspekty výskumu súčasnej slovenčiny (Sociolinguistica Slovaca 1).
Bratislava: Veda, pp. 188-206.
*Štolc, Jozef (1968)
Reč Slovákov v Juhoslávii I.: Zvuková a gramatická stavba
The speech of the Slovaks in Yugoslavia: phonological and grammatical structure.
Bratislava: Vydavateľstvo Slovenskej akadémie vied.
*Štolc, Jozef (1994)
Slovenská dialektológia Slovak dialectology.
Ed. I. Ripka.
Bratislava: Veda.
Further reading
