Dinosaurs are a diverse group of reptiles of the clade Dinosauria.
They first appeared during the Triassic period, between 243 and 233.23 million years ago, although the exact origin and timing of the evolution of dinosaurs is the subject of active research.
They became the dominant terrestrial vertebrates after the Triassic-Jurassic extinction event 201 million years ago; their dominance continued through the Jurassic and Cretaceous periods.
The fossil record demonstrates that birds are modern feathered dinosaurs, having evolved from earlier theropods during the late Jurassic Period.
As such, birds were the only dinosaur lineage to survive the Cretaceous-Paleogene extinction event 66 million years ago.
Dinosaurs can therefore be divided into avian dinosaurs, or birds; and non-avian dinosaurs, which are all dinosaurs other than birds.
This article deals primarily with non-avian dinosaurs.
Dinosaurs are a varied group of animals from taxonomic, morphological and ecological standpoints.
Birds, at over 10,000 living species, are the most diverse group of vertebrates besides perciform fish.
Using fossil evidence, paleontologists have identified over 500 distinct genera and more than 1,000 different species of non-avian dinosaurs.
Dinosaurs are represented on every continent by both extant species (birds) and fossil remains.
Through the first half of the 20th century, before birds were recognized to be dinosaurs, most of the scientific community believed dinosaurs to have been sluggish and cold-blooded.
Most research conducted since the 1970s, however, has indicated that all dinosaurs were active animals with elevated metabolisms and numerous adaptations for social interaction.
Some were herbivorous, others carnivorous.
Evidence suggests that all dinosaurs were egg-laying; and nest-building was a trait shared by many dinosaurs, both avian and non-avian.
While dinosaurs were ancestrally bipedal, many extinct groups included quadrupedal species, and some were able to shift between these stances.
Elaborate display structures such as horns or crests are common to all dinosaur groups, and some extinct groups developed skeletal modifications such as bony armor and spines.
While the dinosaurs' modern-day surviving avian lineage (birds) are generally small due to the constraints of flight, many prehistoric dinosaurs (non-avian and avian) were large-bodied-the largest sauropod dinosaurs are estimated to have reached lengths of and heights of and were the largest land animals of all time.
Still, the idea that non-avian dinosaurs were uniformly gigantic is a misconception based in part on preservation bias, as large, sturdy bones are more likely to last until they are fossilized.
Many dinosaurs were quite small: Xixianykus, for example, was only about long.
Since the first dinosaur fossils were recognized in the early 19th century, mounted fossil dinosaur skeletons have been major attractions at museums around the world, and dinosaurs have become an enduring part of world culture.
The large sizes of some dinosaur groups, as well as their seemingly monstrous and fantastic nature, have ensured dinosaurs' regular appearance in best-selling books and films, such as Jurassic Park.
Persistent public enthusiasm for the animals has resulted in significant funding for dinosaur science, and new discoveries are regularly covered by the media.
Etymology
The taxon 'Dinosauria' was formally named in 1841 by paleontologist Sir Richard Owen, who used it to refer to the "distinct tribe or sub-order of Saurian Reptiles" that were then being recognized in England and around the world.
Pterosaurs are distantly related to dinosaurs, being members of the clade Ornithodira.
The other groups mentioned are, like dinosaurs and pterosaurs, members of Sauropsida (the reptile and bird clade), except Dimetrodon (which is a synapsid).
Definition
Under phylogenetic nomenclature, dinosaurs are usually defined as the group consisting of the most recent common ancestor (MRCA) of Triceratops and Neornithes, and all its descendants.
Birds are classified as belonging to the subgroup Maniraptora, which are coelurosaurs, which are theropods, which are saurischians, which are dinosaurs.
Research by Matthew Baron, David B. Norman, and Paul M. Barrett in 2017 suggested a radical revision of dinosaurian systematics.
Phylogenetic analysis by Baron et al. recovered the Ornithischia as being closer to the Theropoda than the Sauropodomorpha, as opposed to the traditional union of theropods with sauropodomorphs.
They resurrected the clade Ornithoscelida to refer to the group containing Ornithischia and Theropoda.
Dinosauria itself was re-defined as the last common ancestor of Triceratops horridus, Passer domesticus and Diplodocus carnegii, and all of its descendants, to ensure that sauropods and kin remain included as dinosaurs.
General description
Using one of the above definitions, dinosaurs can be generally described as archosaurs with hind limbs held erect beneath the body.
Some are herbivorous, others carnivorous, including seed-eaters, fish-eaters, insectivores, and omnivores.
While dinosaurs were ancestrally bipedal (as are all modern birds), some prehistoric species were quadrupeds, and others, such as Anchisaurus and Iguanodon, could walk just as easily on two or four legs.
Cranial modifications like horns and crests are common dinosaurian traits, and some extinct species had bony armor.
Although known for large size, many Mesozoic dinosaurs were human-sized or smaller, and modern birds are generally small in size.
Dinosaurs today inhabit every continent, and fossils show that they had achieved global distribution by at least the early Jurassic period.
Paleontologists think that Eoraptor resembles the common ancestor of all dinosaurs; Recently, it has been determined that Staurikosaurus from the Santa Maria Formation dates to 233.23 Ma, making it older in geologic age than Eoraptor.
When dinosaurs appeared, they were not the dominant terrestrial animals.
The terrestrial habitats were occupied by various types of archosauromorphs and therapsids, like cynodonts and rhynchosaurs.
Their main competitors were the pseudosuchia, such as aetosaurs, ornithosuchids and rauisuchians, which were more successful than the dinosaurs.
Most of these other animals became extinct in the Triassic, in one of two events.
First, at about 215 million years ago, a variety of basal archosauromorphs, including the protorosaurs, became extinct.
This was followed by the Triassic-Jurassic extinction event (about 200 million years ago), that saw the end of most of the other groups of early archosaurs, like aetosaurs, ornithosuchids, phytosaurs, and rauisuchians.
Rhynchosaurs and dicynodonts survived (at least in some areas) at least as late as early-mid Norian and late Norian or earliest Rhaetian, respectively, and the exact date of their extinction is uncertain.
These losses left behind a land fauna of crocodylomorphs, dinosaurs, mammals, pterosaurians, and turtles.
Evolution and paleobiogeography
Dinosaur evolution after the Triassic follows changes in vegetation and the location of continents.
In the late Triassic and early Jurassic, the continents were connected as the single landmass Pangaea, and there was a worldwide dinosaur fauna mostly composed of coelophysoid carnivores and early sauropodomorph herbivores.
Terror birds and bathornithids occupied carnivorous guilds alongside predatory mammals, and ratites are still fairly successful as mid-sized herbivores; eogruiids similarly lasted from the Eocene to Pliocene, only becoming extinct very recently after over 20 million years of co-existence with many mammal groups.
Classification
Dinosaurs belong to a group known as archosaurs, which also includes modern crocodilians.
Within the archosaur group, dinosaurs are differentiated most noticeably by their gait.
Dinosaur legs extend directly beneath the body, whereas the legs of lizards and crocodilians sprawl out to either side.
By contrast, ornithischians-"bird-hipped", from the Greek ornitheios (ὀρνίθειος) meaning "of a bird" and ischion (ἰσχίον) meaning "hip joint"-had a pelvis that superficially resembled a bird's pelvis: the pubic bone was oriented caudally (rear-pointing).
Unlike birds, the ornithischian pubis also usually had an additional forward-pointing process.
Ornithischia includes a variety of species which were primarily herbivores.
:::::*†Compsognathidae (common early coelurosaurs with reduced forelimbs)
:::::*†Tyrannosauridae (Tyrannosaurus and close relatives; had reduced forelimbs)
:::::*†Ornithomimosauria ("ostrich-mimics"; mostly toothless; carnivores to possible herbivores)
:::::*†Alvarezsauroidea (small insectivores with reduced forelimbs each bearing one enlarged claw)
:::::*Maniraptora ("hand snatchers"; had long, slender arms and fingers)
::::::*†Therizinosauria (bipedal herbivores with large hand claws and small heads)
::::::*†Oviraptorosauria (mostly toothless; their diet and lifestyle are uncertain)
::::::*†Archaeopterygidae (small, winged theropods or primitive birds)
::::::*†Deinonychosauria (small- to medium-sized; bird-like, with a distinctive toe claw)
:::::::::::::*†Scansoriopterygidae (small primitive avialans with long third fingers)
:::::::*†Omnivoropterygidae (large, early short-tailed avialans)
::::::::::::::*†Enantiornithes (primitive tree-dwelling, flying avialans)
:::::::::::::::*†Yanornithiformes (toothed Cretaceous Chinese birds)
::::::::*†Hesperornithes (specialized aquatic diving birds)
::::::::*Aves (modern, beaked birds and their extinct relatives)
::*†Sauropodomorpha (herbivores with small heads, long necks, long tails)
:::*†Guaibasauridae (small, primitive, omnivorous sauropodomorphs)
:::*†Plateosauridae (primitive, strictly bipedal "prosauropods")
::::::*†Massospondylidae (small, primitive sauropodomorphs)
:::*†Sauropoda (very large and heavy, usually over long; quadrupedal)
::::*†Vulcanodontidae (primitive sauropods with pillar-like limbs)
::::::::::::::*†Turiasauria (European group of Jurassic and Cretaceous sauropods)
:::::::::::*†Diplodocoidea (skulls and tails elongated; teeth typically narrow and pencil-like)
::::::*†Macronaria (boxy skulls; spoon- or pencil-shaped teeth)
:::::::*†Brachiosauridae (long-necked, long-armed macronarians)
:::::::*†Titanosauria (diverse; stocky, with wide hips; most common in the late Cretaceous of southern continents)
:*†Ornithischia ("bird-hipped"; diverse bipedal and quadrupedal herbivores)
::*†Heterodontosauridae (small basal ornithopod herbivores/omnivores with prominent canine-like teeth)
::*†Thyreophora (armored dinosaurs; mostly quadrupeds)
:::*†Ankylosauria (scutes as primary armor; some had club-like tails)
::::::::*†Ornithopoda (various sizes; bipeds and quadrupeds; evolved a method of chewing using skull flexibility and numerous teeth)
:::*†Marginocephalia (characterized by a cranial growth)
::::*†Pachycephalosauria (bipeds with domed or knobby growth on skulls)
::::*†Ceratopsia (quadrupeds with frills; many also had horns)
Biology
Knowledge about dinosaurs is derived from a variety of fossil and non-fossil records, including fossilized bones, feces, trackways, gastroliths, feathers, impressions of skin, internal organs and soft tissues.
Two topics of particular interest and study have been dinosaur size and behavior.
Size
Current evidence suggests that dinosaur average size varied through the Triassic, early Jurassic, late Jurassic and Cretaceous periods.
There are several proposed advantages for the large size of sauropods, including protection from predation, reduction of energy use, and longevity, but it may be that the most important advantage was dietary.
Large animals are more efficient at digestion than small animals, because food spends more time in their digestive systems.
This also permits them to subsist on food with lower nutritive value than smaller animals.
Sauropod remains are mostly found in rock formations interpreted as dry or seasonally dry, and the ability to eat large quantities of low-nutrient browse would have been advantageous in such environments.
The tallest and heaviest dinosaur known from good skeletons is Giraffatitan brancai (previously classified as a species of Brachiosaurus).
Its remains were discovered in Tanzania between 1907 and 1912.
Bones from several similar-sized individuals were incorporated into the skeleton now mounted and on display at the Museum für Naturkunde Berlin; and would have belonged to an animal that weighed between and kilograms ( and lb).
The longest complete dinosaur is the long Diplodocus, which was discovered in Wyoming in the United States and displayed in Pittsburgh's Carnegie Natural History Museum in 1907.
The longest dinosaur known from good fossil material is the reconstructed skeleton mount long.
There were larger dinosaurs, but knowledge of them is based entirely on a small number of fragmentary fossils.
Most of the largest herbivorous specimens on record were discovered in the 1970s or later, and include the massive Argentinosaurus, which may have weighed to kilograms (90 to 110 short tons) and reached length of ; some of the longest were the long Diplodocus hallorum
The largest carnivorous dinosaur was Spinosaurus, reaching a length of , and weighing 7-20.9 tonnes (7.7-23 short tons).
with a length of only and mass of around .
The smallest known non-avialan dinosaurs were about the size of pigeons and were those theropods most closely related to birds.
While some early bird-like species may have already been arboreal as well (including dromaeosaurids such as Microraptor Dinosaur eggs were usually laid in a nest.
Most species create somewhat elaborate nests which can be cups, domes, plates, beds scrapes, mounds, or burrows.
Some species of modern bird have no nests; the cliff-nesting common guillemot lays its eggs on bare rock, and male emperor penguins keep eggs between their body and feet.
Primitive birds and many non-avialan dinosaurs often lay eggs in communal nests, with males primarily incubating the eggs.
While modern birds have only one functional oviduct and lay one egg at a time, more primitive birds and dinosaurs had two oviducts, like crocodiles.
Some non-avialan dinosaurs, such as Troodon, exhibited iterative laying, where the adult might lay a pair of eggs every one or two days, and then ensured simultaneous hatching by delaying brooding until all eggs were laid.
When laying eggs, females grow a special type of bone between the hard outer bone and the marrow of their limbs.
This medullary bone, which is rich in calcium, is used to make eggshells.
A discovery of features in a Tyrannosaurus rex skeleton provided evidence of medullary bone in extinct dinosaurs and, for the first time, allowed paleontologists to establish the sex of a fossil dinosaur specimen.
Further research has found medullary bone in the carnosaur Allosaurus and the ornithopod Tenontosaurus.
Because the line of dinosaurs that includes Allosaurus and Tyrannosaurus diverged from the line that led to Tenontosaurus very early in the evolution of dinosaurs, this suggests that the production of medullary tissue is a general characteristic of all dinosaurs.
A dinosaur embryo (pertaining to the prosauropod Massospondylus) was found without teeth, indicating that some parental care was required to feed the young dinosaurs.
Both Tyrannosaurus rex and Troodon formosus display juveniles with clear supreprecociality and likely occupying different ecological niches than the adults.
Superprecociality has been inferred for sauropods.
Physiology
Because both modern crocodilians and birds have four-chambered hearts (albeit modified in crocodilians), it is likely that this is a trait shared by all archosaurs, including all dinosaurs.
After non-avian dinosaurs were discovered, paleontologists first posited that they were ectothermic.
This supposed "cold-bloodedness" was used to imply that the ancient dinosaurs were relatively slow, sluggish organisms, even though many modern reptiles are fast and light-footed despite relying on external sources of heat to regulate their body temperature.
The idea of dinosaurs as ectothermic and sluggish remained a prevalent view until Robert T. "Bob" Bakker, an early proponent of dinosaur endothermy, published an influential paper on the topic in 1968.
Modern evidence indicates that even non-avian dinosaurs and birds thrived in cooler temperate climates, and that at least some early species must have regulated their body temperature by internal biological means (aided by the animals' bulk in large species and feathers or other body coverings in smaller species).
Evidence of endothermy in Mesozoic dinosaurs includes the discovery of polar dinosaurs in Australia and Antarctica as well as analysis of blood-vessel structures within fossil bones that are typical of endotherms.
Scientific debate continues regarding the specific ways in which dinosaur temperature regulation evolved.
In saurischian dinosaurs, higher metabolisms were supported by the evolution of the avian respiratory system, characterized by an extensive system of air sacs that extended the lungs and invaded many of the bones in the skeleton, making them hollow.
Early avian-style respiratory systems with air sacs may have been capable of sustaining higher activity levels than those of mammals of similar size and build.
In addition to providing a very efficient supply of oxygen, the rapid airflow would have been an effective cooling mechanism, which is essential for animals that are active but too large to get rid of all the excess heat through their skin.
Like other reptiles, dinosaurs are primarily uricotelic, that is, their kidneys extract nitrogenous wastes from their bloodstream and excrete it as uric acid instead of urea or ammonia via the ureters into the intestine.
In most living species, uric acid is excreted along with feces as a semisolid waste.
However, at least some modern birds (such as hummingbirds) can be facultatively ammonotelic, excreting most of the nitrogenous wastes as ammonia.
They also excrete creatine, rather than creatinine like mammals.
This material, as well as the output of the intestines, emerges from the cloaca.
In addition, many species regurgitate pellets, and fossil pellets that may have come from dinosaurs are known from as long ago as the Cretaceous period.
Origin of birds
The possibility that dinosaurs were the ancestors of birds was first suggested in 1868 by Thomas Henry Huxley.
Direct fossil evidence of feathers or feather-like structures has been discovered in a diverse array of species in many non-avian dinosaur groups, and theropods, suggesting the possibility that feather-like filaments may have been common in the bird lineage and evolved before the appearance of dinosaurs themselves.
Archaeopteryx was the first fossil found that revealed a potential connection between dinosaurs and birds.
It is considered a transitional fossil, in that it displays features of both groups.
Brought to light just two years after Darwin's seminal The Origin of Species, its discovery spurred the nascent debate between proponents of evolutionary biology and creationism.
This early bird is so dinosaur-like that, without a clear impression of feathers in the surrounding rock, at least one specimen was mistaken for Compsognathus.
The description of feathered dinosaurs has not been without controversy; perhaps the most vocal critics have been Alan Feduccia and Theagarten Lingham-Soliar, who have proposed that some purported feather-like fossils are the result of the decomposition of collagenous fiber that underlaid the dinosaurs' skin,
Skeleton
Because feathers are often associated with birds, feathered dinosaurs are often touted as the missing link between birds and dinosaurs.
However, the multiple skeletal features also shared by the two groups represent another important line of evidence for paleontologists.
Areas of the skeleton with important similarities include the neck, pubis, wrist (semi-lunate carpal), arm and pectoral girdle, furcula (wishbone), and breast bone.
Comparison of bird and dinosaur skeletons through cladistic analysis strengthens the case for the link.
Soft anatomy
Large meat-eating dinosaurs had a complex system of air sacs similar to those found in modern birds, according to a 2005 investigation led by Patrick M. O'Connor.
The lungs of theropod dinosaurs (carnivores that walked on two legs and had bird-like feet) likely pumped air into hollow sacs in their skeletons, as is the case in birds.
"What was once formally considered unique to birds was present in some form in the ancestors of birds", O'Connor said.
The ratio between egg volume and body mass of adults among these dinosaurs suggest that the eggs were primarily brooded by the male, and that the young were highly precocial, similar to many modern ground-dwelling birds.
Some dinosaurs are known to have used gizzard stones like modern birds.
These stones are swallowed by animals to aid digestion and break down food and hard fibers once they enter the stomach.
When found in association with fossils, gizzard stones are called gastroliths.
However, all non-avian dinosaurs, estimated to have been 628-1078 species, as well as many groups of birds did suddenly become extinct approximately 66 million years ago.
It has been suggested that because small mammals, squamata and birds occupied the ecological niches suited for small body size, non-avian dinosaurs never evolved a diverse fauna of small-bodied species, which led to their downfall when large-bodied terrestrial tetrapods were hit by the mass extinction event.
Many other groups of animals also became extinct at this time, including ammonites (nautilus-like mollusks), mosasaurs, plesiosaurs, pterosaurs, and many groups of mammals.
Impact event
The asteroid collision theory, which was brought to wide attention in 1980 by Walter Alvarez and colleagues, links the extinction event at the end of the Cretaceous period to a bolide impact approximately 66 million years ago.
Alvarez et al. proposed that a sudden increase in iridium levels, recorded around the world in the period's rock stratum, was direct evidence of the impact.
In 2019, scientists drilling into the seafloor off Mexico extracted a unique geologic record of what they believe to be the day a city-sized asteroid smashed into the planet 65 million years ago.
Deccan Traps
Before 2000, arguments that the Deccan Traps flood basalts caused the extinction were usually linked to the view that the extinction was gradual, as the flood basalt events were thought to have started around 68 million years ago and lasted for over 2 million years.
However, there is evidence that two thirds of the Deccan Traps were created in only 1 million years about 66 million years ago, and so these eruptions would have caused a fairly rapid extinction, possibly over a period of thousands of years, but still longer than would be expected from a single impact event.
Scholarly descriptions of what would now be recognized as dinosaur bones first appeared in the late 17th century in England.
Part of a bone, now known to have been the femur of a Megalosaurus,
In 1858, William Parker Foulke discovered the first known American dinosaur, in marl pits in the small town of Haddonfield, New Jersey.
The creature was named Hadrosaurus foulkii.
It was an extremely important find: Hadrosaurus was one of the first nearly complete dinosaur skeletons found (the first was in 1834, in Maidstone, England), and it was clearly a bipedal creature.
This was a revolutionary discovery as, until that point, most scientists had believed dinosaurs walked on four feet, like other lizards.
Foulke's discoveries sparked a wave of dinosaur mania in the United States.
Dinosaur mania was exemplified by the fierce rivalry between Edward Drinker Cope and Othniel Charles Marsh, both of whom raced to be the first to find new dinosaurs in what came to be known as the Bone Wars.
The feud probably originated when Marsh publicly pointed out that Cope's reconstruction of an Elasmosaurus skeleton was flawed: Cope had inadvertently placed the plesiosaur's head at what should have been the animal's tail end.
The fight between the two scientists lasted for over 30 years, ending in 1897 when Cope died after spending his entire fortune on the dinosaur hunt.
Marsh 'won' the contest primarily because he was better funded through a relationship with the US Geological Survey.
Unfortunately, many valuable dinosaur specimens were damaged or destroyed due to the pair's rough methods: for example, their diggers often used dynamite to unearth bones (a method modern paleontologists would find appalling because the explosions from the dynamic would potentially destroy any and all dinosauric evidence).
Despite their unrefined methods, the contributions of Cope and Marsh to paleontology were vast: Marsh unearthed 86 new species of dinosaur and Cope discovered 56, a total of 142 new species.
Cope's collection is now at the American Museum of Natural History in New York, while Marsh's is on display at the Peabody Museum of Natural History at Yale University.
although it was 1994 before an Antarctic species, the theropod Cryolophosaurus ellioti, was formally named and described in a scientific journal.
Current dinosaur "hot spots" include southern South America (especially Argentina) and China.
China in particular has produced many exceptional feathered dinosaur specimens due to the unique geology of its dinosaur beds, as well as an ancient arid climate particularly conducive to fossilization.
Soft tissue and DNA
One of the best examples of soft-tissue impressions in a fossil dinosaur was discovered in Pietraroia, Italy.
The discovery was reported in 1998, and described the specimen of a small, very young coelurosaur, Scipionyx samniticus.
The fossil includes portions of the intestines, colon, liver, muscles, and windpipe of this immature dinosaur.
The extraction of ancient DNA from dinosaur fossils has been reported on two separate occasions; upon further inspection and peer review, however, neither of these reports could be confirmed.
In 2015, researchers reported finding structures similar to blood cells and collagen fibers, preserved in the bone fossils of six Cretaceous dinosaur specimens, which are approximately 75 million years old.
Cultural depictions
By human standards, dinosaurs were creatures of fantastic appearance and often enormous size.
As such, they have captured the popular imagination and become an enduring part of human culture.
Entry of the word "dinosaur" into the common vernacular reflects the animals' cultural importance: in English, "dinosaur" is commonly used to describe anything that is impractically large, obsolete, or bound for extinction.
Further reading
* Bakker, Robert T. (1986).
The Dinosaur Heresies: New Theories Unlocking the Mystery of the Dinosaurs and Their Extinction.
New York: Morrow. .
* Holtz, Thomas R. Jr. (2007). .
New York: Random House. .
Paul, Gregory S. (2000).
The Scientific American Book of Dinosaurs.
New York: St. Martin's Press. .
Paul, Gregory S. (2002).
Dinosaurs of the Air: The Evolution and Loss of Flight in Dinosaurs and Birds.
Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins University Press. .
* Sternberg, C.M. (1966).
Canadian Dinosaurs, in Geological Series, no. 54.
Second ed.
Ottawa: National Museum of Canada.
28 p., amply ill.
