Cape Verde () or Cabo Verde (, ) (, ), officially the Republic of Cabo Verde, is an island country spanning an archipelago of 10 volcanic islands in the central Atlantic Ocean.
It forms part of the Macaronesia ecoregion, along with the Azores, Canary Islands, Madeira, and the Savage Isles.
Located west of the Cape Verde Peninsula off the coast of Northwest Africa, the islands cover a combined area of slightly over .
The Cape Verde archipelago was uninhabited until the 15th century, when Portuguese explorers discovered and colonized the islands, establishing the first European settlement in the tropics.
Ideally located for the Atlantic slave trade, the islands grew prosperous throughout the 16th and 17th centuries, attracting merchants, privateers, and pirates.
The end of transatlantic slavery in the 19th century led to economic decline and emigration.
Cape Verde gradually recovered as an important commercial center and stopover for shipping routes.
Incorporated as an overseas department of Portugal in 1951, the islands continued to campaign for independence, which was achieved in 1975.
Since the early 1990s, Cape Verde has been a stable representative democracy, and remains one of the most developed and democratic countries in Africa.
Lacking natural resources, its developing economy is mostly service-oriented, with a growing focus on tourism and foreign investment.
Its population of around 540,000 is mostly of mixed European, Moorish, Arab and African heritage, and predominantly Roman Catholic, reflecting the legacy of Portuguese rule.
A sizeable diaspora community exists across the world, slightly outnumbering inhabitants on the islands.
Historically, the name "Cape Verde" has been used in English for the archipelago and, since independence in 1975, for the country.
In 2013, the Cape Verdean government determined that the Portuguese designation Cabo Verde would henceforth be used for official purposes, as at the United Nations, even in English contexts.
Cape Verde is a member of the African Union.
Etymology
The name of the country stems from the nearby Cap-Vert, on the Senegalese coast.
In 1444, Portuguese explorers had named that landmark as Cabo Verde, a few years before they discovered the islands (Verde is Portuguese for "green").
On 24 October 2013, the country's delegation announced at the United Nations that the official name should no longer be translated into other languages.
Instead of "Cape Verde", the designation "Republic of Cabo Verde" is to be used.
History
Before the arrival of Europeans, the Cape Verde Islands were uninhabited.
They were discovered by Genoese and Portuguese navigators around 1456.
According to Portuguese official records, the first discoveries were made by Genoa-born António de Noli, who was afterwards appointed governor of Cape Verde by Portuguese King Afonso V. Other navigators mentioned as contributing to discoveries in the Cape Verde archipelago are Diogo Gomes (who was with António de Noli and claimed to have been the first to land on and name Santiago island), Diogo Dias, Diogo Afonso and the Italian (Venice-born)
Alvise Cadamosto.
In 1462, Portuguese settlers arrived at Santiago and founded a settlement they called Ribeira Grande (now called Cidade Velha ("Old City"), to avoid being confused with the town of Ribeira Grande on the Santo Antão island).
Ribeira Grande was the first permanent European settlement in the tropics.
In the 16th century, the archipelago prospered from the Atlantic slave trade.
Cape Verde was the first stop of Charles Darwin's voyage with in 1832.
With few natural resources and inadequate sustainable investment from the Portuguese, the citizens grew increasingly discontented with the colonial masters, who nevertheless refused to provide the local authorities with more autonomy.
In 1951, Portugal changed Cape Verde's status from a colony to an overseas province in an attempt to blunt growing nationalism.
In 1956, Amílcar Cabral and a group of fellow Cape Verdeans and Guineans organised (in Portuguese Guinea)
the clandestine African Party for the Independence of Guinea and Cape Verde (PAIGC).
It is among the most democratic nations in Africa, ranking 26th in the world, according to the 2018 Democracy Index.
The https:/ constitution/Cape_Verde_1992?lang=en constitution - adopted in 1980 and revised in 1992, 1995 and 1999 - defines the basic principles of its government.
The president is the head of state and is elected by popular vote for a 5-year term.
The judicial system consists of a Supreme Court of Justice - whose members are appointed by the president, the National Assembly, and the Board of the Judiciary - and regional courts.
Separate courts hear civil, constitutional, and criminal cases.
Appeal is to the Supreme Court.
with the EU, under the Cotonou Agreement, and might apply for special membership, even because the Cape Verdean escudo, the country's currency, is indexed to the Euro.
In 2011 Cape Verde ratified the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court.
In 2017 Cape Verde signed the UN treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons.
Military
The military of Cape Verde consists of the National Guard and the Coast Guard; 0.7% of the country's GDP was spent on the military in 2005.
Having fought their only war for independence against Portugal between 1974 and 1975, the efforts of the Caboverdean Armed Forces have now been turned to combating international drug trafficking.
In 2007, together with the Cape Verdean Police, they carried out Operation Flying Launch (Operacão Lancha Voadora), a successful operation to put an end to a drug trafficking group which smuggled cocaine from Colombia to the Netherlands and Germany using the country as a reorder point.
The operation took more than three years, being a secret operation during the first two years, and ended in 2010.
Although located in Africa, Cape Verde has always had close relations with Europe.
Because of this, some scholars argue that Cape Verde may be eligible to join the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe and NATO.
The most recent engagement of the Armed Forces was the Monte Tchota massacre that resulted in 11 deaths.
International recognition
Cape Verde is often praised as an example among African nations for its stability and developmental growth despite its lack of natural resources.
In 2013 then United States President Barack Obama said Cape Verde is "a real success story".
Among other achievements, it has been recognised with the following assessments:
Geography
The Cape Verde archipelago is in the Atlantic Ocean, approximately off the western coast of the African continent, near Senegal, The Gambia, and Mauritania, and is part of the Macaronesia ecoregion.
It lies between latitudes 14° and 18°N, and longitudes 22° and 26°W.
The country is a horseshoe-shaped cluster of ten islands (nine inhabited) and eight islets, that constitute an area of 4033 km2.
The oldest exposed rocks occurred on Maio and northern peninsula of Santiago and are 128-131 million year old pillow lavas.
The first stage of volcanism in the islands began in the early Miocene, and reached its peak at the end of this period, when the islands reached their maximum sizes.
Historical volcanism (within human settlement) has been restricted to the island of Fogo.
The origin of the islands' volcanism has been attributed to a hotspot, associated with bathymetric swell that formed the Cape Verde Rise.
The Rise is one of the largest protuberances in the world's oceans, rising in a semi-circular region of 1200 km2, associated with a rise of the geoid and elevated surface heat flow.
According to the president of Nauru, Cape Verde has been ranked the eighth most endangered nation due to flooding from climate change.
Climate
Cape Verde's climate is milder than that of the African mainland, because the surrounding sea moderates temperatures on the islands and cold Atlantic currents produce an arid atmosphere around the archipelago.
Conversely, the islands do not receive the upwellings (cold streams) that affect the West African coast, so the air temperature is cooler than in Senegal, but the sea is warmer, because the orographic relief of some islands, such as Santiago with steep mountains, cover it with rich woods and luxuriant vegetation where the humid air condenses and soak the plants, rocks, soil, logs, moss, etc.
On the higher islands and somewhat wetter islands, exclusively in mountainous areas, like Santo Antão island, the climate is suitable for the development of dry monsoon forest, and laurel forest as this vegetation
Cape Verde is part of the Sahelian arid belt, with nothing like the rainfall levels of nearby West Africa.
Sal, Boa Vista and Maio have a flat landscape and arid climate, whilst the other islands are generally rockier and have more vegetation.
Because of the infrequent occurrence of rainfall the landscape is arid.
The archipelago can be divided into four broad ecological zones - arid, semiarid, subhumid and humid, according to altitude and average annual rainfall ranging from in the arid areas of the coast to more than in the humid mountain.
Most rainfall precipitation is due to condensation of the ocean mist.
In some islands, as Santiago, the wetter climate of the interior and the eastern coast contrasts with the dryer one in the south/southwest coast.
Praia, on the southeast coast, is the largest city of the island and the largest city and capital of the country.
Because of their proximity to the Sahara, most of the Cape Verde islands are dry, but on islands with high mountains and farther away from the coast, by orography, the humidity is much higher, providing a rainforest habitat, although much affected by the human presence.
Northeastern slopes of high mountains often receive a lot of rain while southwest slopes do not.
These umbria areas are identified with cool and moisture.
Western Hemisphere-bound hurricanes often have their early beginnings near the Cape Verde Islands.
These are referred to as Cape Verde-type hurricanes.
These hurricanes can become very intense as they cross warm Atlantic waters away from Cape Verde.
The average hurricane season has about two Cape Verde-type hurricanes, which are usually the largest and most intense storms of the season because they often have plenty of warm open ocean over which to develop before encountering land.
The five largest Atlantic tropical cyclones on record have been Cape Verde-type hurricanes.
Most of the longest-lived tropical cyclones in the Atlantic basin are Cape Verde hurricanes.
The islands themselves have only been struck by hurricanes twice in recorded history (since 1851): once in 1892, and again in 2015 by Hurricane Fred, the easternmost hurricane ever to form in the Atlantic.
Biome
Cape Verde's isolation has resulted in the islands having a number of endemic species, particularly birds and reptiles, many of which are endangered by human development.
Endemic birds include Alexander's swift (Apus alexandri), Bourne's heron (Ardea purpurea bournei), the Raso lark (Alauda razae), the Cape Verde warbler (Acrocephalus brevipennis), and the Iago sparrow (Passer iagoensis).
The islands are also an important breeding area for seabirds including the Cape Verde shearwater.
Reptiles include the Cape Verde giant gecko (Tarentola gigas).
Administrative divisions
Cape Verde is divided into 22 municipalities (concelhos) and subdivided into 32 parishes (freguesias), based on the religious parishes that existed during the colonial period:
Largest cities
Economy
Cape Verde's notable economic growth and improvement in living conditions despite a lack of natural resources has garnered international recognition, with other countries and international organizations often providing development aid.
Since 2007, the UN has classified it as a developing nation rather than a least developed country.
Cape Verde has few natural resources.
Only five of the ten main islands (Santiago, Santo Antão, São Nicolau, Fogo, and Brava) normally support significant agricultural production, and over 90% of all food consumed in Cape Verde is imported.
Mineral resources include salt, pozzolana (a volcanic rock used in cement production), and limestone.
17% in industry, 4% in infrastructure, and 21% in fisheries and services.
Between 2000 and 2009, real GDP increased on average by over 7 percent a year, well above the average for Sub-Saharan countries and faster than most small island economies in the region.
Strong economic performance was bolstered by one of the fastest growing tourism industries in the world, as well as by substantial capital inflows that allowed Cape Verde to build up national currency reserves to the current 3.5 months of imports.
Unemployment has been falling rapidly, and the country is on track to achieve most of the UN Millennium Development Goals - including halving its 1990 poverty level.
In 2007, Cape Verde joined the World Trade Organization (WTO) and in 2008 the country graduated from Least Developed Country (LDC) to Middle Income Country (MIC) status.
Cape Verde has significant cooperation with Portugal at every level of the economy, which has led it to link its currency first to the Portuguese escudo and, in 1999, to the euro.
On 23 June 2008 Cape Verde became the 153rd member of the WTO.
In early January 2018, the government announced that the minimum wage would be raised to 13,000 CVE (US$140 or EUR 130) per month, from 11,000 CVE, which was effective in mid-January 2018.
Development
The European Commission's total allocation for the period of 2008-2013 foreseen for Cape Verde to address "poverty reduction, in particular in rural and periurban areas where women are heading the households, as well as good governance" amounts to €54.1 million.
Tourism
Cape Verde's strategic location at the crossroads of mid-Atlantic air and sea lanes has been enhanced by significant improvements at Mindelo's harbour (Porto Grande) and at Sal's and Praia's international airports.
A new international airport was opened in Boa Vista in December 2007 and on the island of São Vicente the newest international airport (Cesária Évora Airport) in Cape Verde was opened in late 2009.
Ship repair facilities at Mindelo were opened in 1983.
A large proportion (236,000) of Cape Verdeans live on the main island, Santiago.
The Cape Verde archipelago was uninhabited when the Portuguese discovered it in 1456.
The modern population of Cape Verde descends from the mixture of European settlers and African slaves who were brought to the islands to work on Portuguese plantations.
Most Cape Verdeans are therefore mulattos, also called mestiços in Portuguese.
Another term is creole, meaning those of mixed native-born African and native-born European descent.
European input included Spaniards and Italian seamen who were granted land by the Portuguese Empire, followed by Portuguese settlers and exiles, as well as Portuguese Muslims (ethnic Moors) and Portuguese Jews (ethnic Sephardim).
Both of these religious groups were victims of the Inquisition.
Other immigrants came from places such as the Netherlands, France, Britain, the Arab countries (especially Lebanon and Morocco), China (especially from Macau), India, Indonesia, South America, and North America (including people of Portuguese and African descent) and were absorbed into the mestiço population.
Cape Verde's population in the 21st century is mostly creole; the capital city Praia accounts for a quarter of the country's population.
Over 65% of the population in the archipelago live in urban centers, and the literacy rate is 89% (i.e., 93,3% among men aged 15 and above and 84,7% among women aged 15 and above) according to the 2017 National Statistics Bureau data.
Many Cape Verdeans have since emigrated, mainly to the United States and Europe.
A genetic study revealed that the ancestry of the population in Cape Verde is predominantly European in the male line and West African in the female line; counted together the percentage is 56% African and 44% European.
The high degree of genetic and ethnic mixture of individuals is a result of centuries of migration.
Languages
Cape Verde's official language is Portuguese.
It is the language of instruction and government.
It is also used in newspapers, television, and radio.
Cape Verdean Creole is used colloquially and is the mother tongue of virtually all Cape Verdeans.
The national constitution calls for the measures to give it parity with Portuguese.
Religion
Around 95% of the population are Christian.
More than 85% of the population was nominally Roman Catholic in 2007.
For a minority of the population, Catholicism is syncretized with African influences.
The largest Protestant denomination is the Church of the Nazarene; other groups include the Seventh-day Adventist Church, The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, the Assemblies of God, the Universal Church of the Kingdom of God, and other Pentecostal and evangelical groups.
The number of atheists is estimated at less than 1% of the population.
Cape Verdean communities in the United States (500,000 of Cape Verdean descent, with a major concentration on the New England coast; Providence, Rhode Island, New Bedford, Massachusetts, Boston, Massachusetts.
Brockton, Massachusetts is the city with the largest number of Cape Verdean descents and immigrants (18,832) in the United States.
There are significant Cape Verde populations in Portugal (150,000), Angola (45,000), São Tomé and Príncipe (25,000), Senegal (25,000), the Netherlands (20,000, of which 15,000 are concentrated in Rotterdam), Spain (65,500), United Kingdom (35,500), France (25,000), Italy (10,000) Luxembourg (7,000) and Scandinavia (7,000).
There is a Cape Verdean community in Argentina numbering 8,000.
A large number of Cape Verdeans and people of Cape Verdean descent who emigrated before 1975 are not included in these statistics, because Cape Verdeans had Portuguese passports before 1975.
The Chinese make up a sizable and important segment of the immigrant population in Cape Verde.
The immigrants from the nearby West African coast make up the majority of foreigners in the country.
Over the last several years, a few thousand Europeans and Latin Americans have settled in the country.
On the islands, there are over 22,000 foreigners/naturalized Cape Verdeans who hail from over 90 countries around the world living and working on a permanent basis.
Over the years, Cape Verde has increasingly become a net immigration country due to its relative high per capita income, political and social stability, and freedom.
Emigrants from the Cape Verde islands to North America have a long history of involvement with the armed forces.
Enlisting in aid of the Revolutionary War, the Civil War, the First and Second World Wars, as well as the Korean and Vietnam Wars.
Cape Verdeans moved to places all over the world, from Macau to Haiti, and Argentina to northern Europe.
The Cape Verdeans peoples history and experience with immigration has inspired many songs and musician like the song Sodade by Cesaria Evora.
Health
The infant mortality rate among Cape Verdean children between 0 and 5 years old is 15 per 1,000 live births according to the latest (2017) data from the National Statistics Bureau, while the maternal mortality rate is 42 deaths per 100,000 live births.
The HIV-AIDS prevalence rate among Cape Verdeans between 15 and 49 years old is 0.8%.
According to the latest data (2017) from the National Statistics Bureau,), is currently the 10th best ranked country in Africa in its Human Development Index.
The total expenditure for health was 7.1% of GDP (2015).
Education
Although the Cape Verdean educational system is similar to the Portuguese system, over the years the local universities have been increasingly adopting the American educational system; for instance, all 10 existing universities in the country offer 4-year bachelor's degree programs as opposed to 5-year bachelor's degree programs that existed before 2010.
Cape Verde has the second best educational system in Africa, after South Africa.
Primary school education in Cape Verde is mandatory and free for children between the ages of 6 and 14 years.
In 2011, the net enrollment ratio for primary school was 85%.
Approximately 90% of the total population over 15 years of age is literate, and roughly 25% of the population holds a college degree; a significant number of these college graduates hold doctorate degrees in different academic fields.
Textbooks have been made available to 90 percent of school children, and 98 percent of the teachers have attended in-service teacher training.
Cape Verde counted 25 researchers in 2011, a researcher density of 51 per million inhabitants.
The world average was 1,083 per million in 2013.
All 25 researchers were working in the government sector in 2011 and one in three were women (36%).
There was no research being conducted in either medical or agricultural sciences.
Of the eight engineers involved in research and development, one was a woman.
Three of the five researchers working in natural sciences were women, as were three of the six social scientists and two of the five researchers from the humanities.
Murders are concentrated in the major population centres of Praia and Mindelo.
Other premium channels are aired in Cape Verde especially Satellite Network, they are common in hotels and villas but availability is predominantly limited, one of them is RDP África, the African version of the Portuguese radio station RDP.
As of early 2017, about 19% of the Cape Verdean population own an active cellular phone, 70% have access to the Internet, 11% own a landline telephone, and 2% of the population subscribe to local cable TV.
In 2003, Cape Verde had 71,700 main line telephones with an additional 53,300 cellular phones in use throughout the country.
In 2004, there were seven radio stations; six independent and one state owned.
The media is operated by the Capeverdean News Agency (secondarily as Inforpress).
Nationwide radio stations include RCV, RCV+, Radio Kriola, the religious station Radio Nova.
Local radio stations include Rádio Praia, the first radio station in Cape Verde, Praia FM, the first FM station in the nation, Rádio Barlavento, Rádio Clube do Mindelo and Radio Morabeza in Mindelo.
Music
The Cape Verdean people are known for their musicality, well expressed by popular manifestations such as the Carnival of Mindelo.
Cape Verde music incorporates "African, Portuguese and Brazilian influences."
Cape Verde's quintessential national music is the morna, a melancholy and lyrical song form typically sung in Cape Verdean Creole.
The most popular music genre after morna is the coladeira, followed by funaná and batuque music.
Cesária Évora was the best-known Cape Verdean singer in the world, known as the "barefoot diva", because she liked to perform barefooted on stage.
The international success of Cesária Évora has made other Cape Verdean artists, or descendants of Cape Verdeans born in Portugal, gain more space in the music market.
Examples of this are singers Sara Tavares, Lura and Mayra Andrade.
Another great exponent of traditional music from Cape Verde was Antonio Vicente Lopes, better known as Travadinha and Ildo Lobo, who died in 2004.
The House of Culture in the center of the city of Praia is called Ildo Lobo House of Culture, in his honor.
There are also well known artists born to Cape Verdean parents who excelled themselves in the international music scene.
Amongst these artists are jazz pianist Horace Silver, Duke Ellington's saxophonist Paul Gonsalves, Teófilo Chantre, Paul Pena, the Tavares brothers and singer Lura.
Dance
Dance forms include the soft dance morna, the extreme sensuality of coladeira, the Cape Verdean version of the zouk from Guadeloupe called Cabo love, the Funaná (a sensual mixed Portuguese and African dance), the Batuque dance, and the Cabo Zouk.
Literature
Cape Verdean literature is one of the richest of Lusophone Africa.
Famous poets include Paulino Vieira, Manuel de Novas, Sergio Frusoni, Eugénio Tavares, and B. Léza, and famous authors include Baltasar Lopes da Silva, António Aurélio Gonçalves, Manuel Lopes, Orlanda Amarílis, Henrique Teixeira de Sousa, Arménio Vieira, Kaoberdiano Dambará, Dr. Azágua, and Germano Almeida.
Cinema
The Carnival and the island of São Vicente is portrayed in the 2015 feature documentary Tchindas, nominated at the 12th Africa Movie Academy Awards.
Cuisine
The Cape Verde diet is mostly based on fish and staple foods like corn and rice.
Vegetables available during most of the year are potatoes, onions, tomatoes, manioc, cabbage, kale, and dried beans.
Fruits such as bananas and papayas are available year-round, while others like mangoes and avocados are seasonal.
The country has competed at every Summer Olympics since 1996.
Transport
Ports
There are four international ports: Mindelo, São Vicente; Praia, Santiago; Palmeira, Sal; and Sal Rei, Boa Vista.
Mindelo on São Vicente is the main port for cruise liners and the terminus for the ferry service to Santo Antão.
Praia on Santiago is a main hub for local ferry services to other islands.
Palmeira on Sal supplies fuel for the main airport on the island, Amílcar Cabral International Airport, and is important for the hotel construction taking place on the island.
Porto Novo on Santo Antão is the only source for imports and exports of produce from the island as well as passenger traffic since the closure of the airstrip at Ponta do Sol.
There are smaller harbors, essentially single jetties at Tarrafal on São Nicolau, Sal Rei on Boa Vista, Vila do Maio (Porto Inglês) on Maio, São Filipe on Fogo and Furna on Brava.
These act as terminals for the inter-island ferry services, which carry both freight and passengers.
The pier at Santa Maria on Sal used by both fishing and dive boats has been rehabilitated.
Airports
There were seven operational airports - 4 international and 3 domestic.
Two others were non-operational, one on Brava and the other on Santo Antão, closed for safety reasons.
Due to its geographical location, Cape Verde is often flown over by transatlantic airliners.
It is part of the conventional air-traffic route from Europe to South America, which goes from southern Portugal via the Canary Islands and Cape Verde to northern Brazil.
International airports
*Nelson Mandela International Airport, Santiago Island
*Aristides Pereira International Airport, Boa Vista Island
Bibliography
