The Tasmanian devil (Sarcophilus harrisii) is a carnivorous marsupial of the family Dasyuridae.
It was once native to mainland Australia and is now found in the wild only on the island state of Tasmania, including tiny east-coast Maria Island where there is a conservation project with disease-free animals.
The size of a small dog, the Tasmanian devil became the largest carnivorous marsupial in the world following the extinction of the thylacine in 1936.
It is related to quolls and distantly related to the thylacine.
It is characterised by its stocky and muscular build, black fur, pungent odour, extremely loud and disturbing screech, keen sense of smell, and ferocity when feeding.
The Tasmanian devil's large head and neck allow it to generate among the strongest bites per unit body mass of any extant mammal land predator, and it hunts prey and scavenges carrion as well as eating household products if humans are living nearby.
Although it is usually solitary, it sometimes eats with other devils and defecates in a communal location.
Unlike most other dasyurids, the devil thermoregulates effectively and is active during the middle of the day without overheating.
Despite its rotund appearance, the devil is capable of surprising speed and endurance, and can climb trees and swim across rivers.
It is believed that ancient marsupials migrated from what is now South America to Australia tens of millions of years ago during the time of Gondwana,
Taxonomy
Believing it to be a type of opossum, naturalist George Harris wrote the first published description of the Tasmanian devil in 1807, naming it Didelphis ursina, He had earlier made a presentation on the topic at the Zoological Society of London.
In 1838, a specimen was named Dasyurus laniarius by Richard Owen, but by 1877 he had relegated it to Sarcophilus.
The modern Tasmanian devil was named Sarcophilus harrisii ("Harris's flesh-lover") by French naturalist Pierre Boitard in 1841.
A later revision of the devil's taxonomy, published in 1987, attempted to change the species name to Sarcophilus laniarius based on mainland fossil records of only a few animals.
the explorers first encountered the animal by hearing its far-reaching vocalisations at night.
Related names that were used in the 19th century were Sarcophilus satanicus ("Satanic flesh-lover") and Diabolus ursinus ("bear devil"), all due to early misconceptions of the species as implacably vicious.
As soil degradation took hold, it is believed that the marsupials adapted to the more basic flora of Australia.
The specific lineage of the Tasmanian devil is theorised to have emerged during the Miocene, molecular evidence suggesting a split from the ancestors of quolls between 10 and 15 million years ago, when severe climate change came to bear in Australia, transforming the climate from warm and moist to an arid, dry ice age, resulting in mass extinctions.
s and spears for hunting around 10,000 years ago, a critical fall in numbers due to systematic hunting is unlikely.
They also point out that caves inhabited by Aborigines have a low proportion of bones and rock paintings of devils, and suggest that this is an indication that it was not a large part of indigenous lifestyle.
A scientific report in 1910 claimed that Aborigines preferred the meat of herbivores rather than carnivores.
The other main theory for the extinction was that it was due to the climate change brought on by the most recent ice age.
According to this theory, the dingo was only a secondary cause.
As the devil is the thylacine's closest relative, there has been speculation that the thylacine could be revived by combining DNA from museum samples of thylacines with ova of the devil.
Genetics
The Tasmanian devil's genome was sequenced in 2010 by the Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute.
Like all dasyurids, the devil has 14 chromosomes.
Devils have a low genetic diversity compared to other Australian marsupials and placental carnivores; this is consistent with a founder effect as allelic size ranges were low and nearly continuous throughout all subpopulations measured.
Allelic diversity was measured at 2.7-3.3 in the subpopulations sampled, and heterozygosity was in the range 0.386-0.467.
but there is some exchange between the two groups.
One strand conformation polymorphism analysis (OSCP) on the major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class I domain taken from various locations across Tasmania showed 25 different types, and showed a different pattern of MHC types in north-western Tasmania to eastern Tasmania.
Those devils in the east of the state have less MHC diversity; 30% are of the same type as the tumour (type 1), and 24% are of type A.
Description
The Tasmanian devil is the largest surviving carnivorous marsupial.
It has a squat, thick build, with a large head and a tail which is about half its body length.
Unusually for a marsupial, its forelegs are slightly longer than its hind legs, and devils can run up to for short distances.
The fur is usually black, often with irregular white patches on the chest and rump (although approximately 16% of wild devils do not have white patches).
These markings suggest that the devil is most active at dawn and dusk, and they are thought to draw biting attacks toward less important areas of the body, as fighting between devils often leads to a concentration of scars in that region.
although devils in western Tasmania tend to be smaller.
Devils have five long toes on their forefeet, four pointing to the front and one coming out from the side, which gives the devil the ability to hold food.
The hind feet have four toes, and the devils have non-retractable claws.
Devils are fully grown at two years of age, Born in January 1997 at the Cincinnati Zoo, Coolah died in May 2004 at the Fort Wayne Children's Zoo.
The devil stores body fat in its tail, and healthy devils have fat tails.
The tail is largely non-prehensile and is important to its physiology, social behaviour and locomotion.
It acts as a counterbalance to aid stability when the devil is moving quickly.
An ano-genital scent gland at the base of its tail is used to mark the ground behind the animal with its strong, pungent scent.
The female's pouch opens backwards, and is present throughout its life, unlike some other dasyurids.
The jaw can open to 75-80 degrees, allowing the devil to generate the large amount of power to tear meat and crush bones The power of the jaws is in part due to its comparatively large head.
The teeth and jaws of Tasmanian devils resemble those of hyenas, an example of convergent evolution.
Like dogs, it has 42 teeth, however, unlike dogs, its teeth are not replaced after birth but grow continuously throughout life at a slow rate.
It has a "highly carnivorous dentition and adaptations for bone consumption".
The devil has long whiskers on its face and in clumps on the top of the head.
These help the devil locate prey when foraging in the dark, and aid in detecting when other devils are close during feeding.
In September 2015, 20 immunised captive-bred devils were released into Narawntapu National Park, Tasmania.
Two later died from being hit by cars.
The "core habitat" of the devils is considered to be within the "low to moderate annual rainfall zone of eastern and north-western Tasmania".
Devils can scale trees of trunk diameter larger than , which tend to have no small side branches to hang onto, up to a height of around .
Devils that are yet to reach maturity can climb shrubs to a height of , and can climb a tree to if it is not vertical.
Devils can also swim and have been observed crossing rivers that are in width, including icy cold waterways, apparently enthusiastically.
Tasmanian devils do not form packs, but rather spend most of their time alone once weaned.
They are considered to be non-territorial in general, but females are territorial around their dens.
In a period of between two and four weeks, devils' home ranges are estimated to vary between , with an average of .
changing dens every 1-3 days and travelling a mean distance of every night.
However, there are also reports that an upper bound can be per night.
They choose to travel through lowlands, saddles and along the banks of creeks, particularly preferring carved-out tracks and livestock paths and eschewing steep slopes and rocky terrain.
While the dasyurids have similar diet and anatomy, differing body sizes affect thermoregulation and thus behaviour.
In ambient temperatures between , the devil was able to maintain a body temperature between .
When the temperature was raised to , and the humidity to 50%, the devil's body temperature spiked upwards by within 60 minutes, but then steadily decreased back to the starting temperature after a further two hours, and remained there for two more hours.
During this time, the devil drank water and showed no visible signs of discomfort, leading scientists to believe that sweating and evaporative cooling is its primary means of heat dissipation.
A later study found that devils pant but do not sweat to release heat.
As the smaller animals have to live in hotter and more arid conditions to which they are less well-adapted, they take up a nocturnal lifestyle and drop their body temperatures during the day, whereas the devil is active in the day and its body temperature varies by from its minimum at night to the maximum in the middle of the day.
The standard metabolic rate of a Tasmanian devil is 141 kJ/kg .
The diet is protein-based with 70% water content.
For every of insects consumed, of energy are produced, while a corresponding amount of wallaby meat generated .
Feeding
Tasmanian devils can take prey up to the size of a small kangaroo, but in practice they are opportunistic and eat carrion more often than they hunt live prey.
Although the devil favours wombats because of the ease of predation and high fat content, it will eat all small native mammals such as bettong and potoroos, domestic mammals (including sheep), birds, fish, fruit, vegetable matter, insects, tadpoles, frogs and reptiles.
Their diet is widely varied and depends on the food available.
Before the extinction of the thylacine, the Tasmanian devil ate thylacine joeys left alone in dens when their parents were away.
This may have helped to hasten the extinction of the thylacine, which also ate devils.
Devils can bite through metal traps, and tend to reserve their strong jaws for escaping captivity rather than breaking into food storage.
In this respect, devils have earned the gratitude of Tasmanian farmers, as the speed at which they clean a carcass helps prevent the spread of insects that might otherwise harm livestock.
Some of these dead animals are disposed of when the devils haul off the excess feed back to their residence to continue eating at a later time.
in addition to small vertebrates and invertebrates, juveniles climb trees to eat grubs and birds' eggs.
it can often be heard several kilometres away.
This has been interpreted as notifications to colleagues to share in the meal, so that food is not wasted by rot and energy is saved.
Typically, the dominant animal eats until it is satiated and leaves, fighting off any challengers in the meantime.
Defeated animals run into the bush with their hair and tail erect, their conqueror in pursuit and biting their victim's rear where possible.
Disputes are less common as the food source increases as the motive appears to be getting sufficient food rather than oppressing other devils.
although fighting does occur.
and scarring is common.
They can also stand on their hind legs and push each other's shoulders with their front legs and heads, similar to sumo wrestling.
Devils are known to return to the same places to defecate, and to do so at a communal location, called a devil latrine.
It is believed that the communal defecation may be a means of communication that is not well understood.
Wedge-tailed eagles have a similar carrion-based diet to the devils and are regarded as competitors.
Quolls and devils are also seen as being in direct competition in Tasmania.
Jones believed that the quoll has evolved into its current state in just 100-200 generations of around two years as determined by the equal spacing effect on the devil, the largest species, the spotted-tail quoll, and the smallest species, the eastern quoll.
Both the Tasmanian devil and the quolls appears to have evolved up to 50 times faster than the average evolutionary rate amongst mammals.
Reproduction
Females start to breed when they reach sexual maturity, typically in their second year.
At this point, they become fertile once a year, producing multiple ova while in heat.
Occurring in March, mating takes places in sheltered locations during both day and night.
Males fight over females in the breeding season, and female devils will mate with the dominant male.
Females can ovulate up to three times in a 21-day period, and copulation can take five days; one instance of a couple being in the mating den for eight days has been recorded.
The pregnancy rate is high; 80% of two-year-old females were observed with newborns in their pouches during the mating season.
or "imps".
When the young are born, competition is fierce as they move from the vagina in a sticky flow of mucus to the pouch.
Once inside the pouch, they each remain attached to a nipple for the next 100 days.
The female Tasmanian devil's pouch, like that of the wombat, opens to the rear, so it is physically difficult for the female to interact with young inside the pouch.
Despite the large litter at birth, the female has only four nipples, so there are never more than four babies nursing in the pouch, and the older a female devil gets, the smaller her litters will become.
Once the young have made contact with the nipple, it expands, resulting in the oversized nipple being firmly clamped inside the newborn and ensuring that the newborn does not fall out of the pouch.
Milk replacements are often used for devils that have been bred in captivity, for orphaned devils or young who are born to diseased mothers.
Little is known about the composition of the devil's milk compared to other marsupials.
The milk contains a higher amount of iron than the milk of placental mammals.
In an apparent response to reduced competition caused by devil facial tumour disease, female devils in regions with the disease are now more likely to begin breeding at the age of one year.
Conservation status
Widespread across Australia in the Pleistocene, the Tasmanian devil had declined and become restricted to three relict populations during the mid-Holocene period around 3,000 years ago.
Rock art and a single fossil near Darwin point to a northern population, and remains in the southeast signify a southeastern population ranging from the mouth of the Murray River eastwards to the vicinity of Port Phillip in Victoria.
This population had contracted from northern Victoria and New South Wales.
The rising sea levels in the Holocene also cut it off from Tasmanian populations.
The third population was from southwest Western Australia.
Fossil evidence from this last location has proven controversial.
In 1972, Mike Archer and Alex Baynes found a devil tooth at the foot of a cliff near Augusta in Western Australia and dated it to 430±160 years of age, a figure widely circulated and cited.
but the Tasmanian devil was threatened as well.
It has been speculated that devils may have become more predacious and presided over larger home ranges to fill in the vacancy left by the thylacine.
Cancer in general is a common cause of death in devils.
In 2008, high levels of potentially carcinogenic flame retardant chemicals were found in Tasmanian devils.
Preliminary results of tests ordered by the Tasmanian government on chemicals found in fat tissue from 16 devils have revealed high levels of hexabromobiphenyl (BB153) and "reasonably high" levels of decabromodiphenyl ether (BDE209).
The Save the Tasmanian Devil Appeal is the official fundraising entity for the Save the Tasmanian Devil Program.
The priority is to ensure the survival of the Tasmanian devil in the wild.
Since 1999, all devils caught in the field have had ear biopsies taken, providing samples of DNA.
As of September 2010, there are 5,642 samples in this collection.
The species was listed as vulnerable under the Tasmanian Threatened Species Protection Act 1995 in 2005 and the Australian Environment Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act 1999 The IUCN classified the Tasmanian devil in the lower risk/least concern category in 1996, but in 2009 they reclassified it as endangered.
As it was believed devils would hunt and kill livestock, possibly due to strong imagery of packs of devils eating weak sheep, a bounty scheme to remove the devil from rural properties was introduced as early as 1830.
However, Guiler's research contended that the real cause of livestock losses was poor land management policies and feral dogs.
Over the next 100 years, trapping and poisoning brought them to the brink of extinction.
After the death of the last thylacine in 1936, the Tasmanian devil was protected by law in June 1941 and the population slowly recovered.
During this time environmentalists also became more outspoken, particularly as scientific studies provided new data suggesting the threat of devils to livestock had been vastly exaggerated.
Numbers may have peaked in the early 1970s after a population boom; in 1975 they were reported to be lower, possibly due to overpopulation and consequent lack of food.
Another report of overpopulation and livestock damage was reported in 1987.
The following year, Trichinella spiralis, a parasite which kills animals and can infect humans, was found in devils and minor panic broke out before scientists assured the public that 30% of devils had it but that they could not transmit it to other species.
Control permits were ended in the 1990s, but illegal killing continues to a limited extent, albeit "locally intense".
This is not considered a substantial problem for the survival of the devil.
On 25 September 2015, 20 immunised devils were microchipped and released in Narawntapu National Park.
By 5 October, 4 had been hit by cars, prompting Samantha Fox, leader of Save the Tasmanian Devil, to describe roadkill as being the biggest threat to the Tasmanian devil after DFTD.
A series of solar-powered alarms have been trialled that make noises and flash lights when cars are approaching, warning the animals.
The trial ran for 18 months and the trial area had two-thirds less deaths than the control.
Devil facial tumour disease
First seen in 1996 in Mount William in northeastern Tasmania, devil facial tumour disease (DFTD) has ravaged Tasmania's wild devils, and estimates of the impact range from 20% to as much as an 80% decline in the devil population, with over 65% of the state affected.
The state's west coast area and far north-west are the only places where devils are tumour free.
Individual devils die within months of infection.
The disease is an example of transmissible cancer, which means that it is contagious and passed from one animal to another.
However, this tumour is not native to Tasmanian devils and is also characterised as a tissue graft that is able to pass between hosts without inducing a response from the host's immune system.
Dominant devils who engage in more biting behaviour are more exposed to the disease.
Short of a cure, scientists are removing the sick animals and quarantining healthy devils in case the wild population dies out.
The Tasmanian devil's major histocompatibility complex, or MHC, is particularly important in the mechanism of the cancer.
MHC molecules are integral proteins in an immune system's arsenal to fight diseases.
In normal circumstances, the tumour graft should be recognised by these MHC proteins and induce an immune response.
Because of the lack of diversity in these MHC's, however, these molecules cannot recognise the tumour as foreign.
This allows the disease to be able to spread throughout a population without being threatened by the host's own immune system, further facilitating its transmission.
The loss of this diversity is thought to be due to the several population fluctuations of the Tasmanian devils that have occurred in the last several decades.
When the population is reduced to a very low number, genetic variation can decrease, resulting in MHC molecules that are very similar in make up.
Research by Professor Greg Woods from the University of Tasmania's Menzies Institute for Medical Research has shown encouraging evidence for the potential development of a vaccine using dead devil facial tumour disease cells to trigger an immune response in healthy devils.
Field testing of the vaccine is being undertaken as a collaborative project between the Menzies Institute for Medical Research and the Save the Tasmanian Devil Program under the Wild Devil Recovery program, and aims to test the immunisation protocol as a tool in ensuring the devil's long term survival in the wild.
In March 2017 it was reported that scientists have for the first time successfully treated Tasmanian devils suffering from the disease, by injecting live cancer cells into the infected devils to make their immune system recognise the disease and fight it off, in a breakthrough which is hoped to speed-up development of an effective vaccine that can be administered to devils in the wild.
Relationship with humans
At Lake Nitchie in western New South Wales in 1970, a male human skeleton wearing a necklace of 178 teeth from 49 different devils was found.
The skeleton is estimated to be 7000 years old, and the necklace is believed to be much older than the skeleton.
Archeologist Josephine Flood believes the devil was hunted for its teeth and that this contributed to its extinction on mainland Australia.
Owen and Pemberton note that few such necklaces have been found.
Middens that contain devil bones are rare-two notable examples are Devil's Lair in the south-western part of Western Australia and Tower Hill in Victoria.
According to Fritz Noetling, the Secretary of the Royal Society of Tasmania in 1910, there was no evidence that Tasmanian Aborigines ate any carnivorous animals.
Owen and Pemberton feel this may have contributed to the devil's survival prior to European settlement.
It is a common belief that devils will eat humans.
While they are known to eat the bodies of murder victims or people who have committed suicide, there are prevalent myths that they eat living humans who wander into the bush.
Despite outdated beliefs and exaggerations regarding their disposition, many, although not all, devils will remain still when in the presence of a human; some will also shake nervously.
They can bite and scratch out of fear when held by a human, but a firm grip will cause them to remain still.
Although they can be tamed, they are asocial and are not considered appropriate as pets;
Until recently, the devil was not studied much by academics and naturalists.
In the mid-1960s Professor Guiler assembled a team of researchers and started a decade of systematic fieldwork on the devil.
This is seen as the start of modern scientific study of it.
However, the devil was still negatively depicted, including in tourism material.
Tasmanian devil milk is being researched for its potential to resist superbugs.
In captivity
Early attempts to breed Tasmanian devils in captivity had limited success.
Mary Roberts bred a pair at Beaumaris Zoo which she named Billy and Truganini in 1913.
However, although advised to remove Billy, Roberts found Truganini too distressed by his absence, and returned him.
The first litter was presumed eaten by Billy, but a second litter in 1914 survived after Billy was removed.
Roberts wrote an article on keeping and breeding the devils for the London Zoological Society.
Even by 1934, successful breeding of the devil was rare.
In a study on the growth of young devils in captivity, some developmental stages were very different from those reported by Guiler.
The pinnae were free on day 36, and eyes opened later, on days 115-121.
Most of these devils are living in Australian zoos and wildlife reserves.
Beginning in November 2012 however, in an effort to create a population that is both wild and disease-free, Tasmanian devils have been relocated to Maria Island, a mountainous island off the east coast of Tasmania.
A study on the survival rates of the Maria Island population found that in contrast to other carnivores raised in captivity, the Tasmanian devils were not adversely affected by being born in captivity when released on Maria Island.
Tasmanian devils were displayed in various zoos around the world from the 1850s onwards.
In the 1950s several animals were given to European zoos.
In October 2005 the Tasmanian government sent four devils, two male and two female, to the Copenhagen Zoo, following the birth of the first son of Frederik, Crown Prince of Denmark and his Tasmanian-born wife Mary.
Due to restrictions on their export by the Australian government, at the time these were the only devils known to be living outside Australia.
San Diego Zoo Global and Albuquerque Biopark were selected to participate in the program, and Wellington Zoo and Auckland Zoo soon followed.
In the United States, four additional zoos have since been selected as part of the Australian government's Save the Tasmanian Devil program, the zoos selected were: the Fort Wayne Children's Zoo, the Los Angeles Zoo, the Saint Louis Zoo, and the Toledo Zoo.
Captive devils are usually forced to stay awake during the day to cater to visitors, rather than following their natural nocturnal style.
There have been reports and suspicions of illegal trading in the past.
In 1997, a devil turned up in Western Australia; it had not escaped from any licensed keeper.
During the 1990s there were internet sites in the US that were advertising devil sales, and rumours that some US Navy personnel had tried to buy them illegally during a visit to Tasmania.
Cultural references
The devil is an iconic animal within Australia, and particularly associated with Tasmania.
The animal is used as the emblem of the Tasmanian National Parks and Wildlife Service, The Hobart Devils were once part of the National Basketball League.
The devil has appeared on several commemorative coins in Australia over the years.
Cascade Brewery in Tasmania sells a ginger beer with a Tasmanian devil on the label.
In 2015, the Tasmanian devil was chosen as Tasmania's state emblem.
Tasmanian devils are popular with tourists, and the director of the Tasmanian Devil Conservation Park has described their possible extinction as "a really significant blow for Australian and Tasmanian tourism".
There has also been a multimillion-dollar proposal to build a giant 19 m-high, 35 m-long devil in Launceston in northern Tasmania as a tourist attraction.
Devils began to be used in tourism from the 1970s, when studies showed that the animals were often the only things known about Tasmania overseas and suggested that they should therefore be the centrepiece of marketing efforts, resulting in some devils being taken on promotional tours.
With its unique personality, the Tasmanian devil has been the subject of numerous documentaries, fiction and non-fiction children's books.
Royalties from Margaret Wild's Ruby Roars, about a Tasmanian devil, are going to research into DFTD.
A 2005 Australian documentary on the Tasmanian devil, Terrors of Tasmania, directed and produced by David Parer and Elizabeth Parer-Cook, follows a female devil called Manganinnie through breeding season and the birth and rearing of her young.
The documentary also looks at the effect of devil facial tumour disease and the conservation measures being taken to ensure survival of the Tasmanian devil.
It has screened on television in Australia and in the United States on the National Geographic Channel.
The Tasmanian devil is probably best known internationally as the inspiration for the Looney Tunes cartoon character the Tasmanian Devil, or "Taz" in 1954.
Little known at the time, the loud hyperactive cartoon character has little in common with the real life animal.
After a few shorts between 1957 and 1964, the character was retired until the 1990s, when he gained his own show, Taz-Mania, and again became popular.
In 1997, a newspaper report noted that Warner Bros. had "trademarked the character and registered the name Tasmanian Devil", and that this trademark "was policed", including an eight-year legal case to allow a Tasmanian company to call a fishing lure "Tasmanian Devil".
Debate followed, and a delegation from the Tasmanian government met with Warner Bros. Ray Groom, the Tourism Minister, later announced that a "verbal agreement" had been reached.
An annual fee would be paid to Warner Bros. in return for the Government of Tasmania being able to use the image of Taz for "marketing purposes".
This agreement later disappeared.
In 2006, Warner Bros. permitted the Government of Tasmania to sell stuffed toys of Taz with profits funnelled into research on DFTD.
There is a DC Comics superhero called Tasmanian Devil who is a member of the Global Guardians team.
Snarl, a character in the Transformers Beast Wars storyline, had the alternate form of a Tasmanian devil.
Tasmanian Kid from Beast Wars II could also transform into a Tasmanian devil.
Researchers have named a genetic-mutant mouse "the Tasmanian Devil".
It is defective in the development of sensory-hair cells of the ear, leading it to abnormal behaviours including head-tossing and circling,
A catamaran, called the Devil Cat, was named for, and based on, the Tasmanian devil.
Operating on the world's longest distance high speed ferry service, the catamaran crossed Bass Strait between George Town in Tasmania, and Station Pier, at Port Phillip, Port Melbourne in Victoria, during 1997-2002.
An exhibit titled "Remarkable Tasmanian Devil" was exhibited at the Tasmanian Museum and Art Gallery.
Notes
Bibliography
Further reading
