War and Peace (pre-reform Russian: ; post-reform ) is a novel by the Russian author Leo Tolstoy, published serially, then in its entirety in 1869.
It is regarded as a central work of world literature and one of Tolstoy's finest literary achievements.
The novel chronicles the French invasion of Russia and the impact of the Napoleonic era on Tsarist society through the stories of five Russian aristocratic families.
Portions of an earlier version, titled The Year 1805, were serialized in The Russian Messenger from 1865 to 1867, then published in its entirety in 1869.
Tolstoy said War and Peace is "not a novel, even less is it a poem, and still less a historical chronicle."
Large sections, especially the later chapters, are philosophical discussion rather than narrative.
Tolstoy also said that the best Russian literature does not conform to standards and hence hesitated to call War and Peace a novel.
Instead, he regarded Anna Karenina as his first true novel.
The Encyclopædia Britannica states: "It can be argued that no single English novel attains the universality of the Russian writer Leo Tolstoy's War and Peace".
Crafting the novel
Tolstoy began writing War and Peace in 1863, the year that he finally married and settled down at his country estate.
The first half of the book was written under the name "1805".
During the writing of the second half, he read widely and acknowledged Schopenhauer as one of his main inspirations.
Tolstoy wrote in a letter to Afanasy Fet that what he has written in War and Peace is also said by Schopenhauer in The World as Will and Representation.
However, Tolstoy approaches "it from the other side."
The first draft of the novel was completed in 1863.
In 1865, the periodical (The Russian Messenger) published the first part of this draft under the title 1805 and published more the following year.
Tolstoy was dissatisfied with this version, although he allowed several parts of it to be published with a different ending in 1867.
He heavily rewrote the entire novel between 1866 and 1869.
The standard Russian text of War and Peace is divided into four books and an epilogue in two parts.
Roughly the first half is concerned strictly with the fictional characters, whereas the latter parts, as well as the second part of the epilogue, increasingly consist of essays about the nature of war, power, history, and historiography.
Tolstoy interspersed these essays into the story in a way that defies previous fictional convention.
Certain abridged versions remove these essays entirely, while others, published even during Tolstoy's life, simply moved these essays into an appendix.
Realism
The novel is set 60 years before Tolstoy's day, but he had spoken with people who lived through the 1812 French invasion of Russia.
He read all the standard histories available in Russian and French about the Napoleonic Wars and had read letters, journals, autobiographies and biographies of Napoleon and other key players of that era.
There are approximately 160 real persons named or referred to in War and Peace.
He worked from primary source materials (interviews and other documents), as well as from history books, philosophy texts and other historical novels.
Tolstoy also used a great deal of his own experience in the Crimean War to bring vivid detail and first-hand accounts of how the Imperial Russian Army was structured.
Tolstoy was critical of standard history, especially military history, in War and Peace.
He explains at the start of the novel's third volume his own views on how history ought to be written.
His aim was to blur the line between fiction and history, to get closer to the truth, as he states in Volume II.
Language
Although the book is mainly in Russian, significant portions of dialogue are in French.
It has been suggested In fact, the Russian nobility often knew only enough Russian to command their servants; Tolstoy illustrates this by showing that Julie Karagina, a character in the novel, is so unfamiliar with her country's native language that she has to take Russian lessons.
The use of French diminishes as the book progresses.
It is suggested that this is to demonstrate Russia freeing itself from foreign cultural domination, For the next one hundred years, it became a social requirement for members of the Russian nobility to speak French and understand French culture.
references to Napoleon's early victories.
Later in the battle, however, Andrei falls into enemy hands and even meets his hero, Napoleon.
But his previous enthusiasm has been shattered; he no longer thinks much of Napoleon, "so petty did his hero with his paltry vanity and delight in victory appear, compared to that lofty, righteous and kindly sky which he had seen and comprehended".
Tolstoy portrays Austerlitz as an early test for Russia, one which ended badly because the soldiers fought for irrelevant things like glory or renown rather than the higher virtues which would produce, according to Tolstoy, a victory at Borodino during the 1812 invasion.
Book Two
Book Two begins with Nikolai Rostov briefly returning on leave to Moscow accompanied by his friend Denisov, his officer from his Pavlograd Regiment.
He spends an eventful winter at home.
Natasha has blossomed into a beautiful young girl.
Denisov falls in love with her, proposes marriage but is rejected.
Although his mother pleads with Nikolai to marry a wealthy heiress to rescue the family from its dire financial straits, Nikolai refuses.
Instead, he promises to marry his childhood sweetheart and orphaned cousin, the dowry-less Sonya.
Pierre Bezukhov, upon finally receiving his massive inheritance, is suddenly transformed from a bumbling young man into the most eligible bachelor in Russian society.
Despite knowing that it is wrong, he is convinced into marriage with Prince Kuragin's beautiful and immoral daughter Hélène (Elena Vasilyevna Kuragina).
Hélène, who is rumoured to be involved in an incestuous affair with her brother Anatole, tells Pierre that she will never have children with him.
Hélène is also rumoured to have an affair with Dolokhov, who mocks Pierre in public.
Pierre loses his temper and challenges Dolokhov to a duel.
Unexpectedly (because Dolokhov is a seasoned dueller), Pierre wounds Dolokhov.
Hélène denies her affair, but Pierre is convinced of her guilt and leaves her.
In his moral and spiritual confusion, Pierre joins the Freemasons.
Much of Book Two concerns his struggles with his passions and his spiritual conflicts.
He abandons his former carefree behavior and enters upon a philosophical quest particular to Tolstoy: how should one live a moral life in an ethically imperfect world?
The question continually baffles Pierre.
He attempts to liberate his serfs, but ultimately achieves nothing of note.
Pierre is contrasted with Prince Andrei Bolkonsky.
Andrei recovers from his near-fatal wound in a military hospital and returns home, only to find his wife Lise dying in childbirth.
He is stricken by his guilty conscience for not treating her better.
His child, Nikolai, survives.
Burdened with nihilistic disillusionment, Prince Andrei does not return to the army but remains on his estate, working on a project that would codify military behavior to solve problems of disorganization responsible for the loss of life on the Russian side.
Pierre visits him and brings new questions: where is God in this amoral world?
Pierre is interested in panentheism and the possibility of an
Pierre's wife, Hélène, begs him to take her back, and trying to abide by the Freemason laws of forgiveness, he agrees.
Hélène establishes herself as an influential hostess in Petersburg society.
Prince Andrei feels impelled to take his newly written military notions to Saint Petersburg, naively expecting to influence either the Emperor himself or those close to him.
Young Natasha, also in Saint Petersburg, is caught up in the excitement of her first grand ball, where she meets Prince Andrei and briefly reinvigorates him with her vivacious charm.
Andrei believes he has found purpose in life again and, after paying the Rostovs several visits, proposes marriage to Natasha.
However, Andrei's father dislikes the Rostovs and opposes the marriage, and he insists the couple wait a year before marrying.
Prince Andrei leaves to recuperate from his wounds abroad, leaving Natasha initially distraught.
Count Rostov takes her and Sonya to Moscow in order to raise funds for her trousseau.
Natasha visits the Moscow opera, where she meets Hélène and her brother Anatole.
Anatole has since married a Polish woman whom he has abandoned in Poland.
He is very attracted to Natasha and determined to seduce her, and conspires with his sister to do so.
Anatole succeeds in making Natasha believe he loves her, eventually establishing plans to elope.
Natasha writes to Princess Maria, Andrei's sister, breaking off her engagement.
At the last moment, Sonya discovers her plans to elope and foils them.
Natasha learns from Pierre of Anatole's marriage.
Devastated, Natasha makes a suicide attempt and is left seriously ill.
Pierre is initially horrified by Natasha's behavior, but realizes he has fallen in love with her.
As the Great Comet of 1811-12 streaks the sky, life appears to begin anew for Pierre.
Prince Andrei coldly accepts Natasha's breaking of the engagement.
He tells Pierre that his pride will not allow him to renew his proposal.
Book Three
With the help of her family, and the stirrings of religious faith, Natasha manages to persevere in Moscow through this dark period.
Meanwhile, the whole of Russia is affected by the coming confrontation between Napoleon's army and the Russian army.
Pierre convinces himself through gematria that Napoleon is the Antichrist of the Book of Revelation.
Old Prince Bolkonsky dies of a stroke knowing that French marauders are coming for his estate.
No organized help from any Russian army seems available to the Bolkonskys, but Nikolai Rostov turns up at their estate in time to help put down an incipient peasant revolt.
He finds himself attracted to the distraught Princess Maria.
Back in Moscow, the patriotic Petya joins a crowd in audience of Czar Alexander and manages to snatch a biscuit thrown from the balcony window of the Cathedral of the Assumption by the Czar.
He is nearly crushed by the throngs in his effort.
Under the influence of the same patriotism, his father finally allows him to enlist.
Napoleon himself is the main character in this section, and the novel presents him in vivid detail, both personally and as both a thinker and would-be strategist.
Also described are the well-organized force of over four hundred thousand troops of the French Grande Armée (only one hundred and forty thousand of them actually French-speaking) that marches through the Russian countryside in the late summer and reaches the outskirts of the city of Smolensk.
Pierre decides to leave Moscow and go to watch the Battle of Borodino from a vantage point next to a Russian artillery crew.
After watching for a time, he begins to join in carrying ammunition.
In the midst of the turmoil he experiences first-hand the death and destruction of war; Eugène's artillery continues to pound Russian support columns, while Marshals Ney and Davout set up a crossfire with artillery positioned on the Semyonovskaya heights.
The battle becomes a hideous slaughter for both armies and ends in a standoff.
The Russians, however, have won a moral victory by standing up to Napoleon's reputedly invincible army.
The Russian army withdraws the next day, allowing Napoleon to march on to Moscow.
Among the casualties are Anatole Kuragin and Prince Andrei.
Anatole loses a leg, and Andrei suffers a grenade wound in the abdomen.
Both are reported dead, but their families are in such disarray that no one can be notified.
Book Four
The Rostovs have waited until the last minute to abandon Moscow, even after it is clear that Kutuzov has retreated past Moscow and Muscovites are being given contradictory instructions on how to either flee or fight.
Count Fyodor Rostopchin, the commander in chief of Moscow, is publishing posters, rousing the citizens to put their faith in religious icons, while at the same time urging them to fight with pitchforks if necessary.
Before fleeing himself, he gives orders to burn the city.
The Rostovs have a difficult time deciding what to take with them, but in the end, Natasha convinces them to load their carts with the wounded and dying from the Battle of Borodino.
Unknown to Natasha, Prince Andrei is amongst the wounded.
When Napoleon's army finally occupies an abandoned and burning Moscow, Pierre takes off on a quixotic mission to assassinate Napoleon.
He becomes anonymous in all the chaos, shedding his responsibilities by wearing peasant clothes and shunning his duties and lifestyle.
The only people he sees are Natasha and some of her family, as they depart Moscow.
Natasha recognizes and smiles at him, and he in turn realizes the full scope of his love for her.
Pierre saves the life of a French officer who enters his home looking for shelter, and they have a long, amicable conversation.
The next day Pierre goes into the street to resume his assassination plan, and comes across two French soldiers robbing an Armenian family.
When one of the soldiers tries to rip the necklace off the young Armenian woman's neck, Pierre intervenes by attacking the soldiers, and is taken prisoner by the French army.
Pierre becomes friends with a fellow prisoner, Platon Karataev, a Russian peasant with a saintly demeanor.
In Karataev, Pierre finally finds what he has been seeking: an honest person of integrity, who is utterly without pretense.
Pierre discovers meaning in life simply by interacting with him.
After witnessing French soldiers sacking Moscow and shooting Russian civilians arbitrarily, Pierre is forced to march with the Grand Army during its disastrous retreat from Moscow in the harsh Russian winter.
After months of trial and tribulation-during which the fever-plagued Karataev is shot by the French-Pierre is finally freed by a Russian raiding party led by Dolokhov and Denisov, after a small skirmish with the French that sees the young Petya Rostov killed in action.
Meanwhile, Andrei has been taken in and cared for by the Rostovs, fleeing from Moscow to Yaroslavl.
He is reunited with Natasha and his sister Maria before the end of the war.
Having lost all will to live, he forgives Natasha in a last act before dying.
As the novel draws to a close, Pierre's wife Hélène dies from an overdose of an abortifacient (Tolstoy does not state it explicitly but the euphemism he uses is unambiguous).
Pierre is reunited with Natasha, while the victorious Russians rebuild Moscow.
Natasha speaks of Prince Andrei's death and Pierre of Karataev's.
Both are aware of a growing bond between them in their bereavement.
With the help of Princess Maria, Pierre finds love at last and marries Natasha.
Epilogue in two parts
First part
The first part of the epilogue begins with the wedding of Pierre and Natasha in 1813.
Count Rostov dies soon after, leaving his eldest son Nikolai to take charge of the debt-ridden estate.
Nikolai finds himself with the task of maintaining the family on the verge of bankruptcy.
His abhorrence at the idea of marrying for wealth almost gets in his way, but finally he marries the now-rich Maria Bolkonskaya and in so doing saves his family from financial ruin (though manages to do so without selling any of his wife's property).
Nikolai and Maria then move to Bald Hills with his mother and Sonya, whom he supports for the rest of their lives.
They also raise Prince Andrei's orphaned son, Nikolai Andreyevich (Nikolenka) Bolkonsky.
As in all good marriages, there are misunderstandings, but the couples-Pierre and Natasha, Nikolai and Maria-remain devoted to their spouses.
Pierre and Natasha visit Bald Hills in 1820.
There is a hint in the closing chapters that the idealistic, boyish Nikolenka and Pierre would both become part of the Decembrist Uprising.
The first epilogue concludes with Nikolenka promising he would do something with which even his late father "would be satisfied" (presumably as a revolutionary in the Decembrist revolt).
Second part
The second part of the epilogue contains Tolstoy's critique of all existing forms of mainstream history.
The 19th-century Great Man Theory claims that historical events are the result of the actions of "heroes" and other great individuals; Tolstoy argues that this is impossible because of how rarely these actions result in great historical events.
Rather, he argues, great historical events are the result of many smaller events driven by the thousands of individuals involved (he compares this to calculus, and the sum of infinitesimals).
He then goes on to argue that these smaller events are the result of an inverse relationship between necessity and free-will, necessity being based on reason and therefore explainable by historical analysis, and free-will being based on "consciousness" and therefore inherently unpredictable.
Reception
The novel that made its author "the true lion of the Russian literature" (according to Ivan Goncharov)
Yet the Russian press's initial response to the novel was muted, most critics unable to decide how to classify it.
The liberal newspaper Golos (The Voice, April 3, #93, 1865) was one of the first to react.
Its anonymous reviewer posed a question later repeated by many others: "What could this possibly be?
What kind of genre are we supposed to file it to?..
Where is fiction in it, and where is real history?"
Articles by D. Minayev, and N. Shelgunov in magazine characterized the novel as "lacking realism", showing its characters as "cruel and rough", "mentally stoned", "morally depraved" and promoting "the philosophy of stagnation".
Still, Mikhail Saltykov-Schedrin, who never expressed his opinion of the novel publicly, in private conversation was reported to have expressed delight with "how strongly this Count has stung our higher society".
Dmitry Pisarev in his unfinished article "Russian Gentry of Old" (, , #2, 1868), while praising Tolstoy's realism in portraying members of high society, was still unhappy with the way the author, as he saw it, 'idealized' the old nobility, expressing "unconscious and quite natural tenderness towards" the Russian dvoryanstvo.
On the opposite front, the conservative press and "patriotic" authors (A. S. Norov and P. A. Vyazemsky among them) were accusing Tolstoy of consciously distorting 1812 history, desecrating the "patriotic feelings of our fathers" and ridiculing dvoryanstvo.
Among the reviewers were military men and authors specializing in the war literature.
Most assessed highly the artfulness and realism of Tolstoy's battle scenes.
N. Lachinov, a member of the Russky Invalid newspaper staff (#69, April 10, 1868) called the Battle of Schöngrabern scenes "bearing the highest degree of historical and artistic truthfulness" and totally agreed with the author's view on the Battle of Borodino, which some of his opponents disputed.
The army general and respected military writer Mikhail Dragomirov, in an article published in (The Military Almanac, 1868-70), while disputing some of Tolstoy's ideas concerning the "spontaneity" of wars and the role of commander in battles, advised all the Russian Army officers to use War and Peace as their desk book, describing its battle scenes as "incomparable" and "serving for an ideal manual to every textbook on theories of military art."
In 1879, unhappy with Ganzen having chosen Anna Karenina to start with, Goncharov insisted: "War and Peace is the extraordinary poem of a novel, both in content and execution.
It also serves as a monument to Russian history's glorious epoch when whatever figure you take is a colossus, a statue in bronze.
Even the novel's minor characters carry all the characteristic features of the Russian people and its life."
In 1885, expressing satisfaction with the fact that Tolstoy's works had by then been translated into Danish, Goncharov again stressed the immense importance of War and Peace.
"Count Tolstoy really mounts over everybody else here in Russia", he remarked.
Fyodor Dostoyevsky (in a May 30, 1871 letter to Strakhov) described War and Peace as "the last word of the landlord's literature and the brilliant one at that".
In a draft version of The Raw Youth he described Tolstoy as "a historiograph of the , or rather, its cultural elite".
"The objectivity and realism impart wonderful charm to all scenes, and alongside people of talent, honour and duty he exposes numerous scoundrels, worthless goons and fools", he added.
In 1876 Dostoyevsky wrote: "My strong conviction is that a writer of fiction has to have most profound knowledge-not only of the poetic side of his art, but also the reality he deals with, in its historical as well as contemporary context.
Here in Russia, as far as I see it, only one writer excels in this, Count Lev Tolstoy."
Nikolai Leskov, then an anonymous reviewer in (The Stock Exchange Herald), wrote several articles praising highly War and Peace, calling it "the best ever Russian historical novel" and "the pride of the contemporary literature".
Marveling at the realism and factual truthfulness of Tolstoy's book, Leskov thought the author deserved the special credit for "having lifted up the people's spirit upon the high pedestal it deserved".
"While working most elaborately upon individual characters, the author, apparently, has been studying most diligently the character of the nation as a whole; the life of people whose moral strength came to be concentrated in the Army that came up to fight mighty Napoleon.
In this respect the novel of Count Tolstoy could be seen as an epic of the Great national war which up until now has had its historians but never had its singers", Leskov wrote.
Ivan Turgenev gradually re-considered his initial skepticism as to the novel’s historical aspect and also the style of Tolstoy's psychological analysis.
In his 1880 article written in the form of a letter addressed to Edmond Abou, the editor of the French newspaper , Turgenev described Tolstoy as "the most popular Russian writer" and War and Peace as "one of the most remarkable books of our age".
"This vast work has the spirit of an epic, where the life of Russia of the beginning of our century in general and in details has been recreated by the hand of a true master ...
The manner in which Count Tolstoy conducts his treatise is innovative and original.
This is the great work of a great writer, and in it there’s true, real Russia", Turgenev wrote.
It was largely due to Turgenev's efforts that the novel started to gain popularity with the European readership.
The first French edition of the War and Peace (1879) paved the way for the worldwide success of Leo Tolstoy and his works.
Later John Galsworthy called War and Peace "the best novel that had ever been written".
Romain Rolland, remembering his reading the novel as a student, wrote: "this work, like life itself, has no beginning, no end.
It is life itself in its eternal movement."
Thomas Mann thought War and Peace to be "the greatest ever war novel in the history of literature."
Ernest Hemingway confessed that it was from Tolstoy that he'd been taking lessons on how to "write about war in the most straightforward, honest, objective and stark way."
"I don't know anybody who could write about war better than Tolstoy did", Hemingway asserted in his 1955 Men at War.
The Best War Stories of All Time anthology.
Tolstoy "gives us a unique combination of the 'naive objectivity' of the oral narrator with the interest in detail characteristic of realism.
This is the reason for our trust in his presentation."
War and Peace is one of https:/ book Five Books most recommended books with philosophers, literary scholars, novelists and historians citing it as a influential text.
English and other translations
War and Peace has been translated into many languages.
It has been translated into English on several occasions, starting with Clara Bell working from a French translation.
The translators Constance Garnett and Louise and Aylmer Maude knew Tolstoy personally.
Translations have to deal with Tolstoy’s often peculiar syntax and his fondness for repetitions.
Only about 2 percent of War and Peace is in French; Tolstoy removed the French in a revised 1873 edition, only to restore it later.
Most translators follow Garnett retaining some French; Briggs uses no French, while Pevear-Volokhonsky and Amy Mandelker's revision of the Maude translation both retain the French fully.
Comparing translations
In the Encyclopedia of Literary Translation into English, academic Zoja Pavlovskis-Petit has this to say about the translations of War and Peace available in 2000: "Of all the translations of War and Peace, Dunnigan's (1968) is the best. ...
Unlike the other translators, Dunnigan even succeeds with many characteristically Russian folk expressions and proverbs. ...
She is faithful to the text and does not hesitate to render conscientiously those details that the uninitiated may find bewildering: for instance, the statement that Boris's mother pronounced his name with a stress on the o - an indication to the Russian reader of the old lady's affectation."
On the Garnett translation Pavlovskis-Petit writes: "her ...War and Peace is frequently inexact and contains too many anglicisms.
Her style is awkward and turgid, very unsuitable for Tolstoi."
On the Maudes' translation she comments: "this should have been the best translation, but the Maudes' lack of adroitness in dealing with Russian folk idiom, and their style in general, place this version below Dunnigan's."
She further comments on Edmonds's revised translation, formerly on Penguin: "it is the work of a sound scholar but not the best possible translator; it frequently lacks resourcefulness and imagination in its use of English. ...
a respectable translation but not on the level of Dunnigan or Maude."
Adaptations
Film
The first Russian adaptation was () in 1915, which was directed by Vladimir Gardin and starred Gardin and the Russian ballerina Vera Karalli.
F. Kamei produced a version in Japan in 1947.
* The 208-minute-long American 1956 version was directed by King Vidor and starred Audrey Hepburn (Natasha), Henry Fonda (Pierre) and Mel Ferrer (Andrei).
Audrey Hepburn was nominated for a BAFTA Award for best British actress and for a Golden Globe Award for best actress in a drama production.
* The critically acclaimed, four-part and 431-minutes long Soviet War and Peace, by director Sergei Bondarchuk, was released in 1966 and 1967.
It starred Lyudmila Savelyeva (as Natasha Rostova) and Vyacheslav Tikhonov (as Andrei Bolkonsky).
Bondarchuk himself played the character of Pierre Bezukhov.
It involved thousands of extras and took six years to finish the shooting, as a result of which the actors age changed dramatically from scene to scene.
It won an Oscar for Best Foreign Language Film for its authenticity and massive scale.
Bondarchuk's film is considered to be the best screen version of the novel.
It attracted some controversy due to the number of horses killed during the making of the battle sequences and screenings were actively boycotted in several US cities by the ASPCA.
Television
* War and Peace (1972): The BBC (British Broadcasting Corporation) made a television serial based on the novel, broadcast in 1972-73.
Anthony Hopkins played the lead role of Pierre.
Other lead characters were played by Rupert Davies, Faith Brook, Morag Hood, Alan Dobie, Angela Down and Sylvester Morand.
This version faithfully included many of Tolstoy's minor characters, including Platon Karataev (Harry Locke).
* (2000): French TV production of Prokofiev's opera War and Peace, directed by François Roussillon.
Robert Brubaker played the lead role of Pierre.
* War and Peace (2007): produced by the Italian Lux Vide, a TV mini-series in Russian & English co-produced in Russia, France, Germany, Poland and Italy.
Directed by Robert Dornhelm, with screenplay written by Lorenzo Favella, Enrico Medioli and Gavin Scott.
It features an international cast with Alexander Beyer playing the lead role of Pierre assisted by Malcolm McDowell, Clémence Poésy, Alessio Boni, Pilar Abella, J. Kimo Arbas, Ken Duken, Juozapas Bagdonas and Toni Bertorelli.
* On 8 December 2015, Russian state television channel Russia-K began a four-day broadcast of a reading of the novel, one volume per day, involving 1,300 readers in over 30 cities.
* War & Peace (2016): The BBC aired a six-part adaptation of the novel scripted by Andrew Davies on BBC One in 2016.
Music
* English progressive rock band Yes's song "The Gates of Delirium" from their 1974 album Relayer was inspired by War and Peace.
Opera
* Initiated by a proposal of the German director Erwin Piscator in 1938, the Russian composer Sergei Prokofiev composed his opera War and Peace (Op. 91, libretto by Mira Mendelson) based on this epic novel during the 1940s.
The complete musical work premièred in Leningrad in 1955.
It was the first opera to be given a public performance at the Sydney Opera House (1973).
Theatre
The first successful stage adaptations of War and Peace were produced by Alfred Neumann and Erwin Piscator (1942, revised 1955, published by Macgibbon & Kee in London 1963, and staged in 16 countries since) and R. Lucas (1943).
A stage adaptation by Helen Edmundson, first produced in 1996 at the Royal National Theatre with Richard Hope as Pierre and Anne-Marie Duff as Natasha, was published that year by Nick Hern Books, London.
Edmundson added to and amended the play for a 2008 production as two 3-hour parts by Shared Experience, again directed by Nancy Meckler and Polly Teale.
This was first put on at the Nottingham Playhouse, then toured in the UK to Liverpool, Darlington, Bath, Warwick, Oxford, Truro, London (the Hampstead Theatre) and Cheltenham.
A musical adaptation by OBIE Award-winner Dave Malloy, called Natasha, Pierre & The Great Comet of 1812 premiered at the Ars Nova theater in Manhattan on October 1, 2012.
The show is described as an electropop opera, and is based on Book 8 of War and Peace, focusing on Natasha's affair with Anatole.
The show opened on Broadway in the fall of 2016, starring Josh Groban as Pierre and Denée Benton as Natasha.
It received twelve Tony Award nominations including Best Musical, Best Actor, Best Actress, Best Original Score, and Best Book of a Musical.
Radio
The BBC Home Service broadcast an eight-part adaptation by Walter Peacock from 17 January to 7 February 1943 with two episodes on each Sunday.
All but the last instalment, which ran for one and a half hours, were one hour long.
Leslie Banks played Pierre while Celia Johnson was Natasha.
* In December 1970, Pacifica Radio station WBAI broadcast a reading of the entire novel (the 1968 Dunnigan translation) read by over 140 celebrities and ordinary people.
A dramatised full-cast adaptation in 20 parts, edited by Michael Bakewell, was broadcast by the BBC between 30 December 1969 and 12 May 1970, with a cast including David Buck, Kate Binchy and Martin Jarvis.
A dramatised full-cast adaptation in ten parts was written by Marcy Kahan and Mike Walker in 1997 for BBC Radio 4.
The production won the 1998 Talkie award for Best Drama and was around 9.5 hours in length.
It was directed by Janet Whitaker and featured Simon Russell Beale, Gerard Murphy, Richard Johnson, and others.
* On New Year's Day 2015, BBC Radio 4 broadcast a dramatisation over 10 hours.
The dramatisation, by playwright Timberlake Wertenbaker, was directed by Celia de Wolff and starred Paterson Joseph and John Hurt.
It was accompanied by a Tweetalong: live tweets throughout the day that offered a playful companion to the book and included plot summaries and entertaining commentary.
The Twitter feed also shared maps, family trees and battle plans.
