Archaeology, or archeology, In North America archaeology is a sub-field of anthropology, Archaeology is distinct from palaeontology, which is the study of fossil remains.
It is particularly important for learning about prehistoric societies, for whom there may be no written records to study.
Prehistory includes over 99% of the human past, from the Paleolithic until the advent of literacy in societies across the world.
The discipline involves surveying, excavation and eventually analysis of data collected to learn more about the past.
In broad scope, archaeology relies on cross-disciplinary research.
It draws upon anthropology, history, art history, classics, ethnology, geography, geology, literary history, linguistics, semiology, sociology, textual criticism, physics, information sciences, chemistry, statistics, paleoecology, paleography, paleontology, paleozoology, and paleobotany.
Archaeology developed out of antiquarianism in Europe during the 19th century, and has since become a discipline practiced across the world.
Archaeology has been used by nation-states to create particular visions of the past.
Since its early development, various specific sub-disciplines of archaeology have developed, including maritime archaeology, feminist archaeology and archaeoastronomy, and numerous different scientific techniques have been developed to aid archaeological investigation.
Nonetheless, today, archaeologists face many problems, such as dealing with pseudoarchaeology, the looting of artifacts, a lack of public interest, and opposition to the excavation of human remains.
History
Antiquarians
The science of archaeology (from Greek , archaiologia from , arkhaios, "ancient" and , -logia, " in Europe in the 17th and 18th centuries.
In Europe, philosophical interest in the remains of Greco-Roman civilization and the rediscovery of classical culture began in the late Middle Age.
Flavio Biondo, an Italian Renaissance humanist historian, created a systematic guide to the ruins and topography of ancient Rome in the early 15th century, for which he has been called an early founder of archaeology.
Antiquarians of the 16th century, including John Leland and William Camden, conducted surveys of the English countryside, drawing, describing and interpreting the monuments that they encountered.
The OED first cites "archaeologist" from 1824; this soon took over as the usual term for one major branch of antiquarian activity.
"Archaeology", from 1607 onwards, initially meant what we would call "ancient history" generally, with the narrower modern sense first seen in 1837.
First excavations
One of the first sites to undergo archaeological excavation was Stonehenge and other megalithic monuments in England.
John Aubrey (1626-1697) was a pioneer archaeologist who recorded numerous megalithic and other field monuments in southern England.
He was also ahead of his time in the analysis of his findings.
He attempted to chart the chronological stylistic evolution of handwriting, medieval architecture, costume, and shield-shapes.
Excavations were also carried out by the Spanish military engineer Roque Joaquín de Alcubierre in the ancient towns of Pompeii and Herculaneum, both of which had been covered by ash during the Eruption of Mount Vesuvius in AD 79.
These excavations began in 1748 in Pompeii, while in Herculaneum they began in 1738.
The discovery of entire towns, complete with utensils and even human shapes, as well the unearthing of frescos, had a big impact throughout Europe.
However, prior to the development of modern techniques, excavations tended to be haphazard; the importance of concepts such as stratification and context were overlooked.
Development of archaeological method
The father of archaeological excavation was William Cunnington (1754-1810).
He undertook excavations in Wiltshire from around 1798, funded by Sir Richard Colt Hoare.
Cunnington made meticulous recordings of Neolithic and Bronze Age barrows, and the terms he used to categorize and describe them are still used by archaeologists today.
One of the major achievements of 19th-century archaeology was the development of stratigraphy.
The idea of overlapping strata tracing back to successive periods was borrowed from the new geological and paleontological work of scholars like William Smith, James Hutton and Charles Lyell.
The application of stratigraphy to archaeology first took place with the excavations of prehistorical and Bronze Age sites.
In the third and fourth decades of the 19th-century, archaeologists like Jacques Boucher de Perthes and Christian Jürgensen Thomsen began to put the artifacts they had found in chronological order.
A major figure in the development of archaeology into a rigorous science was the army officer and ethnologist, Augustus Pitt Rivers, who began excavations on his land in England in the 1880s.
His approach was highly methodical by the standards of the time, and he is widely regarded as the first scientific archaeologist.
He arranged his artifacts by type or "typologically, and within types by date or "chronologically".
This style of arrangement, designed to highlight the evolutionary trends in human artifacts, was of enormous significance for the accurate dating of the objects.
His most important methodological innovation was his insistence that all artifacts, not just beautiful or unique ones, be collected and catalogued.
William Flinders Petrie is another man who may legitimately be called the Father of Archaeology.
His painstaking recording and study of artifacts, both in Egypt and later in Palestine, laid down many of the ideas behind modern archaeological recording; he remarked that "I believe the true line of research lies in the noting and comparison of the smallest details."
Petrie developed the system of dating layers based on pottery and ceramic findings, which revolutionized the chronological basis of Egyptology.
Petrie was the first to scientifically investigate the Great Pyramid in Egypt during the 1880s.
He was also responsible for mentoring and training a whole generation of Egyptologists, including Howard Carter who went on to achieve fame with the discovery of the tomb of 14th-century BC pharaoh Tutankhamun.
The first stratigraphic excavation to reach wide popularity with public was that of Hissarlik, on the site of ancient Troy, carried out by Heinrich Schliemann, Frank Calvert and Wilhelm Dörpfeld in the 1870s.
These scholars individuated nine different cities that had overlapped with one another, from prehistory to the Hellenistic period.
Meanwhile, the work of Sir Arthur Evans at Knossos in Crete revealed the ancient existence of an equally advanced Minoan civilization.
The next major figure in the development of archaeology was Sir Mortimer Wheeler, whose highly disciplined approach to excavation and systematic coverage in the 1920s and 1930s brought the science on swiftly.
Wheeler developed the grid system of excavation, which was further improved by his student Kathleen Kenyon.
Archaeology became a professional activity in the first half of the 20th century, and it became possible to study archaeology as a subject in universities and even schools.
By the end of the 20th century nearly all professional archaeologists, at least in developed countries, were graduates.
Further adaptation and innovation in archaeology continued in this period, when maritime archaeology and urban archaeology became more prevalent and rescue archaeology was developed as a result of increasing commercial development.
Purpose
The purpose of archaeology is to learn more about past societies and the development of the human race.
Over 99% of the development of humanity has occurred within prehistoric cultures, who did not make use of writing, thereby no written records exist for study purposes.
Without such written sources, the only way to understand prehistoric societies is through archaeology.
Because archaeology is the study of past human activity, it stretches back to about 2.5 million years ago when we find the first stone tools - The Oldowan Industry.
Many important developments in human history occurred during prehistory, such as the evolution of humanity during the Paleolithic period, when the hominins developed from the australopithecines in Africa and eventually into modern Homo sapiens.
Archaeology also sheds light on many of humanity's technological advances, for instance the ability to use fire, the development of stone tools, the discovery of metallurgy, the beginnings of religion and the creation of agriculture.
Without archaeology, we would know little or nothing about the use of material culture by humanity that pre-dates writing.
Field survey
The archaeological project then continues (or alternatively, begins) with a field survey.
Regional survey is the attempt to systematically locate previously unknown sites in a region.
Site survey is the attempt to systematically locate features of interest, such as houses and middens, within a site.
Each of these two goals may be accomplished with largely the same methods.
Survey was not widely practiced in the early days of archaeology.
Cultural historians and prior researchers were usually content with discovering the locations of monumental sites from the local populace, and excavating only the plainly visible features there.
Gordon Willey pioneered the technique of regional settlement pattern survey in 1949 in the Viru Valley of coastal Peru, A bird's-eye view is useful for quick mapping of large or complex sites.
Aerial photographs are used to document the status of the archaeological dig.
Aerial imaging can also detect many things not visible from the surface.
Plants growing above a buried man made structure, such as a stone wall, will develop more slowly, while those above other types of features (such as middens) may develop more rapidly.
Photographs of ripening grain, which changes colour rapidly at maturation, have revealed buried structures with great precision.
Aerial photographs taken at different times of day will help show the outlines of structures by changes in shadows.
Aerial survey also employs ultraviolet, infrared, ground-penetrating radar wavelengths, LiDAR and thermography.
Geophysical survey can be the most effective way to see beneath the ground.
Magnetometers detect minute deviations in the Earth's magnetic field caused by iron artifacts, kilns, some types of stone structures, and even ditches and middens.
Devices that measure the electrical resistivity of the soil are also widely used.
Archaeological features whose electrical resistivity contrasts with that of surrounding soils can be detected and mapped.
Some archaeological features (such as those composed of stone or brick) have higher resistivity than typical soils, while others (such as organic deposits or unfired clay) tend to have lower resistivity.
Although some archaeologists consider the use of metal detectors to be tantamount to treasure hunting, others deem them an effective tool in archaeological surveying.
Examples of formal archaeological use of metal detectors include musketball distribution analysis on English Civil War battlefields, metal distribution analysis prior to excavation of a 19th-century ship wreck, and service cable location during evaluation.
Metal detectorists have also contributed to archaeology where they have made detailed records of their results and refrained from raising artifacts from their archaeological context.
In the UK, metal detectorists have been solicited for involvement in the Portable Antiquities Scheme.
Regional survey in underwater archaeology uses geophysical or remote sensing devices such as marine magnetometer, side-scan sonar, or sub-bottom sonar.
Excavation
Archaeological excavation existed even when the field was still the domain of amateurs, and it remains the source of the majority of data recovered in most field projects.
It can reveal several types of information usually not accessible to survey, such as stratigraphy, three-dimensional structure, and verifiably primary context.
Modern excavation techniques require that the precise locations of objects and features, known as their provenance or provenience, be recorded.
This always involves determining their horizontal locations, and sometimes vertical position as well (also see Primary Laws of Archaeology).
Likewise, their association, or relationship with nearby objects and features, needs to be recorded for later analysis.
This allows the archaeologist to deduce which artifacts and features were likely used together and which may be from different phases of activity.
For example, excavation of a site reveals its stratigraphy; if a site was occupied by a succession of distinct cultures, artifacts from more recent cultures will lie above those from more ancient cultures.
Excavation is the most expensive phase of archaeological research, in relative terms.
Also, as a destructive process, it carries ethical concerns.
As a result, very few sites are excavated in their entirety.
Again the percentage of a site excavated depends greatly on the country and "method statement" issued.
Sampling is even more important in excavation than in survey.
Sometimes large mechanical equipment, such as backhoes (JCBs), is used in excavation, especially to remove the topsoil (overburden), though this method is increasingly used with great caution.
Following this rather dramatic step, the exposed area is usually hand-cleaned with trowels or hoes to ensure that all features are apparent.
The next task is to form a site plan and then use it to help decide the method of excavation.
Features dug into the natural subsoil are normally excavated in portions to produce a visible archaeological section for recording.
A feature, for example a pit or a ditch, consists of two parts: the cut and the fill.
The cut describes the edge of the feature, where the feature meets the natural soil.
It is the feature's boundary.
The fill is what the feature is filled with, and will often appear quite distinct from the natural soil.
The cut and fill are given consecutive numbers for recording purposes.
Scaled plans and sections of individual features are all drawn on site, black and white and colour photographs of them are taken, and recording sheets are filled in describing the context of each.
All this information serves as a permanent record of the now-destroyed archaeology and is used in describing and interpreting the site.
Analysis
Once artifacts and structures have been excavated, or collected from surface surveys, it is necessary to properly study them.
This process is known as post-excavation analysis, and is usually the most time-consuming part of an archaeological investigation.
It is not uncommon for final excavation reports for major sites to take years to be published.
At a basic level of analysis, artifacts found are cleaned, catalogued and compared to published collections.
This comparison process often involves classifying them typologically and identifying other sites with similar artifact assemblages.
However, a much more comprehensive range of analytical techniques are available through archaeological science, meaning that artifacts can be dated and their compositions examined.
Bones, plants, and pollen collected from a site can all be analyzed using the methods of zooarchaeology, paleoethnobotany, palynology and stable isotopes while any texts can usually be deciphered.
These techniques frequently provide information that would not otherwise be known, and therefore they contribute greatly to the understanding of a site.
Computational and virtual archaeology
Computer graphics are now used to build virtual 3D models of sites, such as the throne room of an Assyrian palace or ancient Rome.
Drones costing as little as £650 have proven useful.
In 2013, drones have flown over at least six Peruvian archaeological sites, including the colonial Andean town Machu Llacta above sea level.
The drones continue to have altitude problems in the Andes, leading to plans to make a drone blimp, employing open source software.
Academic sub-disciplines
As with most academic disciplines, there are a very large number of archaeological sub-disciplines characterized by a specific method or type of material (e.g., lithic analysis, music, archaeobotany), geographical or chronological focus (e.g. Near Eastern archaeology, Islamic archaeology, Medieval archaeology), other thematic concern (e.g. maritime archaeology, landscape archaeology, battlefield archaeology), or a specific archaeological culture or civilization (e.g. Egyptology, Indology, Sinology).
Historical archaeology
Historical archaeology is the study of cultures with some form of writing.
In England, archaeologists have uncovered layouts of 14th century medieval villages, abandoned after crises such as the Black Death.
In downtown New York City, archaeologists have exhumed the 18th century remains of the African Burial Ground.
When remnants of the WWII Siegfried Line were being destroyed, emergency archaeological digs took place whenever any part of the line was removed, to further scientific knowledge and reveal details of the line's construction.
Ethnoarchaeology
Ethnoarchaeology is the ethnographic study of living people, designed to aid in our interpretation of the archaeological record.
Cadw and as a hobby more than a job in the scientific community.
Cinema audiences form a notion of "who archaeologists are, why they do what they do, and how relationships to the past are constituted", integrated a one-hour HD documentary, short videos for public viewing and video updates during the expedition as part of the educational outreach.
Webcasting is also another tool for educational outreach.
For one week in 2000 and 2001, live underwater video of the Queen Anne's Revenge Shipwreck Project was webcast to the Internet as a part of the QAR DiveLive educational program that reached thousands of children around the world.
Created and co-produced by Nautilus Productions and Marine Grafics, this project enabled students to talk to scientists and learn about methods and technologies utilized by the underwater archaeology team.
In the UK, popular archaeology programs such as Time Team and Meet the Ancestors have resulted in a huge upsurge in public interest.
Where possible, archaeologists now make more provisions for public involvement and outreach in larger projects than they once did, and many local archaeological organizations operate within the Community archaeology framework to expand public involvement in smaller-scale, more local projects.
Archaeological excavation, however, is best undertaken by well-trained staff that can work quickly and accurately.
Often this requires observing the necessary health and safety and indemnity insurance issues involved in working on a modern building site with tight deadlines.
Certain charities and local government bodies sometimes offer places on research projects either as part of academic work or as a defined community project.
There is also a flourishing industry selling places on commercial training excavations and archaeological holiday tours.
Archaeologists prize local knowledge and often liaise with local historical and archaeological societies, which is one reason why Community archaeology projects are starting to become more common.
Often archaeologists are assisted by the public in the locating of archaeological sites, which professional archaeologists have neither the funding, nor the time to do.
Archaeological Legacy Institute (ALI), is a registered 501c 3 non-profit, media and education corporation registered in Oregon in 1999.
ALI founded a website, http:/
The Archaeology Channel to support the organization's mission "to nurturing and bringing attention to the human cultural heritage, by using media in the most efficient and effective ways possible."
Some historical archaeology sites are subjected to looting by metal detector hobbyists who search for artifacts using increasingly advanced technology.
Efforts are underway among all major Archaeological organizations to increase education and legitimate cooperation between amateurs and professionals in the metal detecting community.
While most looting is deliberate, accidental looting can occur when amateurs, who are unaware of the importance of Archaeological rigor, collect artifacts from sites and place them into private collections.
Descendant peoples
In the United States, examples such as the case of Kennewick Man have illustrated the tensions between Native Americans and archaeologists, which can be summarized as a conflict between a need to remain respectful toward sacred burial sites and the academic benefit from studying them.
For years, American archaeologists dug on Indian burial grounds and other places considered sacred, removing artifacts and human remains to storage facilities for further study.
In some cases human remains were not even thoroughly studied but instead archived rather than reburied.
Furthermore, Western archaeologists' views of the past often differ from those of tribal peoples.
The West views time as linear; for many natives, it is cyclic.
From a Western perspective, the past is long-gone; from a native perspective, disturbing the past can have dire consequences in the present.
As a consequence of this, American Indians attempted to prevent archaeological excavation of sites inhabited by their ancestors, while American archaeologists believed that the advancement of scientific knowledge was a valid reason to continue their studies.
This contradictory situation was addressed by the Native American Graves Protection and Repatriation Act (NAGPRA, 1990), which sought to reach a compromise by limiting the right of research institutions to possess human remains.
Due in part to the spirit of postprocessualism, some archaeologists have begun to actively enlist the assistance of indigenous peoples likely to be descended from those under study.
Archaeologists have also been obliged to re-examine what constitutes an archaeological site in view of what native peoples believe to constitute sacred space.
To many native peoples, natural features such as lakes, mountains or even individual trees have cultural significance.
Australian archaeologists especially have explored this issue and attempted to survey these sites to give them some protection from being developed.
Such work requires close links and trust between archaeologists and the people they are trying to help and at the same time study.
While this cooperation presents a new set of challenges and hurdles to fieldwork, it has benefits for all parties involved.
Tribal elders cooperating with archaeologists can prevent the excavation of areas of sites that they consider sacred, while the archaeologists gain the elders' aid in interpreting their finds.
There have also been active efforts to recruit aboriginal peoples directly into the archaeological profession.
Repatriation
:See Repatriation and reburial of human remains
A new trend in the heated controversy between First Nations groups and scientists is the repatriation of native artifacts to the original descendants.
An example of this occurred on 21 June 2005, when community members and elders from a number of the 10 Algonquian nations in the Ottawa area convened on the Kitigan Zibi reservation near Maniwaki, Quebec, to inter ancestral human remains and burial goods-some dating back 6,000 years.
It was not determined, however, if the remains were directly related to the Algonquin people who now inhabit the region.
The remains may be of Iroquoian ancestry, since Iroquoian people inhabited the area before the Algonquin.
Moreover, the oldest of these remains might have no relation at all to the Algonquin or Iroquois, and belong to an earlier culture who previously inhabited the area.
The remains and artifacts, including jewelry, tools and weapons, were originally excavated from various sites in the Ottawa Valley, including Morrison and the Allumette Islands.
They had been part of the Canadian Museum of Civilization's research collection for decades, some since the late 19th century.
Elders from various Algonquin communities conferred on an appropriate reburial, eventually deciding on traditional redcedar and birchbark boxes lined with redcedar chips, muskrat and beaver pelts.
An inconspicuous rock mound marks the reburial site where close to 80 boxes of various sizes are buried.
Because of this reburial, no further scientific study is possible.
Although negotiations were at times tense between the Kitigan Zibi community and museum, they were able to reach agreement.
Bibliography
Further reading
* Lewis Binford - New Perspectives in Archaeology (1968)
* Glyn Daniel - A Short History of Archaeology (1991)
* Kevin Greene - Introduction to Archaeology (1983)
* Thomas Hester, Harry Shafer, and Kenneth L. Feder - Field Methods in Archaeology 7th edition (1997)
* Ian Hodder & Scott Hutson - "Reading the Past" 3rd. edition (2003)
* International Journal of South American Archaeology - IJSA (magazine)
* Adrian Praetzellis - Death by Theory, AltaMira Press (2000).
* Colin Renfrew & Paul Bahn - Archaeology: theories, methods and practice, 2nd edition (1996)
* Smekalova, T.N.; Voss O.; & Smekalov S.L. (2008).
"Magnetic Surveying in Archaeology.
More than 10 years of using the Overhauser GSM-19 gradiometer".
Wormianum.
* David Hurst Thomas - Archaeology, 3rd.
edition (1998)
* Robert J. Sharer & Wendy Ashmore - Archaeology:
Discovering our Past 2nd edition (1993)
* Bruce Trigger - "A History of Archaeological Thought" 2nd. edition (2007)
* Alison Wylie - Thinking From Things: Essays in the Philosophy of Archaeology, University of California Press, Berkeley CA, 2002
