Abelisaurus (; "Abel's lizard") is a genus of predatory abelisaurid theropod dinosaur during the Late Cretaceous Period (Campanian) of what is now South America.
It was a bipedal carnivore that probably reached about in length, although this is uncertain as it is known from only one partial skull.
Discovery and naming
Coining the type species Abelisaurus comahuensis, both genus and species were named and described by Argentine paleontologists José Bonaparte and Fernando Emilio Novas in 1985.
The generic name recognizes Roberto Abel as the discoverer of the type specimen, and also as the former director of the provincial Museum of Cipolletti in Argentina, where the specimen is housed.
It also incorporates the Greek σαυρος/sauros, meaning 'lizard'.
The specific name comahuensis honors the Comahue region of Argentina, where the fossil was found.
The holotype, MC 11078, was in 1983 uncovered at the "Cantera de la Pala Mécanica"-site in the Lago Pellegrini quarries exploited by Abel since 1975.
This single known fossil of Abelisaurus consists of a skull, lacking the lower jaws, that is incomplete, especially on the right side.
Most of the connections between the snout and the back of the skull are absent.
It is also missing most of the palate (roof of the mouth).
Despite the missing pieces, it could be estimated at over long.
In 2009, Novas suggested that Aucasaurus garridoi might be a junior synonym of Abelisaurus.
In 2010, Gregory S. Paul renamed Aucasaurus into a Abelisaurus garridoi.
This has found no acceptance.
Description
As only the skull is known, it has proven difficult to provide a reliable size estimate of Abelisaurus.
It has transpired that abelisaurids have relatively short heads.
In 2010, Gregory S. Paul estimated its body length at , its weight at .
Skull length was estimated at in 1985.
The skull is relatively deep.
Although there are no bony crests or horns, like those found in some other abelisaurids, such as Carnotaurus, rough ridges on the snout and above the eyes might have supported some kind of crest made out of keratin, which would not have become fossilized.
The skull roof is thickened.
There are also very large fenestrae (window-like openings) in the skull, which are found in many dinosaurs and reduce skull weight.
One of these is a large triangular antorbital fenestra in the side of the snout.
The eye socket behind it is rather high.
It is constricted in the middle by bony projections of the lacrimal bone in the front and the postorbital bone at the rear.
The eye was located above the constriction.
Behind the eye socket a large triangular infratemporal fenestra is present.
Its form reflects a strong forward inclination of the back of the skull.
Others are less certain of its position.
Abelisaurus shares some skull features, such as a relative elongation, with the carcharodontosaurids, a group unrelated to other species assigned to the Abelisauridae, and, since it is known only from a skull, it has been suggested that future discoveries may show that Abelisaurus was in fact a carcharodontosaurid.
However, this is thought unlikely.
Paleobiology
As the skull of Abelisaurus was relatively broad at the back, Bonaparte and Novas drew a comparison between the newly described species and the also wide-skulled Tyrannosauridae.
They assumed that, just as tyrannosaurids, Abelisaurus were the apex predators of their ecosystem.
In 2010, Paul proposed that Abelisaurus hunted titanosaurian sauropods.
* Timeline of ceratosaur research
