The Capitoline Wolf (Italian: Lupa Capitolina) is a bronze sculpture depicting a scene from the legend of the founding of Rome.
The sculpture shows a she-wolf suckling the mythical twin founders of Rome, Romulus and Remus.
According to the legend, when Numitor, grandfather of the twins, was overthrown by his brother Amulius, the usurper ordered them to be cast into the Tiber River.
They were rescued by a she-wolf who cared for them until a herdsman, Faustulus, found and raised them.
The age and origin of the Capitoline Wolf is controversial.
The statue was long thought to be an Etruscan work of the 5th century BC, with the twins added in the late 15th century AD, probably by the sculptor Antonio Pollaiolo.
However, radiocarbon and thermoluminescence dating has found that the wolf portion of the statue is likely to have been cast between 1021 and 1153.
The image of the she-wolf suckling Romulus and Remus is a symbol of Rome since ancient times and one of the most recognizable icons of ancient mythology.
The sculpture has been housed since 1471 in the Palazzo dei Conservatori on the Campidoglio (the ancient Capitoline Hill), Rome, Italy, and there are many replicas in various places around the world.
Description
The sculpture is somewhat larger than life-size, standing high and long.
The wolf is depicted in a tense, watchful pose, with alert ears and glaring eyes which are watching for danger.
By contrast, the human twins - executed in a completely different style - are oblivious to their surroundings, absorbed by their suckling.
Attribution and dating
The she-wolf from the legend of Romulus and Remus was regarded as a symbol of Rome from ancient times.
Several ancient sources refer to statues depicting the wolf suckling the twins.
Livy reports in his Roman history that a statue was erected at the foot of the Palatine Hill in 295 B.C. Pliny the Elder mentions the presence in the Roman Forum of a statue of a she-wolf that was "a miracle proclaimed in bronze nearby, as though she had crossed the Comitium while Attus Navius was taking the omens".
Cicero also mentions a statue of the she-wolf as one of a number of sacred objects on the Capitoline that had been inauspiciously struck by lightning in the year 65 BC: "it was a gilt statue on the Capitol of a baby being given suck from the udders of a wolf."
Cicero also mentions the wolf in De Divinatione 1.20 and 2.47.
It was widely assumed that the Capitoline Wolf was the very sculpture described by Cicero, due to the presence of damage to the sculpture's paw, which was believed to correspond to the lightning strike of 65 BC.
The 18th-century German art historian Johann Joachim Winckelmann attributed the statue to an Etruscan maker in the 5th century BC, based on how the wolf's fur was depicted.
It was first attributed to the Veiian artist Vulca, who decorated the Temple of Jupiter Capitolinus, and then re-attributed to an unknown Etruscan artist of approximately 480-470 BC.
Winckelmann correctly identified a Renaissance origin for the twins; they were probably added in 1471 or later.
During the 19th century, a number of researchers questioned Winckelmann's dating of the bronze.
August Emil Braun, the secretary of the Archaeological Institute of Rome, proposed in 1854 that the damage to the wolf's paw had been caused by an error during casting.
Wilhelm Fröhner, the Conservator of the Louvre, stated in 1878 that style of the statue was attributable to the Carolingian art period rather than the Etruscan, and in 1885 Wilhelm von Bode also stated that he was of the view that the statue was most likely a mediaeval work.
However, these views were largely disregarded and had been forgotten by the 20th century.
The 12th-century English cleric Magister Gregorius wrote a descriptive essay De Mirabilibus Urbis Romae and recorded in an appendix three pieces of sculpture he had neglected: one was the Wolf in the portico, at the principal entrance to the Lateran Palace.
He mentions no twins, for he noted that she was set up as if stalking a bronze ram that was nearby, which served as a fountain.
The wolf had also served as a fountain, Magister Gregorius thought, but it had been broken off at the feet and moved to where he saw it.
The present-day Capitoline Wolf could not have been the sculpture seen by Benedict and Gregorius, if its newly attributed age is accepted, though it is conceivable that it could have been a replacement for an earlier (now lost) depiction of the Roman wolf.
In December 1471 Pope Sixtus IV ordered the present sculpture to be transferred to the Palazzo dei Conservatori on the Capitoline Hill, and the twins were added some time around then.
The Capitoline Wolf joined a number of other genuinely ancient sculptures transferred at the same time, to form the nucleus of the Capitoline Museum.
Modern use and symbolism
The image was favoured by Benito Mussolini, who cast himself as the founder of the "New Rome" and donated copies of the statue to various places around the world.
To encourage American goodwill, he sent several copies of the Capitoline Wolf to U.S. cities.
In 1929 he sent one replica for a Sons of Italy national convention in Cincinnati, Ohio.
It was switched for another one in 1931, which still stands in Eden Park, Cincinnati.
Another replica was given to the city of Rome, Georgia, the same year.
A third copy went to Rome, New York in 1956 by Alfonso Felici, a veteran of World War II.
The programme of conservation undertaken in the 1990s resulted in an exhibition devoted to the Lupa Capitolina and her iconography.
In the 2009 film Agora, set in 5th-century Alexandria, the Capitoline Wolf-complete with the del Pollaiolo twins-can be seen in the prefect's palace.
This is visible in the scene before Hypatia's capture, directly behind her character.
In Rick Riordan's The Son of Neptune, Lupa is the wolf that trains all demigods who wish to enter Camp Jupiter.
She trains Percy Jackson and is mentioned that she trained Jason Grace also.
In the first episode of the American television programme The Addams Family, a mirror-image sculpture of the Capitoline Wolf is on display in the Addams's living room.
It can be seen standing atop a table, just to the right of the main staircase.
The Boston Latin School uses an image on the cover of their agenda book as well as being the official school emblem.
The Capitoline Wolf is used in Romania and Moldova as a symbol of the Latin origin of its inhabitants and in some major cities there are replicas of the original statue given as a gift from Italy at the beginning of the 20th century.
The Capitoline Wolf is reimagined in Look at Me (new Capitoline Wolf), a 2011 installation by Polish artist Paweł Wocial.
Notes
|last
Lombardi |first
|year=2002
|title=A petrographic study of the casting core of the Lupa Capitolina
|journal=Archaeometry
|volume
44 |issue
4 |pages=601ff
|doi=10.1111/1475-4754.t01-1-00088
Further reading
* (This paper initiated modern research into the sculpture's history.)
