, born , then , was the most famous poet of the Edo period in Japan.
During his lifetime, Bashō was recognized for his works in the collaborative haikai no renga form; today, after centuries of commentary, he is recognized as the greatest master of haiku (then called hokku).
Matsuo Bashō's poetry is internationally renowned; and, in Japan, many of his poems are reproduced on monuments and traditional sites.
Although Bashō is justifiably famous in the West for his hokku, he himself believed his best work lay in leading and participating in renku.
He is quoted as saying, "Many of my followers can write hokku as well as I can.
Where I show who I really am is in linking haikai verses."
Bashō was introduced to poetry at a young age, and after integrating himself into the intellectual scene of Edo (modern Tokyo) he quickly became well known throughout Japan.
He made a living as a teacher; but then renounced the social, urban life of the literary circles and was inclined to wander throughout the country, heading west, east, and far into the northern wilderness to gain inspiration for his writing.
His poems were influenced by his firsthand experience of the world around him, often encapsulating the feeling of a scene in a few simple elements.
Biography
Early life
Matsuo Bashō was born in 1644, near Ueno, in Iga Province.
The Matsuo family was of samurai descent, and his father was probably a , a class of landowning peasants granted certain privileges of samurai.
Little is known of his childhood.
In his late teens, Bashō became a servant to
When Nishiyama Sōin, founder and leader of the Danrin school of haikai, came to Edo from Osaka in 1675, Bashō was among the poets invited to compose with him.
It was on this occasion that he gave himself the haigō of Tōsei, and by 1680 he had a full-time job teaching twenty disciples, who published , advertising their connection to Tōsei's talent.
That winter, he took the surprising step of moving across the river to Fukagawa, out of the public eye and towards a more reclusive life.
His disciples built him a rustic hut and planted a in the yard, giving Bashō a new haigō and his first permanent home.
He appreciated the plant very much, but was not happy to see Fukagawa's native miscanthus grass growing alongside it:
QTEMPLATE
by my new banana plant a miscanthus bud! 1680
Despite his success, Bashō grew dissatisfied and lonely.
He began to practice Zen meditation, but it seems not to have calmed his mind.
In the winter of 1682 his hut burned down, and shortly afterwards, in early 1683, his mother died.
He then traveled to Yamura, to stay with a friend.
In the winter of 1683 his disciples gave him a second hut in Edo, but his spirits did not improve.
In 1684 his disciple Takarai Kikaku published a compilation of him and other poets, .
Later that year he left Edo on the first of four major wanderings.
Bashō traveled alone, off the beaten path, that is, on the Edo Five Routes, which in medieval Japan were regarded as immensely dangerous; and, at first Bashō expected to simply die in the middle of nowhere or be killed by bandits.
However, as his trip progressed, his mood improved, and he became comfortable on the road.
Bashō met many friends and grew to enjoy the changing scenery and the seasons.
His poems took on a less introspective and more striking tone as he observed the world around him:
QTEMPLATE |
even a horse snowy morrow 1684
The trip took him from Edo to Mount Fuji, Ueno, and Kyoto.
He met several poets who called themselves his disciples and wanted his advice; he told them to disregard the contemporary Edo style and even his own Shriveled Chestnuts, saying it contained "many verses that are not worth discussing".
Bashō returned to Edo in the summer of 1685, taking time along the way to write more hokku and comment on his own life:
QTEMPLATE |
another year is gone straw sandals at my feet 1685
When Bashō returned to Edo he happily resumed his job as a teacher of poetry at his bashō hut, although privately he was already making plans for another journey.
The poems from his journey were published as .
In early 1686 he composed one of his best-remembered haiku:
QTEMPLATE |
an ancient pond the splash of water 1686
Historians believe this poem became instantly famous: in April, the poets of Edo gathered at the bashō hut for a haikai no renga contest on the subject of frogs that seems to have been a tribute to Bashō's hokku, which was placed at the top of the compilation.
Bashō stayed in Edo, continuing to teach and hold contests, with an excursion in the autumn of 1687 when he traveled to the countryside for moon watching, and a longer trip in 1688 when he returned to Ueno to celebrate the Lunar New Year.
At home in Edo, Bashō sometimes became reclusive: he alternated between rejecting visitors to his hut and appreciating their company.
At the same time, he enjoyed his life and had a subtle sense of humor, as reflected in his hokku:
QTEMPLATE |
now then, let's go out I slip and fall!
Oku no Hosomichi
Bashō's private planning for another long journey, to be described in his masterwork Oku no Hosomichi, or The Narrow Road to the Deep North, culminated on May 16, 1689 (Yayoi 27, Genroku 2), when he left Edo with his student and apprentice
Last years
On his return to Edo in the winter of 1691, Bashō lived in his third bashō hut, again provided by his disciples.
This time, he was not alone: he took in a nephew and his female friend, Jutei, who were both recovering from illness.
He had a great many visitors.
Bashō continued to be uneasy.
He wrote to a friend that "disturbed by others, I have no peace of mind".
He made a living from teaching and appearances at haikai parties until late August 1693, when he shut the gate to his bashō hut and refused to see anybody for a month.
Finally, he relented after adopting the principle of karumi or "lightness", a semi-Buddhist philosophy of greeting the mundane world rather than separating himself from it.
Bashō left Edo for the last time in the summer of 1694, spending time in Ueno and Kyoto before his arrival in Osaka.
He became sick with a stomach illness and died peacefully, surrounded by his disciples.
Although he did not compose any formal death poem on his deathbed the following, being the last poem recorded during his final illness, is generally accepted as his poem of farewell:
QTEMPLATE |
falling sick on a journey over a field of dried grass 1694
Influence and literary criticism
Rather than sticking to the formulas of , which remain popular in Japan even today, Bashō aspired to reflect his real environment and emotions in his hokku.
Even during his lifetime, the effort and style of his poetry was widely appreciated; after his death, it only increased.
Several of his students compiled quotations from him about his own poetry, most notably Mukai Kyorai and Hattori Dohō.
During the 18th century, appreciation of Bashō's poems grew more fervent, and commentators such as Ishiko Sekisui and Moro Nanimaru went to great length to find references in his hokku to historical events, medieval books, and other poems.
These commentators were often lavish in their praise of Bashō's obscure references, some of which were probably literary false cognates.
and to leading intellectuals and the Japanese public at large.
He invented the term haiku (replacing hokku) to refer to the freestanding 5-7-5 form which he considered the most artistic and desirable part of the haikai no renga.
The impressionistic and concise nature of Bashō's verse greatly influenced Ezra Pound, the Imagists, and poets of the Beat Generation.
Two of Bashō's poems were popularized in the short story "Teddy" written by J. D. Salinger and published in 1952 by The New Yorker magazine.
In 1979, the International Astronomical Union named a crater found on Mercury after him.
List of works
*Nozarashi Kikō (Record of a Weather-Exposed Skeleton) (1684)
*Oi no Kobumi, or Utatsu Kikō (Record of a Travel-Worn Satchel) (1688)
*Sarashina Kikō (A Visit to Sarashina Village) (1688)
*Bashō no Utsusu Kotoba (On Transplanting the Banana Tree) (1691)
*Oku no Hosomichi (Narrow Road to the Interior) (1694)
*Zoku Sarumino (The Monkey's Raincoat, Continued) (1698)*
Denotes the title is one of the Seven Major Anthologies of Bashō (Bashō Shichibu Shū)
English translations
Notes
*Forbes, Andrew; Henley, David (2014).
Utagawa Hiroshige's 53 Stations of the Tokaido.
Chiang Mai: Cognoscenti Books. B00LM4APAI
*Slawenski, Kenneth.
J.D. Salinger: A Life.
New York: Random House,
*Takarai, Kikaku (2006).
An Account of Our Master Basho's Last Days, translated by Nobuyuki Yuasa in Springtime in Edo.
Hiroshima, Keisuisha.
*Matsuo, Bashō (1666).
"The narrow road to the Deep North", translated by Nobuyuki Yuasa.
Harmondsworth, Penguin.
