The chickpea or chick pea (Cicer arietinum) is an annual legume of the family Fabaceae, subfamily Faboideae.
Its different types are variously known as gram or Bengal gram,
Chickpea is a key ingredient in hummus and chana masala, and it can be ground into flour to make falafel.
It is also used in salads, soups and stews, curry and other meal products like channa.
The chickpea is important in Indian and Middle Eastern cuisine.
In 2017, India produced 67% of the world total for chickpeas.
The term chich-pease, used in the 1500s, derived from chich, the Old French term for chick-pea.
History
Domesticated chickpeas have been found in the aceramic levels of Tell es-Sultan (Jericho) (PPNB) along with Çayönü in Turkey and in Neolithic pottery at Hacilar, Turkey.
They were found in the late Neolithic (about 3500 BC) at Thessaly, Kastanas, Lerna and Dimini, Greece.
In southern France, Mesolithic layers in a cave at L'Abeurador, Hérault, have yielded wild chickpeas carbon-dated to 6790±90 BC.
Chickpeas are mentioned in Charlemagne's (about 800 AD) as , as grown in each imperial demesne.
Albertus Magnus mentions red, white, and black varieties.
Nicholas Culpeper noted "chick-pease or cicers" are less "windy" than peas and more nourishing.
Ancient people also associated chickpeas with Venus because they were said to offer medical uses such as increasing sperm and milk, provoking menstruation and urine, and helping to treat kidney stones.
"White cicers" were thought to be especially strong and helpful.
In the First World War, they were grown for this use in some areas of Germany.
They are still sometimes brewed instead of coffee.
A collaboration of 20 research organizations, led by the International Crops Research Institute for the Semi-Arid Tropics (ICRISAT), sequenced CDC Frontier, a kabuli chickpea variety, and identified more than 28,000 genes and several million genetic markers.
Geographic cultivation
The plant grows to 20-50 cm (8-20 in) high and has small, feathery leaves on either side of the stem.
Chickpeas are a type of pulse, with one seedpod containing two or three peas.
It has white flowers with blue, violet, or pink veins.
Several varieties of chickpea are cultivated throughout the world.
Desi chana closely resembles both seeds found on archaeological sites and the wild plant ancestor of domesticated chickpeas, Cicer reticulatum, which only grows in southeast Turkey, where chickpeas are believed to have originated.
Desi chana has small, darker seeds and a rough coat.
They are grown mostly in India and other parts of South Asia, as well as in Ethiopia, Mexico, and Iran.
Desi means "country" or "native" in Hindustani; its other names include kala chana ("black chickpea" in both Hindi and Urdu) or chholaa boot.
Desi chana can be black, green or speckled.
This variety is hulled and split to make chana dal.
Garbanzo beans or 'kabuli' chana are lighter-coloured, larger, and with a smoother coat, and are mainly grown in the Mediterranean, Southern Europe, Northern Africa, South America, and South Asia.
An uncommon black chickpea, ceci neri, is grown only in Apulia, in southeastern Italy.
It is around the same size as garbanzo beans, being both larger and darker than the 'desi' variety.
Uses
Culinary
Chickpeas are usually rapidly boiled for 10 minutes and then simmered for a longer period.
Dried chickpeas need a long cooking time (1-2 hours) but will easily fall apart when cooked longer.
If soaked for 12-24 hours before use, cooking time can be shortened by around 30 minutes.
Chickpeas can also be pressure cooked or sous vide cooked at .
Mature chickpeas can be cooked and eaten cold in salads, cooked in stews, ground into flour, ground and shaped in balls and fried as falafel, made into a batter and baked to make farinata or cecina, or fried to make panelle.
Chickpea flour is known as gram flour or besan in South Asia and used frequently in South Asian cuisine.
Chickpeas are popular in the Iberian Peninsula.
In Portugal, they are one of the main ingredients in rancho, eaten with pasta and meat, including Portuguese sausages, or with rice.
They are used in other hot dishes with bacalhau and in soup.
In Spain, they are used cold in tapas and salads, as well as in cocido madrileño.
In Italy, chickpeas are eaten with pasta or in soup.
In southern Italy, chickpea flour is made into a batter for panelle, a sort of crepe.
In Egypt, chickpeas are used as a topping for kushari.
Ḥummuṣ is the Arabic word for chickpeas, which are often cooked and ground into a paste and mixed with ṭaḥīna (sesame seed paste), the blend called ḥummuṣ bi ṭaḥīna.
Chickpeas are roasted, spiced, and eaten as a snack, such as leblebi.
By the end of the 20th century, hummus had become commonplace in American cuisine.
By 2010, 5% of Americans consumed hummus on a regular basis,
Chickpeas and Bengal grams are used to make curries and are one of the most popular vegetarian foods in South Asia and in diaspora communities of many other countries served with variety of breads or steamed rice.
Popular dishes in Indian cuisine are made with chickpea flour, such as Mirchi Bada and mirapakaya bajji.
In India, as well as in the Levant, unripe chickpeas are often picked out of the pod and eaten as a raw snack and the leaves are eaten as a leaf vegetable in salads.
In India, desserts such as besan halwa and sweets such as besan barfi and laddu are made.
Chickpea flour is used to make "Burmese tofu" which was first known among the Shan people of Burma.
In South Asian cuisine the chickpea flour (besan) is used as a batter to coat vegetables before deep frying to make pakoras.
The flour is also used as a batter to coat vegetables and meats before frying, or fried alone such as panelle (little bread), a chickpea fritter from Sicily.
Chickpea flour is used to make the Mediterranean flatbread socca and called panisse in Provence, southern France.
It is made of cooked chickpea flour, poured into saucers, allowed to set, cut in strips, and fried in olive oil, often eaten during Lent.
In Tuscany chickpea flour (farina di ceci) is used to make an oven baked pancake: the flour is mixed with water, oil and salt.
Chickpea flour known as kadlehittu in Kannada is used for making sweet dish Mysorepak.
In the Philippines, chickpeas preserved in syrup are eaten as sweets and in desserts such as halo-halo.
Jews from Ashkenazi countries traditionally serve whole chickpeas at a Shalom Zachar celebration for baby boys.
Guasanas or garbanza is a Mexican chickpea street snack.
The beans, while still green, are cooked in water and salt, kept in a steamer to maintain their humidity, and served in a plastic bag.
A chickpea-derived liquid (aquafaba) can be used as an egg white replacement to make meringue or ice cream, with the residual pomace used as flour.
File:FOOD Doubles 2.jpg|Doubles, a street food in Trinidad and Tobago
File:Potaje de garbanzos y collejas5.JPG|Manchego cuisine; chickpea and Silene vulgaris stew (potaje de garbanzos y collejas)
File:Farinata di ceci 01.jpg|Farinata di ceci, a traditional Italian chickpea snack food
File:Chakhchoukha9.JPG|Chakhchoukha in Algerian cuisine; freshly cooked marqa before mixing with rougag
File:Choleindia.jpg|Chana masala, India
File:Halua of Chickpeas.jpg|Halua chickpeas, Bangladesh
File:Aesthetic Fried Gram.jpg|Fried chickpea
Animal feed
Chickpeas serve as an energy and protein source as animal feed.
Raw chickpeas have a lower trypsin and chymotrypsin inhibitor content than peas, common beans, and soybeans.
This leads to higher nutrition values and fewer digestive problems in nonruminants.
Nonruminant diets can be completed with 200 g/kg of raw chickpeas to promote egg production and growth of birds and pigs.
Higher amounts can be used when chickpeas are treated with heat.
A 100 g serving of cooked chickpeas provides .
Cooked chickpeas are 60% water, 27% carbohydrates, 9% protein and 3% fat (table).
Effects of cooking
Cooking treatments do not lead to variance in total protein and carbohydrate content.
Soaking and cooking of dry seeds possibly induces chemical modification of protein-fibre complexes, which leads to an increase in crude fiber content.
Thus, cooking can increase protein quality by inactivating or destroying heat-labile antinutritional factors.
Chickpea leaves have a significantly higher mineral content than either cabbage leaves or spinach leaves.
Production
In 2017, world production of chickpeas was 14.8 million tonnes, led by India with 67% of the global total, and Australia with 14% (table).
The uptake of micronutrients such as inorganic phosphorus or nitrogen is vital to the plant development of Cicer arietinum, commonly known as the perennial chickpea.
Consequently, the impact of heat cultivation not only affects the protein content of the chickpea itself, but the ecosystem that it supports as well.
Increasing the height and size of chickpea plants involves using micronutrient fertilization with varying doses of inorganic phosphorus and nitrogen.
Increasing the levels of inorganic phosphorus at all doses incrementally increases the height of the chickpea plant.
Thus, the seasonal changes in phosphorus soil content as well as periods of drought that are known to be a native characteristic of the dry Middle-Eastern region where the chickpea is most commonly cultivated have a strong effect on the growth of the plant itself.
Plant yield is also affected by a combination of phosphorus nutrition and water supply, resulting in a 12% increase in yield of the crop.
Additional minerals and micronutrients make the absorption process of nitrogen and phosphorus more available.
Inorganic phosphate ions are generally attracted towards charged minerals such as iron and aluminium oxides.
Additionally, growth and yield are also limited by zinc and boron deficiencies in the soil.
Boron-rich soil resulted in an increase of chickpea yield and size, while soil fertilization with zinc seemed to have no apparent effect on the chickpea yield.
Pathogens
Pathogens in chickpeas are the main cause for yield loss (up to 90%).
One example is the fungus Fusarium oxysporum f.sp. ciceris, present in most of the major pulse crop-growing areas and causing regular yield damages between 10 and 15%.
From 1978 until 1995, the worldwide number of pathogens increased from 49 to 172, of which 35 have been recorded in India.
These pathogens originate from the groups of bacteria, fungi, viruses, mycoplasma and nematodes and show a high genotypic variation.
The most widely distributed pathogens are Ascochyta rabiei (35 countries), Fusarium oxysporum f.sp. ciceris (32 countries)
Uromyces ciceris-arietini (25 countries), bean leafroll virus (23 countries), and Macrophomina phaseolina (21 countries).
Ascochyta disease emergence is favored by wet weather; spores are carried to new plants by wind and water splash.
The stagnation of yield improvement over the last decades is linked to the susceptibility to pathogens.
Research for yield improvement, such as an attempt to increase yield from 0.8 to 2.0 tons per hectare by breeding cold-resistant varieties, is always linked with pathogen-resistance breeding as pathogens such as Ascochyta rabiei and F. o. f.sp. ciceris flourish in conditions such as cold temperature.
Research started selecting favourable genes for pathogen resistance and other traits through marker-assisted selection.
The use of this method is a promising sign for the future to achieve significant yield improvements.
