World War I (often abbreviated as WWI or WW1), also known as the First World War, the Great War, the Seminal Catastrophe, and initially in North America as the European War, was a global war originating in Europe that lasted from 28 July 1914 to 11 November 1918.
Contemporaneously described as "the war to end all wars", it led to the mobilisation of more than 70 million military personnel, including 60 million Europeans, making it one of the largest wars in history.
It is also one of the deadliest conflicts in history, with an estimated nine million combatants and seven million civilian deaths as a direct result of the war, while resulting genocides and the resulting 1918 influenza pandemic caused another 50 to 100 million deaths worldwide.
On 28 June 1914, Gavrilo Princip, a Bosnian Serb Yugoslav nationalist, assassinated the Austro-Hungarian heir Archduke Franz Ferdinand in Sarajevo, leading to the July Crisis.
In response, on 23 July Austria-Hungary issued an ultimatum to Serbia.
Serbia's reply failed to satisfy the Austrians, and the two moved to a war footing.
A network of interlocking alliances enlarged the crisis from a bilateral issue in the Balkans to one involving most of Europe.
By July 1914, the great powers of Europe were divided into two coalitions: the Triple Entente-consisting of France, Russia, and Britain-and the Triple Alliance of Germany, Austria-Hungary, and Italy (the Triple Alliance was only defensive in nature, allowing Italy to stay out of the war until April 1915, when it joined the Allied Powers after its relations with Austria-Hungary deteriorated).
Russia felt it necessary to back Serbia and, after Austria-Hungary shelled the Serbian capital of Belgrade on the 28July, approved partial mobilisation.
Full Russian mobilisation was announced on the evening of 30July; on the 31st, Austria-Hungary and Germany did the same, while Germany demanded Russia demobilise within twelve hours.
When Russia failed to comply, Germany declared war on Russia on 1August in support of Austria-Hungary, with Austria-Hungary following suit on 6August; France ordered full mobilisation in support of Russia on 2August.
German strategy for a war on two fronts against France and Russia was to rapidly concentrate the bulk of its army in the West to defeat France within six weeks, then shift forces to the East before Russia could fully mobilise; this was later known as the Schlieffen Plan.
On 2August, Germany demanded free passage through Belgium, an essential element in achieving a quick victory over France.
When this was refused, German forces invaded Belgium on 3August and declared war on France the same day; the Belgian government invoked the 1839 Treaty of London and in compliance with its obligations under this, Britain declared war on Germany on 4August.
On 12 August, Britain and France also declared war on Austria-Hungary; on the 23August, Japan sided with Britain, seizing German possessions in China and the Pacific.
In November 1914, the Ottoman Empire entered the war on the side of the Central Powers, opening fronts in the Caucasus, Mesopotamia, and the Sinai Peninsula.
The war was fought in and drew upon each power's colonial empire as well, spreading the conflict to Africa and across the globe.
The Entente and its allies would eventually become known as the Allied Powers, while the grouping of Austria-Hungary, Germany and their allies would become known as the Central Powers.
The German advance into France was halted at the Battle of the Marne and by the end of 1914, the Western Front settled into a battle of attrition, marked by a long series of trench lines that changed little until 1917 (the Eastern Front, by contrast, was marked by much greater exchanges of territory).
In 1915, Italy joined the Allied Powers and opened a front in the Alps.
Bulgaria joined the Central Powers in 1915 and Greece joined the Allies in 1917, expanding the war in the Balkans.
The United States initially remained neutral, though even while neutral it became an important supplier of war materiel to the Allies.
Eventually, after the sinking of American merchant ships by German submarines, the declaration by Germany that its navy would resume unrestricted attacks on neutral shipping, and the revelation that Germany was trying to incite Mexico to make war on the United States, the U.S. declared war on Germany on 6April 1917.
Trained American forces would not begin arriving at the front in large numbers until mid-1918, but ultimately the American Expeditionary Force would reach some two million troops.
Though Serbia was defeated in 1915, and Romania joined the Allied Powers in 1916 only to be defeated in 1917, none of the great powers were knocked out of the war until 1918.
The 1917 February Revolution in Russia replaced the Tsarist autocracy with the Provisional Government, but continuing discontent with the cost of the war led to the October Revolution, the creation of the Soviet Socialist Republic, and the signing of the Treaty of Brest-Litovsk by the new government in March 1918, ending Russia's involvement in the war.
This allowed the transfer of large numbers of German troops from the East to the Western Front, resulting in the German March 1918 Offensive.
This offensive was initially successful, but failed to score a decisive victory and exhausted the last of the German reserves.
The Allies rallied and drove the Germans back in their Hundred Days Offensive, a continual series of attacks to which the Germans had no reply.
Bulgaria was the first Central Power to sign an armistice-the Armistice of Salonica on 29 September 1918.
On 30 October, the Ottoman Empire capitulated, signing the Armistice of Mudros.
Ultimately, as a result of the war the Austro-Hungarian, German, Ottoman, and Russian Empires ceased to exist, with numerous new states created from their remains.
However, despite the conclusive Allied victory (and the creation of the League of Nations during the Peace Conference, intended to prevent future wars), a second world war would follow just over twenty years later.
Names
The term "First World War" was first used in September 1914 by German biologist and philosopher Ernst Haeckel, who claimed that "there is no doubt that the course and character of the feared 'European War' ... will become the first world war in the full sense of the word," citing a wire service report in The Indianapolis Star on 20 September 1914.
Prior to World War II, the events of 1914-1918 were generally known as the Great War or simply the World War.
In October 1914, the Canadian magazine Maclean's wrote, "Some wars name themselves.
This is the Great War."
Contemporary Europeans also referred to it as "the war to end war" or "the war to end all wars" due to their perception of its then-unparalleled scale and devastation.
After World WarII began in 1939, the terms became more standard, with British Empire historians, including Canadians, favouring "The First World War" and Americans "World WarI".
Background
Political and military alliances
For much of the 19th century, the major European powers had tried to maintain a tenuous balance of power among themselves, resulting in a complex network of political and military alliances.
The biggest challenges to this were Britain's withdrawal into so-called splendid isolation, the decline of the Ottoman Empire and the post-1848 rise of Prussia under Otto von Bismarck.
Victory in the 1866 Austro-Prussian War established Prussian hegemony in Germany, while victory over France in the 1870-1871 Franco-Prussian War unified the German states into a German Reich under Prussian leadership.
In 1873, to isolate France and avoid a war on two fronts, Bismarck negotiated the League of the Three Emperors (German: Dreikaiserbund) between Austria-Hungary, Russia and Germany.
Concerned by Russia's victory in the 1877-1878 Russo-Turkish War and their influence in the Balkans, the League was dissolved in 1878, with Germany and Austria-Hungary subsequently forming the 1879 Dual Alliance; this became the Triple Alliance when Italy joined in 1882.
The practical details of these alliances were limited, since their primary purpose was to ensure cooperation between the three Imperial Powers and isolate France.
Attempts by Britain in 1880 to resolve colonial tensions with Russia and diplomatic moves by France led to Bismarck reforming the League in 1881.
When the League finally lapsed in 1887, it was replaced by the Reinsurance Treaty, a secret agreement between Germany and Russia to remain neutral if either were attacked by France or Austria-Hungary.
In 1890, the new German Emperor, Kaiser Wilhelm II, forced Bismarck to retire and was persuaded not to renew the Reinsurance Treaty by the new Chancellor, Leo von Caprivi.
This allowed France to counteract the Triple Alliance with the Franco-Russian Alliance of 1894 and the 1904 Entente Cordiale with Britain, while in 1907 Britain and Russia signed the Anglo-Russian Convention.
The agreements did not constitute formal alliances, but by settling long-standing colonial disputes, they made British entry into any future conflict involving France or Russia a possibility; these interlocking bilateral agreements became known as the Triple Entente.
Arms race
The creation of the German Reich following victory in the 1871 Franco-Prussian War led to a massive increase in Germany's economic and industrial strength.
Admiral Alfred von Tirpitz and Wilhelm II, who became Emperor in 1890, sought to use that to create a Kaiserliche Marine or Imperial German Navy to compete with Britain's Royal Navy for world naval supremacy.
However, it was also driven by Wilhelm's admiration of the Royal Navy and desire to outdo it.
This resulted in the Anglo-German naval arms race but the launch of in 1906 gave the Royal Navy a technological advantage over its German rival, which they never lost.
Ultimately, the race diverted huge resources to creating a German navy large enough to antagonise Britain, but not defeat it.
In 1911, Chancellor Theobald von Bethmann-Hollweg acknowledged defeat, leading to the Rüstungswende or ‘armaments turning point', when Germany switched expenditure from the navy to the army.
This was driven by Russia's recovery from the 1905 Revolution, specifically increased investment post 1908 in railways and infrastructure in its western border regions.
Germany and Austria-Hungary relied on faster mobilisation to compensate for fewer numbers; it was concern at the closing of this gap that led to the end of the naval race, rather than a reduction in tension elsewhere.
When Germany expanded its standing army by 170,000 men in 1913, France extended compulsory military service from two to three years; similar measures taken by the Balkan powers and Italy led to increased expenditure by the Ottomans and Austria-Hungary.
Absolute figures are hard to calculate, due to differences in categorising expenditure, while they often omit civilian infrastructure projects with a military use, such as railways.
However, from 1908 to 1913, defence spending by the six major European powers increased by over 50% in real terms.
Conflicts in the Balkans
In October 1908, Austria-Hungary precipitated the Bosnian crisis of 1908-1909 by officially annexing the former Ottoman territory of Bosnia and Herzegovina, which it had occupied since 1878.
This angered the Kingdom of Serbia and its patron, the Pan-Slavic and Orthodox Russian Empire.
Russian political manoeuvring in the region destabilised peace accords that were already fracturing in the Balkans, which came to be known as the "powder keg of Europe".
In 1912 and 1913, the First Balkan War was fought between the Balkan League and the fracturing Ottoman Empire.
The resulting Treaty of London further shrank the Ottoman Empire, creating an independent Albanian state while enlarging the territorial holdings of Bulgaria, Serbia, Montenegro, and Greece.
When Bulgaria attacked Serbia and Greece on 16 June 1913, it sparked the 33-day Second Balkan War, by the end of which it lost most of Macedonia to Serbia and Greece, and Southern Dobruja to Romania, further destabilising the region.
The Great Powers were able to keep these Balkan conflicts contained, but the next one would spread throughout Europe and beyond.
Prelude
Sarajevo assassination
On 28 June 1914, Archduke Franz Ferdinand, heir presumptive to the Austro-Hungarian Empire, visited the Bosnian capital, Sarajevo.
A group of six assassins (Cvjetko Popović, Gavrilo Princip, Muhamed Mehmedbašić, Nedeljko Čabrinović, Trifko Grabež, and Vaso Čubrilović) from the Yugoslavist group Mlada Bosna, supplied with arms by the Serbian Black Hand, gathered on the street where the Archduke's motorcade was to pass, with the intention of assassinating him.
The political objective of the assassination was to break off Austria-Hungary's South Slav provinces, which Austria-Hungary had annexed from the Ottoman Empire, so they could be combined into a Yugoslavia.
Čabrinović threw a grenade at the car, but missed.
Some nearby were injured by the blast, but Ferdinand's convoy carried on.
The other assassins failed to act as the cars drove past them.
About an hour later, when Ferdinand was returning from a visit at the Sarajevo Hospital with those wounded in the assassination attempt, the convoy took a wrong turn into a street where, by coincidence, Princip stood.
With a pistol, Princip shot and killed Ferdinand and his wife Sophie.
Although they were reportedly not personally close, the Emperor Franz Joseph was profoundly shocked and upset.
The reaction among the people in Austria, however, was mild, almost indifferent.
As historian Zbyněk Zeman later wrote, "the event almost failed to make any impression whatsoever.
On Sunday and Monday (28 and 29 June), the crowds in Vienna listened to music and drank wine, as if nothing had happened."
Nevertheless, the political effect of the murder of the heir to the throne was significant, and was described by historian Christopher Clark on the BBC Radio4 series Month of Madness as a "9/11 effect, a terrorist event charged with historic meaning, transforming the political chemistry in Vienna."
Expansion of violence in Bosnia and Herzegovina
The Austro-Hungarian authorities encouraged the subsequent anti-Serb riots in Sarajevo, in which Bosnian Croats and Bosniaks killed two Bosnian Serbs and damaged numerous Serb-owned buildings.
Violent actions against ethnic Serbs were also organised outside Sarajevo, in other cities in Austro-Hungarian-controlled Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia and Slovenia.
Austro-Hungarian authorities in Bosnia and Herzegovina imprisoned and extradited approximately 5,500 prominent Serbs, 700 to 2,200 of whom died in prison.
A further 460 Serbs were sentenced to death.
A predominantly Bosniak special militia known as the Schutzkorps was established and carried out the persecution of Serbs.
July Crisis
The assassination led to a month of diplomatic manoeuvring between Austria-Hungary, Germany, Russia, France and Britain, called the July Crisis.
Austria-Hungary correctly believed that Serbian officials (especially the officers of the Black Hand) were involved in the plot to murder the Archduke, and wanted to finally end Serbian interference in Bosnia.
On 23July, Austria-Hungary delivered to Serbia the July Ultimatum, a series of ten demands that were made intentionally unacceptable, in an effort to provoke a war with Serbia.
Serbia decreed general mobilisation on 25July.
Serbia accepted all the terms of the ultimatum except for article six, which demanded that Austrian delegates be allowed in Serbia for the purpose of participation in the investigation into the assassination.
Following this, Austria broke off diplomatic relations with Serbia and, the next day, ordered a partial mobilisation.
Finally, on 28 July 1914, a month after the assassination, Austria-Hungary declared war on Serbia.
On 25July, Russia, in support of Serbia, declared partial mobilisation against Austria-Hungary.
On 30July, Russia ordered general mobilisation.
German Chancellor Bethmann-Hollweg waited until the 31st for an appropriate response, when Germany declared Erklärung des Kriegszustandes, or "Statement on the war status".
Kaiser Wilhelm II asked his cousin, Tsar Nicolas II, to suspend the Russian general mobilisation.
When he refused, Germany issued an ultimatum demanding its mobilisation be stopped, and a commitment not to support Serbia.
Another was sent to France, asking her not to support Russia if it were to come to the defence of Serbia.
On 1August, after the Russian response, Germany mobilised and declared war on Russia.
This also led to the general mobilisation in Austria-Hungary on 4August.
The German government issued demands to France that it remain neutral as they had to decide which deployment plan to implement, it being extremely difficult to change the deployment whilst it was underway.
The modified German Schlieffen Plan, Aufmarsch II West, would deploy 80% of the army in the west, while Aufmarsch I Ost and Aufmarsch II Ost would deploy 60% in the west and 40% in the east.
The French did not respond, but sent a mixed message by ordering their troops to withdraw from the border to avoid any incidents, and at the same time ordered the mobilisation of their reserves.
Germany responded by mobilising its own reserves and implementing Aufmarsch II West.
On 1 August, Wilhelm ordered General Helmuth von Moltke the Younger to "march the whole of the... army to the East" after being wrongly informed that the British would remain neutral if France was not attacked.
Moltke told the Kaiser that attempting to redeploy a million men was unthinkable, and that making it possible for the French to attack the Germans "in the rear" would prove disastrous.
Yet Wilhelm insisted that the German army should not march into Luxembourg until he received a telegram sent by his cousin George V, who made it clear that there had been a misunderstanding.
Eventually the Kaiser told Moltke, "Now you can do what you want."
On 2 August, Germany occupied Luxembourg, and on 3August declared war on France; on the same day, they sent the Belgian government an ultimatum demanding unimpeded right of way through any part of Belgium, which was refused.
Early on the morning of 4August, the Germans invaded; King Albert ordered his military to resist and called for assistance under the 1839 Treaty of London.
Britain demanded Germany comply with the Treaty and respect Belgian neutrality; it declared war on Germany at 19:00 UTC on 4August 1914 (effective from 23:00), following an "unsatisfactory reply".
Progress of the war
Opening hostilities
Confusion among the Central Powers
The strategy of the Central Powers suffered from miscommunication.
Germany had promised to support Austria-Hungary's invasion of Serbia, but interpretations of what this meant differed.
Previously tested deployment plans had been replaced early in 1914, but those had never been tested in exercises.
Austro-Hungarian leaders believed Germany would cover its northern flank against Russia.
Germany, however, envisioned Austria-Hungary directing most of its troops against Russia, while Germany dealt with France.
This confusion forced the Austro-Hungarian Army to divide its forces between the Russian and Serbian fronts.
Serbian campaign
Austria invaded and fought the Serbian army at the Battle of Cer and Battle of Kolubara beginning on 12 August.
Over the next two weeks, Austrian attacks were thrown back with heavy losses, which marked the first major Allied victories of the war and dashed Austro-Hungarian hopes of a swift victory.
As a result, Austria had to keep sizeable forces on the Serbian front, weakening its efforts against Russia.
Serbia's defeat of the Austro-Hungarian invasion of 1914 has been called one of the major upset victories of the twentieth century.
The campaign saw the very first use of medical evacuation by the Serbian army in autumn of 1915 and anti-aircraft warfare in the spring of 1915 after an Austrian plane was shot down with ground-to-air fire.
German Offensive in Belgium and France
When the war began, the German Order of Battle placed 80% of the army in the West, with the remainder acting as a screening force in the East.
The plan was to quickly knock France out of the war, then redeploy to the East and do the same to Russia.
The German offensive in the West was officially titled Aufmarsch II West, but is better known as the Schlieffen Plan, after its original creator.
Schlieffen deliberately kept the German left (i.e. its positions in Alsace-Lorraine) weak to lure the French into attacking there, while the majority were allocated to the German right, so as to sweep through Belgium, encircle Paris and trap the French armies against the Swiss border (the French charged into Alsace-Lorraine on the outbreak of war as envisaged by their Plan XVII, thus actually aiding this strategy).
However, Schlieffen's successor Moltke grew concerned that the French might push too hard on his left flank.
As such, as the German Army increased in size in the years leading up to the war, he changed the allocation of forces between the German right and left wings from 85:15 to 70:30.
Ultimately, Moltke's changes meant insufficient forces to achieve decisive success and thus unrealistic goals and timings.
The initial German advance in the West was very successful: by the end of August the Allied left, which included the British Expeditionary Force (BEF), was in full retreat; French casualties in the first month exceeded 260,000, including 27,000 killed on 22 August during the Battle of the Frontiers.
German planning provided broad strategic instructions, while allowing army commanders considerable freedom in carrying them out at the front; this worked well in 1866 and 1870 but in 1914, von Kluck used this freedom to disobey orders, opening a gap between the German armies as they closed on Paris.
The French and British exploited this gap to halt the German advance east of Paris at the First Battle of the Marne from 5to 12 September and push the German forces back some .
In 1911, the Russian Stavka had agreed with the French to attack Germany within 15 days of mobilisation; this was unrealistic and the two Russian armies that entered East Prussia on 17 August did so without many of their support elements.
The Russian Second Army was effectively destroyed at the Battle of Tannenberg on 26-30 August but the Russian advance caused the Germans to re-route their 8th Field Army from France to East Prussia, a factor in Allied victory on the Marne.
By the end of 1914, German troops held strong defensive positions inside France, controlled the bulk of France's domestic coalfields and had inflicted 230,000 more casualties than it lost itself.
However, communications problems and questionable command decisions cost Germany the chance of a decisive outcome while it had failed to achieve the primary objective of avoiding a long, two-front war.
This amounted to a strategic defeat; shortly after the Marne, Crown Prince Wilhelm told an American reporter; "We have lost the war.
It will go on for a long time but lost it is already."
Asia and the Pacific
New Zealand occupied German Samoa (later Western Samoa) on 30 August 1914.
On 11 September, the Australian Naval and Military Expeditionary Force landed on the island of Neu Pommern (later New Britain), which formed part of German New Guinea.
On 28 October, the German cruiser sank the Russian cruiser Zhemchug in the Battle of Penang.
Japan seized Germany's Micronesian colonies and, after the Siege of Tsingtao, the German coaling port of Qingdao on the Chinese Shandong peninsula.
As Vienna refused to withdraw the Austro-Hungarian cruiser from Tsingtao, Japan declared war not only on Germany, but also on Austria-Hungary; the ship participated in the defence of Tsingtao where it was sunk in November 1914.
Within a few months, the Allied forces had seized all the German territories in the Pacific; only isolated commerce raiders and a few holdouts in New Guinea remained.
African campaigns
Some of the first clashes of the war involved British, French, and German colonial forces in Africa.
On 6-7 August, French and British troops invaded the German protectorate of Togoland and Kamerun.
On 10 August, German forces in South-West Africa attacked South Africa; sporadic and fierce fighting continued for the rest of the war.
The German colonial forces in German East Africa, led by Colonel Paul von Lettow-Vorbeck, fought a guerrilla warfare campaign during World WarI and only surrendered two weeks after the armistice took effect in Europe.
Indian support for the Allies
Germany attempted to use Indian nationalism and pan-Islamism to its advantage, instigating uprisings in India, and sending a mission that urged Afghanistan to join the war on the side of Central Powers.
However, contrary to British fears of a revolt in India, the outbreak of the war saw an unprecedented outpouring of loyalty and goodwill towards Britain.
Indian political leaders from the Indian National Congress and other groups were eager to support the British war effort, since they believed that strong support for the war effort would further the cause of Indian Home Rule.
The Indian Army in fact outnumbered the British Army at the beginning of the war; about 1.3 million Indian soldiers and labourers served in Europe, Africa, and the Middle East, while the central government and the princely states sent large supplies of food, money, and ammunition.
In all, 140,000 men served on the Western Front and nearly 700,000 in the Middle East.
Casualties of Indian soldiers totalled 47,746 killed and 65,126 wounded during World WarI.
The suffering engendered by the war, as well as the failure of the British government to grant self-government to India after the end of hostilities, bred disillusionment and fuelled the campaign for full independence that would be led by Mohandas K. Gandhi and others.
Western Front
Trench warfare begins
Military tactics developed before World War I failed to keep pace with advances in technology and had become obsolete.
These advances had allowed the creation of strong defensive systems, which out-of-date military tactics could not break through for most of the war.
Barbed wire was a significant hindrance to massed infantry advances, while artillery, vastly more lethal than in the 1870s, coupled with machine guns, made crossing open ground extremely difficult.
Commanders on both sides failed to develop tactics for breaching entrenched positions without heavy casualties.
In time, however, technology began to produce new offensive weapons, such as gas warfare and the tank.
After the First Battle of the Marne (5-12 September 1914), Allied and German forces unsuccessfully tried to outflank each other, a series of manoeuvres later known as the "Race to the Sea".
By the end of 1914, the opposing forces were left confronting each other along an uninterrupted line of entrenched positions from Alsace to Belgium's North Sea coast.
Tanks were developed by Britain and France and were first used in combat by the British during the Battle of Flers-Courcelette on 15 September 1916, with only partial success.
However, their effectiveness would grow as the war progressed; the Allies built tanks in large numbers, whilst the Germans employed only a few of their own design, supplemented by captured Allied tanks.
Continuation of trench warfare
Neither side proved able to deliver a decisive blow for the next two years.
Throughout 1915-17, the British Empire and France suffered more casualties than Germany, because of both the strategic and tactical stances chosen by the sides.
Strategically, while the Germans mounted only one major offensive, the Allies made several attempts to break through the German lines.
In February 1916 the Germans attacked French defensive positions at the Battle of Verdun, lasting until December 1916.
The Germans made initial gains, before French counter-attacks returned matters to near their starting point.
Casualties were greater for the French, but the Germans bled heavily as well, with anywhere from 700,000 to 975,000 casualties suffered between the two combatants.
Verdun became a symbol of French determination and self-sacrifice.
The Battle of the Somme was an Anglo-French offensive of July to November 1916.
The opening day of the offensive (1 July 1916) was the bloodiest day in the history of the British Army, suffering 57,470 casualties, including 19,240 dead.
The entire Somme offensive cost the British Army some 420,000 casualties.
The French suffered another estimated 200,000 casualties and the Germans an estimated 500,000.
Gun fire was not the only factor taking lives; the diseases that emerged in the trenches were a major killer on both sides.
The living conditions made it so that countless diseases and infections occurred, such as trench foot, shell shock, blindness/burns from mustard gas, lice, trench fever, cooties (body lice) and the 'Spanish Flu'.
To maintain morale, wartime censors minimised early reports of widespread influenza illness and mortality in Germany, the United Kingdom, France, and the United States.
Papers were free to report the epidemic's effects in neutral Spain (such as the grave illness of King Alfonso XIII).
This created a false impression of Spain as especially hard hit, thereby giving rise to the pandemic's nickname, "Spanish Flu".
Protracted action at Verdun throughout 1916, combined with the bloodletting at the Somme, brought the exhausted French army to the brink of collapse.
Futile attempts using frontal assault came at a high price for both the British and the French and led to the widespread French Army Mutinies, after the failure of the costly Nivelle Offensive of April-May 1917.
The concurrent British Battle of Arras was more limited in scope, and more successful, although ultimately of little strategic value.
A smaller part of the Arras offensive, the capture of Vimy Ridge by the Canadian Corps, became highly significant to that country: the idea that Canada's national identity was born out of the battle is an opinion widely held in military and general histories of Canada.
The last large-scale offensive of this period was a British attack (with French support) at Passchendaele (July-November 1917).
This offensive opened with great promise for the Allies, before bogging down in the October mud.
Casualties, though disputed, were roughly equal, at some 200,000-400,000 per side.
The years of trench warfare on the Western front achieved no major exchanges of territory and, as a result, are often thought of as static and unchanging.
However, throughout this period, British, French, and German tactics constantly evolved to meet new battlefield challenges.
Naval war
At the start of the war, the German Empire had cruisers scattered across the globe, some of which were subsequently used to attack Allied merchant shipping.
The British Royal Navy systematically hunted them down, though not without some embarrassment from its inability to protect Allied shipping.
Before the beginning of the war, it was widely understood that Britain held the position of strongest, most influential navy in the world.
The widespread use of chemical warfare was a distinguishing feature of the conflict.
Gases used included chlorine, mustard gas and phosgene.
Relatively few war casualties were caused by gas, as effective countermeasures to gas attacks were quickly created, such as gas masks.
The use of chemical warfare and small-scale strategic bombing (as opposed to tactical bombing) were both outlawed by the Hague Conventions of 1899 and 1907, and both proved to be of limited effectiveness, though they captured the public imagination.
The most powerful land-based weapons were railway guns, weighing dozens of tons apiece.
The German version were nicknamed Big Berthas, even though the namesake was not a railway gun.
Germany developed the Paris Gun, able to bombard Paris from over , though shells were relatively light at 94 kilograms (210 lb).
Trenches, machine guns, air reconnaissance, barbed wire, and modern artillery with fragmentation shells helped bring the battle lines of World WarI to a stalemate.
The British and the French sought a solution with the creation of the tank and mechanised warfare.
The British first tanks were used during the Battle of the Somme on 15 September 1916.
Mechanical reliability was an issue, but the experiment proved its worth.
Within a year, the British were fielding tanks by the hundreds, and they showed their potential during the Battle of Cambrai in November 1917, by breaking the Hindenburg Line, while combined arms teams captured 8,000 enemy soldiers and 100 guns.
Meanwhile, the French introduced the first tanks with a rotating turret, the Renault FT, which became a decisive tool of the victory.
The conflict also saw the introduction of light automatic weapons and submachine guns, such as the Lewis Gun, the Browning Automatic Rifle, and the Bergmann MP18.
Another new weapon, the flamethrower, was first used by the German army and later adopted by other forces.
Although not of high tactical value, the flamethrower was a powerful, demoralising weapon that caused terror on the battlefield.
Trench railways evolved to supply the enormous quantities of food, water, and ammunition required to support large numbers of soldiers in areas where conventional transportation systems had been destroyed.
Internal combustion engines and improved traction systems for automobiles and trucks/lorries eventually rendered trench railways obsolete.
Areas taken in major attacks
On the Western Front neither side made impressive gains in the first three years of the war with attacks at Verdun, the Somme, Passchendaele, and Cambrai the exception was Nivelle's Offensive in which the German defence gave ground while mauling the attackers so badly that there were mutinies in the French Army.
In 1918 the Germans smashed through the defence lines in three great attacks: Michael, on the Lys, and on the Aisne, which displayed the power of their new tactics.
The Allies struck back at Soissons, which showed the Germans that they must return to the defensive, and at Amiens; tanks played a prominent role in both these assaults, as they had the year before at Cambrai.
The areas in the East were larger.
The Germans did well at the First Masurian Lakes driving the invaders from East Prussia, and at Riga, which led the Russians to sue for peace.
The Austro-Hungarians and Germans joined for a great success at Gorlice-Tarnów, which drove the Russians out of Poland.
In a series of attacks along with the Bulgarians they occupied Serbia, Albania, Montenegro and most of Romania.
The Allies successes came later in Palestine, the beginning of the end for the Ottomans, in Macedonia, which drove the Bulgarians out of the war, and at Vittorio Veneto, the final blow for the Austro-Hungarians.
The area occupied in East by the Central powers on 11 November 1918 was .
Naval
Germany deployed U-boats (submarines) after the war began.
Alternating between restricted and unrestricted submarine warfare in the Atlantic, the Kaiserliche Marine employed them to deprive the British Isles of vital supplies.
The deaths of British merchant sailors and the seeming invulnerability of U-boats led to the development of depth charges (1916), hydrophones (passive sonar, 1917), blimps, hunter-killer submarines (HMS R-1, 1917), forward-throwing anti-submarine weapons, and dipping hydrophones (the latter two both abandoned in 1918).
Aviation
Fixed-wing aircraft were first used militarily by the Italians in Libya on 23 October 1911 during the Italo-Turkish War for reconnaissance, soon followed by the dropping of grenades and aerial photography the next year.
By 1914, their military utility was obvious.
They were initially used for reconnaissance and ground attack.
To shoot down enemy planes, anti-aircraft guns and fighter aircraft were developed.
Strategic bombers were created, principally by the Germans and British, though the former used Zeppelins as well.
Towards the end of the conflict, aircraft carriers were used for the first time, with HMS Furious launching Sopwith Camels in a raid to destroy the Zeppelin hangars at Tondern in 1918.
Manned observation balloons, floating high above the trenches, were used as stationary reconnaissance platforms, reporting enemy movements and directing artillery.
Balloons commonly had a crew of two, equipped with parachutes, so that if there was an enemy air attack the crew could parachute to safety.
At the time, parachutes were too heavy to be used by pilots of aircraft (with their marginal power output), and smaller versions were not developed until the end of the war; they were also opposed by the British leadership, who feared they might promote cowardice.
Recognised for their value as observation platforms, balloons were important targets for enemy aircraft.
To defend them against air attack, they were heavily protected by antiaircraft guns and patrolled by friendly aircraft; to attack them, unusual weapons such as air-to-air rockets were tried.
Thus, the reconnaissance value of blimps and balloons contributed to the development of air-to-air combat between all types of aircraft, and to the trench stalemate, because it was impossible to move large numbers of troops undetected.
The Germans conducted air raids on England during 1915 and 1916 with airships, hoping to damage British morale and cause aircraft to be diverted from the front lines, and indeed the resulting panic led to the diversion of several squadrons of fighters from France.
On 24 September, Baralong destroyed U-41, which was in the process of sinking the cargo ship Urbino.
According to Karl Goetz, the submarine's commander, Baralong continued to fly the US flag after firing on U-41 and then rammed the lifeboat-carrying the German survivors-sinking it.
Torpedoing of HMHS Llandovery Castle
The Canadian hospital ship was torpedoed by the German submarine SM U-86 on 27 June 1918 in violation of international law.
Only 24 of the 258 medical personnel, patients, and crew survived.
Survivors reported that the U-boat surfaced and ran down the lifeboats, machine-gunning survivors in the water.
The U-boat captain, Helmut Patzig, was charged with war crimes in Germany following the war, but escaped prosecution by going to the Free City of Danzig, beyond the jurisdiction of German courts.
Blockade of Germany
After the war, the German government claimed that approximately 763,000 German civilians died from starvation and disease during the war because of the Allied blockade.
An academic study done in 1928 put the death toll at 424,000.
Germany protested that the Allies had used starvation as a weapon of war.
Sally Marks argued that the German accounts of a hunger blockade are a "myth," as Germany did not face the starvation level of Belgium and the regions of Poland and northern France that it occupied.
According to the British judge and legal philosopher Patrick Devlin, "The War Orders given by the Admiralty on 26 August 1914 were clear enough.
All food consigned to Germany through neutral ports was to be captured and all food consigned to Rotterdam was to be presumed consigned to Germany. ...
The British were determined on the starvation policy, whether or not it was lawful."
Chemical weapons in warfare
The German army was the first to successfully deploy chemical weapons during the Second Battle of Ypres (22 April - 25 May 1915), after German scientists working under the direction of Fritz Haber at the Kaiser Wilhelm Institute developed a method to weaponize chlorine.
The use of chemical weapons was sanctioned by the German High Command in an effort to force Allied soldiers out of their entrenched positions, complementing rather than supplanting more lethal conventional weapons.
The use of chemical weapons in warfare was in direct violation of the 1899 Hague Declaration Concerning Asphyxiating Gases and the 1907 Hague Convention on Land Warfare, which prohibited their use.
The effect of poison gas was not limited to combatants.
Civilians were at risk from the gases as winds blew the poison gases through their towns, and they rarely received warnings or alerts of potential danger.
In addition to absent warning systems, civilians often did not have access to effective gas masks.
An estimated 100,000-260,000 civilian casualties were caused by chemical weapons during the conflict and tens of thousands more (along with military personnel) died from scarring of the lungs, skin damage, and cerebral damage in the years after the conflict ended.
Many commanders on both sides knew such weapons would cause major harm to civilians but nonetheless continued to use them.
British Field Marshal Sir Douglas Haig wrote in his diary, "My officers and I were aware that such weapons would cause harm to women and children living in nearby towns, as strong winds were common in the battlefront.
However, because the weapon was to be directed against the enemy, none of us were overly concerned at all."
The war damaged chemistry's prestige in European societies, in particular the German variety.
Genocide and ethnic cleansing
Ottoman Empire
The ethnic cleansing of the Ottoman Empire's Armenian population, including mass deportations and executions, during the final years of the Ottoman Empire is considered genocide.
The Ottomans carried out organised and systematic massacres of the Armenian population at the beginning of the war and portrayed deliberately provoked acts of Armenian resistance as rebellions to justify further extermination.
In early 1915, a number of Armenians volunteered to join the Russian forces and the Ottoman government used this as a pretext to issue the Tehcir Law (Law on Deportation), which authorised the deportation of Armenians from the Empire's eastern provinces to Syria between 1915 and 1918.
The Armenians were intentionally marched to death and a number were attacked by Ottoman brigands.
While an exact number of deaths is unknown, the International Association of Genocide Scholars estimates 1.5 million.
The government of Turkey has consistently denied the genocide, arguing that those who died were victims of inter-ethnic fighting, famine, or disease during World WarI; these claims are rejected by most historians.
Other ethnic groups were similarly attacked by the Ottoman Empire during this period, including Assyrians and Greeks, and some scholars consider those events to be part of the same policy of extermination.
At least 250,000 Assyrian Christians, about half of the population, and 350,000-750,000 Anatolian and Pontic Greeks were killed between 1915 and 1922.
Russian Empire
Many pogroms accompanied the Russian Revolution of 1917 and the ensuing Russian Civil War.
60,000-200,000 civilian Jews were killed in the atrocities throughout the former Russian Empire (mostly within the Pale of Settlement in present-day Ukraine).
There were an estimated 7-12 million casualties during the Russian Civil War, mostly civilians.
Rape of Belgium
The German invaders treated any resistance-such as sabotaging rail lines-as illegal and immoral, and shot the offenders and burned buildings in retaliation.
In addition, they tended to suspect that most civilians were potential francs-tireurs (guerrillas) and, accordingly, took and sometimes killed hostages from among the civilian population.
The German army executed over 6,500 French and Belgian civilians between August and November 1914, usually in near-random large-scale shootings of civilians ordered by junior German officers.
The German Army destroyed 15,000-20,000 buildings-most famously the university library at Louvain-and generated a wave of refugees of over a million people.
Over half the German regiments in Belgium were involved in major incidents.
Thousands of workers were shipped to Germany to work in factories.
British propaganda dramatising the Rape of Belgium attracted much attention in the United States, while Berlin said it was both lawful and necessary because of the threat of franc-tireurs like those in France in 1870.
The British and French magnified the reports and disseminated them at home and in the United States, where they played a major role in dissolving support for Germany.
Soldiers' experiences
The British soldiers of the war were initially volunteers but increasingly were conscripted into service.
Surviving veterans, returning home, often found they could discuss their experiences only amongst themselves.
Grouping together, they formed "veterans' associations" or "Legions".
A small number of personal accounts of American veterans have been collected by the Library of Congress Veterans History Project.
Prisoners of war
About eight million men surrendered and were held in POW camps during the war.
All nations pledged to follow the Hague Conventions on fair treatment of prisoners of war, and the survival rate for POWs was generally much higher than that of combatants at the front.
Individual surrenders were uncommon; large units usually surrendered en masse.
At the siege of Maubeuge about 40,000 French soldiers surrendered, at the battle of Galicia Russians took about 100,000 to 120,000 Austrian captives, at the Brusilov Offensive about 325,000 to 417,000 Germans and Austrians surrendered to Russians, and at the Battle of Tannenberg 92,000 Russians surrendered.
When the besieged garrison of Kaunas surrendered in 1915, some 20,000 Russians became prisoners, at the battle near Przasnysz (February-March 1915)
14,000 Germans surrendered to Russians, and at the First Battle of the Marne about 12,000 Germans surrendered to the Allies. 25-31% of Russian losses (as a proportion of those captured, wounded, or killed) were to prisoner status; for Austria-Hungary 32%, for Italy 26%, for France 12%, for Germany 9%; for Britain 7%.
Prisoners from the Allied armies totalled about 1.4 million (not including Russia, which lost 2.5-3.5 million men as prisoners).
From the Central Powers about 3.3 million men became prisoners; most of them surrendered to Russians.
Germany held 2.5 million prisoners; Russia held 2.2-2.9 million; while Britain and France held about 720,000.
Most were captured just before the Armistice.
The United States held 48,000.
The most dangerous moment was the act of surrender, when helpless soldiers were sometimes gunned down.
Once prisoners reached a camp, conditions were, in general, satisfactory (and much better than in World WarII), thanks in part to the efforts of the International Red Cross and inspections by neutral nations.
However, conditions were terrible in Russia: starvation was common for prisoners and civilians alike; about 15-20% of the prisoners in Russia died, and in Central Powers imprisonment 8% of Russians.
In Germany, food was scarce, but only 5% died.
The Ottoman Empire often treated POWs poorly.
Some 11,800 British Empire soldiers, most of them Indians, became prisoners after the Siege of Kut in Mesopotamia in April 1916; 4,250 died in captivity.
Although many were in a poor condition when captured, Ottoman officers forced them to march to Anatolia.
A survivor said: "We were driven along like beasts; to drop out was to die."
The survivors were then forced to build a railway through the Taurus Mountains.
In Russia, when the prisoners from the Czech Legion of the Austro-Hungarian army were released in 1917, they re-armed themselves and briefly became a military and diplomatic force during the Russian Civil War.
While the Allied prisoners of the Central Powers were quickly sent home at the end of active hostilities, the same treatment was not granted to Central Power prisoners of the Allies and Russia, many of whom served as forced labour, e.g., in France until 1920.
They were released only after many approaches by the Red Cross to the Allied Supreme Council.
German prisoners were still being held in Russia as late as 1924.
Military attachés and war correspondents
Military and civilian observers from every major power closely followed the course of the war.
Many were able to report on events from a perspective somewhat akin to modern "embedded" positions within the opposing land and naval forces.
Support for the war
In the Balkans, Yugoslav nationalists such as the leader, Ante Trumbić, strongly supported the war, desiring the freedom of Yugoslavs from Austria-Hungary and other foreign powers and the creation of an independent Yugoslavia.
The Yugoslav Committee, led by Trumbić, was formed in Paris on 30 April 1915 but shortly moved its office to London.
In April 1918, the Rome Congress of Oppressed Nationalities met, including Czechoslovak, Italian, Polish, Transylvanian, and Yugoslav representatives who urged the Allies to support national self-determination for the peoples residing within Austria-Hungary.
Von Syburg, the German envoy in Addis Ababa, said, "now the time has come for Ethiopia to regain the coast of the Red Sea driving the Italians home, to restore the Empire to its ancient size."
The Ethiopian Empire was on the verge of entering World WarI on the side of the Central Powers before Iyasu's overthrow due to Allied pressure on the Ethiopian aristocracy.
Iyasu was accused of converting to Islam.
According to Ethiopian historian Bahru Zewde, the evidence used to prove Iyasu's conversion was a doctored photo of Iyasu wearing a turban provided by the Allies.
Some historians claim the British spy T. E. Lawrence forged the Iyasu photo.
A number of socialist parties initially supported the war when it began in August 1914.
But European socialists split on national lines, with the concept of class conflict held by radical socialists such as Marxists and syndicalists being overborne by their patriotic support for the war.
Once the war began, Austrian, British, French, German, and Russian socialists followed the rising nationalist current by supporting their countries' intervention in the war.
Italian nationalism was stirred by the outbreak of the war and was initially strongly supported by a variety of political factions.
One of the most prominent and popular Italian nationalist supporters of the war was Gabriele d'Annunzio, who promoted Italian irredentism and helped sway the Italian public to support intervention in the war.
The Italian Liberal Party, under the leadership of Paolo Boselli, promoted intervention in the war on the side of the Allies and used the Dante Alighieri Society to promote Italian nationalism.
Italian socialists were divided on whether to support the war or oppose it; some were militant supporters of the war, including Benito Mussolini and Leonida Bissolati.
However, the Italian Socialist Party decided to oppose the war after anti-militarist protestors were killed, resulting in a general strike called Red Week.
The Italian Socialist Party purged itself of pro-war nationalist members, including Mussolini.
Opposition to the war
Once war was declared, many socialists and trade unions backed their governments.
Among the exceptions were the Bolsheviks, the Socialist Party of America, the Italian Socialist Party, and people like Karl Liebknecht, Rosa Luxemburg, and their followers in Germany.
Benedict XV, elected to the papacy less than three months into World WarI, made the war and its consequences the main focus of his early pontificate.
In stark contrast to his predecessor, five days after his election he spoke of his determination to do what he could to bring peace.
His first encyclical, Ad beatissimi Apostolorum, given 1November 1914, was concerned with this subject.
Benedict XV found his abilities and unique position as a religious emissary of peace ignored by the belligerent powers.
The 1915 Treaty of London between Italy and the Triple Entente included secret provisions whereby the Allies agreed with Italy to ignore papal peace moves towards the Central Powers.
Consequently, the publication of Benedict's proposed seven-point Peace Note of August 1917 was roundly ignored by all parties except Austria-Hungary.
In Britain in 1914, the Public Schools Officers' Training Corps annual camp was held at Tidworth Pennings, near Salisbury Plain.
Head of the British Army, Lord Kitchener, was to review the cadets, but the imminence of the war prevented him.
General Horace Smith-Dorrien was sent instead.
He surprised the two-or-three thousand cadets by declaring (in the words of Donald Christopher Smith, a Bermudian cadet who was present),
that war should be avoided at almost any cost, that war would solve nothing, that the whole of Europe and more besides would be reduced to ruin, and that the loss of life would be so large that whole populations would be decimated.
In our ignorance I, and many of us, felt almost ashamed of a British General who uttered such depressing and unpatriotic sentiments, but during the next four years, those of us who survived the holocaust-probably not more than one-quarter of us-learned how right the General's prognosis was and how courageous he had been to utter it.
Voicing these sentiments did not hinder Smith-Dorrien's career, or prevent him from doing his duty in World WarI to the best of his abilities.
Many countries jailed those who spoke out against the conflict.
These included Eugene Debs in the United States and Bertrand Russell in Britain.
In the US, the Espionage Act of 1917 and Sedition Act of 1918 made it a federal crime to oppose military recruitment or make any statements deemed "disloyal".
Publications at all critical of the government were removed from circulation by postal censors, The war began amid the Home Rule crisis in Ireland that had resurfaced in 1912, and by July 1914 there was a serious possibility of an outbreak of civil war in Ireland.
Irish nationalists and Marxists attempted to pursue Irish independence, culminating in the Easter Rising of 1916, with Germany sending 20,000 rifles to Ireland to stir unrest in Britain.
The UK government placed Ireland under martial law in response to the Easter Rising, though once the immediate threat of revolution had dissipated, the authorities did try to make concessions to nationalist feeling.
However, opposition to involvement in the war increased in Ireland, resulting in the Conscription Crisis of 1918.
Other opposition came from conscientious objectors-some socialist, some religious-who refused to fight.
In Britain, 16,000 people asked for conscientious objector status.
Some of them, most notably prominent peace activist Stephen Henry Hobhouse, refused both military and alternative service.
Many suffered years of prison, including solitary confinement and bread and water diets.
Even after the war, in Britain many job advertisements were marked "No conscientious objectors need apply".
The Central Asian Revolt started in the summer of 1916, when the Russian Empire government ended its exemption of Muslims from military service.
In 1917, a series of French Army Mutinies led to dozens of soldiers being executed and many more imprisoned.
On 1-4 May 1917, about 100,000 workers and soldiers of Petrograd, and after them, the workers and soldiers of other Russian cities, led by the Bolsheviks, demonstrated under banners reading "Down with the war!"
and "all power to the soviets!"
The mass demonstrations resulted in a crisis for the Russian Provisional Government.
In Milan, in May 1917, Bolshevik revolutionaries organised and engaged in rioting calling for an end to the war, and managed to close down factories and stop public transportation.
The Italian army was forced to enter Milan with tanks and machine guns to face Bolsheviks and anarchists, who fought violently until 23 May when the army gained control of the city.
Almost 50 people (including three Italian soldiers) were killed and over 800 people arrested.
The Bolsheviks agreed to a peace treaty with Germany, the peace of Brest-Litovsk, despite its harsh conditions.
The German Revolution of 1918-1919 led to the abdication of the Kaiser and German surrender.
Conscription
Conscription was common in most European countries.
However, it was controversial in English-speaking countries.
It was especially unpopular among minority ethnic groups-especially the Irish Catholics in Ireland and Australia, and the French Catholics in Canada.
Canada
In Canada the issue produced a major political crisis that permanently alienated the Francophones.
It opened a political gap between French Canadians, who believed their true loyalty was to Canada and not to the British Empire, and members of the Anglophone majority, who saw the war as a duty to their British heritage.
Australia
Australia had a form of conscription at the outbreak of the war, as compulsory military training had been introduced in 1911.
However, the Defence Act 1903 provided that unexempted males could be called upon only for home defence during times of war, not overseas service.
Prime Minister Billy Hughes wished to amend the legislation to require conscripts to serve overseas, and held two non-binding referendums - one in 1916 and one in 1917 - in order to secure public support.
Both were defeated by narrow margins, with farmers, the labour movement, the Catholic Church, and Irish-Australians combining to campaign for the "No" vote.
The issue of conscription caused the 1916 Australian Labor Party split.
Hughes and his supporters were expelled from the party, forming the National Labor Party and then the Nationalist Party.
Despite the referendum results, the Nationalists won a landslide victory at the 1917 federal election.
Conscription lasted until mid-1919.
Due to the political situation in Ireland, conscription was never applied there; only in England, Scotland and Wales.
United States
In the United States, conscription began in 1917 and was generally well received, with a few pockets of opposition in isolated rural areas.
The administration decided to rely primarily on conscription, rather than voluntary enlistment, to raise military manpower for when only 73,000 volunteers enlisted out of the initial 1million target in the first six weeks of the war.
In 1917 10 million men were registered.
This was deemed to be inadequate, so age ranges were increased and exemptions reduced, and so by the end of 1918 this increased to 24 million men that were registered with nearly 3million inducted into the military services.
The draft was universal and included blacks on the same terms as whites, although they served in different units.
In all 367,710 black Americans were drafted (13% of the total), compared to 2,442,586 white (87%).
Forms of resistance ranged from peaceful protest to violent demonstrations and from humble letter-writing campaigns asking for mercy to radical newspapers demanding reform.
The most common tactics were dodging and desertion, and many communities sheltered and defended their draft dodgers as political heroes.
Many socialists were jailed for "obstructing the recruitment or enlistment service".
The most famous was Eugene Debs, head of the Socialist Party of America, who ran for president in 1920 from his prison cell.
In 1917 a number of radicals and anarchists challenged the new draft law in federal court, arguing that it was a direct violation of the Thirteenth Amendment's prohibition against slavery and involuntary servitude.
The Supreme Court unanimously upheld the constitutionality of the draft act in the Selective Draft Law Cases on 7January 1918.
Austria-Hungary
Like all the armies of mainland Europe, Austria-Hungary relied on conscription to fill its ranks.
Officer recruitment, however, was voluntary.
The effect of this at the start of the war was that well over a quarter of the rank and file were Slavs, while more than 75% of the officers were ethnic Germans.
This was much resented.
The army has been described as being "run on colonial lines" and the Slav soldiers as "disaffected".
Thus conscription contributed greatly to Austria's disastrous performance on the battlefield.
Diplomacy
The non-military diplomatic and propaganda interactions among the nations were designed to build support for the cause, or to undermine support for the enemy.
For the most part, wartime diplomacy focused on five issues: propaganda campaigns; defining and redefining the war goals, which became harsher as the war went on; luring neutral nations (Italy, Ottoman Empire, Bulgaria, Romania) into the coalition by offering slices of enemy territory; and encouragement by the Allies of nationalistic minority movements inside the Central Powers, especially among Czechs, Poles, and Arabs.
In addition, there were multiple peace proposals coming from neutrals, or one side or the other; none of them progressed very far.
Legacy and memory
QTEMPLATE |...
"Strange, friend," I said, "Here is no cause to mourn."
"None," said the other, "Save the undone years"... |Wilfred Owen, Strange Meeting, 1918
The first tentative efforts to comprehend the meaning and consequences of modern warfare began during the initial phases of the war, and this process continued throughout and after the end of hostilities, and is still underway, more than a century later.
Historiography
Historian Heather Jones argues that the historiography has been reinvigorated by the cultural turn in recent years.
Scholars have raised entirely new questions regarding military occupation, radicalisation of politics, race, and the male body.
Furthermore, new research has revised our understanding of five major topics that historians have long debated: Why the war began, why the Allies won, whether generals were responsible for high casualty rates, how the soldiers endured the horrors of trench warfare, and to what extent the civilian homefront accepted and endorsed the war effort.
Memorials
Memorials were erected in thousands of villages and towns.
Close to battlefields, those buried in improvised burial grounds were gradually moved to formal graveyards under the care of organisations such as the Commonwealth War Graves Commission, the American Battle Monuments Commission, the German War Graves Commission, and Le Souvenir français.
Many of these graveyards also have central monuments to the missing or unidentified dead, such as the Menin Gate memorial and the Thiepval Memorial to the Missing of the Somme.
In 1915 John McCrae, a Canadian army doctor, wrote the poem In Flanders Fields as a salute to those who perished in the Great War.
Published in Punch on 8December 1915, it is still recited today, especially on Remembrance Day and Memorial Day.
National World War I Museum and Memorial in Kansas City, Missouri, is a memorial dedicated to all Americans who served in World WarI. The Liberty Memorial was dedicated on 1November 1921, when the supreme Allied commanders spoke to a crowd of more than 100,000 people.
The UK Government has budgeted substantial resources to the commemoration of the war during the period 2014 to 2018.
The lead body is the Imperial War Museum.
On 3August 2014, French President Francois Hollande and German President Joachim Gauck together marked the centenary of Germany's declaration of war on France by laying the first stone of a memorial in Vieil Armand, known in German as Hartmannswillerkopf, for French and German soldiers killed in the war.
Cultural memory
World War I had a lasting impact on social memory.
It was seen by many in Britain as signalling the end of an era of stability stretching back to the Victorian period, and across Europe many regarded it as a watershed.
Historian Samuel Hynes explained:
QTEMPLATE |A generation of innocent young men, their heads full of high abstractions like Honour, Glory and England, went off to war to make the world safe for democracy.
They were slaughtered in stupid battles planned by stupid generals.
Those who survived were shocked, disillusioned and embittered by their war experiences, and saw that their real enemies were not the Germans, but the old men at home who had lied to them.
They rejected the values of the society that had sent them to war, and in doing so separated their own generation from the past and from their cultural inheritance.
Several historians like John Terraine, Niall Ferguson and Gary Sheffield have challenged these interpretations as partial and polemical views:
These beliefs did not become widely shared because they offered the only accurate interpretation of wartime events.
In every respect, the war was much more complicated than they suggest.
In recent years, historians have argued persuasively against almost every popular cliché of World WarI. It has been pointed out that, although the losses were devastating, their greatest impact was socially and geographically limited.
The many emotions other than horror experienced by soldiers in and out of the front line, including comradeship, boredom, and even enjoyment, have been recognised.
The war is not now seen as a 'fight about nothing', but as a war of ideals, a struggle between aggressive militarism and more or less liberal democracy.
It has been acknowledged that British generals were often capable men facing difficult challenges, and that it was under their command that the British army played a major part in the defeat of the Germans in 1918: a great forgotten victory.
Though these views have been discounted as "myths", they are common.
They have dynamically changed according to contemporary influences, reflecting in the 1950s perceptions of the war as "aimless" following the contrasting Second World War and emphasising conflict within the ranks during times of class conflict in the 1960s.
The majority of additions to the contrary are often rejected.
Social trauma
The social trauma caused by unprecedented rates of casualties manifested itself in different ways, which have been the subject of subsequent historical debate.
The optimism of la belle époque was destroyed, and those who had fought in the war were referred to as the Lost Generation.
For years afterwards, people mourned the dead, the missing, and the many disabled.
Many soldiers returned with severe trauma, suffering from shell shock (also called neurasthenia, a condition related to posttraumatic stress disorder).
Many more returned home with few after-effects; however, their silence about the war contributed to the conflict's growing mythological status.
Though many participants did not share in the experiences of combat or spend any significant time at the front, or had positive memories of their service, the images of suffering and trauma became the widely shared perception.
Such historians as Dan Todman, Paul Fussell, and Samuel Heyns have all published works since the 1990s arguing that these common perceptions of the war are factually incorrect.
Discontent in Germany
The rise of Nazism and Fascism included a revival of the nationalist spirit and a rejection of many post-war changes.
Similarly, the popularity of the stab-in-the-back legend (German: Dolchstoßlegende) was a testament to the psychological state of defeated Germany and was a rejection of responsibility for the conflict.
This conspiracy theory of betrayal became common, and the German populace came to see themselves as victims.
The widespread acceptance of the "stab-in-the-back" theory delegitimised the Weimar government and destabilised the system, opening it to extremes of right and left.
Communist and fascist movements around Europe drew strength from this theory and enjoyed a new level of popularity.
These feelings were most pronounced in areas directly or harshly affected by the war.
Adolf Hitler was able to gain popularity by using German discontent with the still controversial Treaty of Versailles.
World WarII was in part a continuation of the power struggle never fully resolved by World WarI.
Furthermore, it was common for Germans in the 1930s to justify acts of aggression due to perceived injustices imposed by the victors of World WarI. American historian William Rubinstein wrote that:
The 'Age of Totalitarianism' included nearly all the infamous examples of genocide in modern history, headed by the Jewish Holocaust, but also comprising the mass murders and purges of the Communist world, other mass killings carried out by Nazi Germany and its allies, and also the Armenian Genocide of 1915.
All these slaughters, it is argued here, had a common origin, the collapse of the elite structure and normal modes of government of much of central, eastern and southern Europe as a result of World WarI, without which surely neither Communism nor Fascism would have existed except in the minds of unknown agitators and crackpots.
Economic effects
One of the most dramatic effects of the war was the expansion of governmental powers and responsibilities in Britain, France, the United States, and the Dominions of the British Empire.
To harness all the power of their societies, governments created new ministries and powers.
New taxes were levied and laws enacted, all designed to bolster the war effort; many have lasted to this day.
Similarly, the war strained the abilities of some formerly large and bureaucratised governments, such as in Austria-Hungary and Germany.
Gross domestic product (GDP) increased for three Allies (Britain, Italy, and the United States), but decreased in France and Russia, in neutral Netherlands, and in the three main Central Powers.
The shrinkage in GDP in Austria, Russia, France, and the Ottoman Empire ranged between 30% and 40%.
In Austria, for example, most pigs were slaughtered, so at war's end there was no meat.
In all nations, the government's share of GDP increased, surpassing 50% in both Germany and France and nearly reaching that level in Britain.
To pay for purchases in the United States, Britain cashed in its extensive investments in American railroads and then began borrowing heavily from Wall Street.
President Wilson was on the verge of cutting off the loans in late 1916, but allowed a great increase in US government lending to the Allies.
After 1919, the US demanded repayment of these loans.
The repayments were, in part, funded by German reparations that, in turn, were supported by American loans to Germany.
This circular system collapsed in 1931 and some loans were never repaid.
Britain still owed the United States $4.4 billion of World WarI debt in 1934, the last instalment was finally paid in 2015.
Macro- and micro-economic consequences devolved from the war.
Families were altered by the departure of many men.
With the death or absence of the primary wage earner, women were forced into the workforce in unprecedented numbers.
At the same time, industry needed to replace the lost labourers sent to war.
This aided the struggle for voting rights for women.
World War I further compounded the gender imbalance, adding to the phenomenon of surplus women.
The deaths of nearly one million men during the war in Britain increased the gender gap by almost a million: from 670,000 to 1,700,000.
The number of unmarried women seeking economic means grew dramatically.
In addition, demobilisation and economic decline following the war caused high unemployment.
The war increased female employment; however, the return of demobilised men displaced many from the workforce, as did the closure of many of the wartime factories.
In Britain, rationing was finally imposed in early 1918, limited to meat, sugar, and fats (butter and margarine), but not bread.
The new system worked smoothly.
From 1914 to 1918, trade union membership doubled, from a little over four million to a little over eight million.
Britain turned to her colonies for help in obtaining essential war materials whose supply from traditional sources had become difficult.
Geologists such as Albert Ernest Kitson were called on to find new resources of precious minerals in the African colonies.
Kitson discovered important new deposits of manganese, used in munitions production, in the Gold Coast.
the Treaty of Versailles (the so-called "war guilt" clause) stated Germany accepted responsibility for "all the loss and damage to which the Allied and Associated Governments and their nationals have been subjected as a consequence of the war imposed upon them by the aggression of Germany and her allies."
It was worded as such to lay a legal basis for reparations, and a similar clause was inserted in the treaties with Austria and Hungary.
However neither of them interpreted it as an admission of war guilt."
In 1921, the total reparation sum was placed at 132 billion gold marks.
However, "Allied experts knew that Germany could not pay" this sum.
The total sum was divided into three categories, with the third being "deliberately designed to be chimerical" and its "primary function was to mislead public opinion ... into believing the "total sum was being maintained."
Thus, 50 billion gold marks (12.5 billion dollars) "represented the actual Allied assessment of German capacity to pay" and "therefore ... represented the total German reparations" figure that had to be paid.
By 1929, the Great Depression arrived, causing political chaos throughout the world.
In 1932 the payment of reparations was suspended by the international community, by which point Germany had paid only the equivalent of 20.598 billion gold marks in reparations.
With the rise of Adolf Hitler, all bonds and loans that had been issued and taken out during the 1920s and early 1930s were cancelled.
David Andelman notes "refusing to pay doesn't make an agreement null and void.
The bonds, the agreement, still exist."
Thus, following the Second World War, at the London Conference in 1953, Germany agreed to resume payment on the money borrowed.
On 3October 2010, Germany made the final payment on these bonds.
The war contributed to the evolution of the wristwatch from women's jewellery to a practical everyday item, replacing the pocketwatch, which requires a free hand to operate.
Military funding of advancements in radio contributed to the postwar popularity of the medium.
Footnotes
Bibliography
* Bond, Brian.
"The First World War" in C.L. Mowat, ed.
The New Cambridge Modern History: Vol.
XII:
The Shifting Balance of World Forces 1898-1945 (2nd ed. 1968)
https:/ stream 12#page mode/1up online pp.
171-208. scholarly summary.
* Encyclopædia Britannica (12th ed. 1922) comprises the 11th edition plus three new volumes 30-31-32 that cover events since 1911 with thorough coverage of the war as well as every country and colony.
* Hirschfeld, Gerhard et al. eds.
Brill's Encyclopedia of the First World War (2012), 1105pp
* Larsen, Daniel.
"Intelligence in the First World War: The state of the field."
Intelligence and National Security 29.2 (2014): 282-302.
* also published by Harper as "Ludendorff's Own Story, August 1914 - November 1918: The Great War from the Siege of Liège to the Signing of the Armistice as Viewed from the Grand Headquarters of the German Army" (original title Meine Kriegserinnerungen, 1914-1918)
* cites "Cf. articles signed XXX in La Revue de Deux Mondes, 1and 15 March 1920"
* Deals with technical developments, including the first dipping hydrophones
Primary sources
* Collins, Ross F. ed.
World War
I: Primary Documents on Events from 1914 to 1919 (Greenwood Press, 2008)
https:/ library world-war-i-primary-documents-on-events-from-1914 online
Hammond's frontier atlas of the world war : containing large scale maps of all the battle fronts of Europe and Asia, together with a military map of the United States (1916)
https:/ details page/n4 online free
Historiography and memory
* Deak, John.
"The Great War and the Forgotten Realm: The Habsburg Monarchy and the First World War" Journal of Modern History (2014) 86#2 pp.
* Iriye, Akira.
"The Historiographic Impact of the Great War".
Diplomatic History (July 2014)
* Jones, Heather.
"As the centenary approaches: the regeneration of First World War historiography".
Historical Journal (2013) 56#3 pp.
* Jones, Heather.
"Goodbye to all that?:
Memory and meaning in the commemoration of the first world war".
Juncture (2014) 20#4 pp. 287-291.
* Kitchen, James E., Alisa Miller and Laura Rowe, eds.
Other Combatants, Other Fronts: Competing Histories of the First World War (2011)
https:/ Other-Combatants-Fronts-Competing-Histories 1443827371/ excerpt
* Kramer, Alan.
"Recent Historiography of the First World War - Part I", Journal of Modern European History (Feb. 2014) 12#1 pp.
5-27; "Recent Historiography of the First World War ", (May 2014) 12#2 pp.
* Mulligan, William.
"The Trial Continues: New Directions in the Study of the Origins of the First World War".
English Historical Review (2014) 129#538 pp.
* Reynolds, David.
The Long Shadow:
The Legacies of the Great War in the Twentieth Century (2014) https:/ Long-Shadow-Legacies-Twentieth-Century 0393088634/ Excerpt and text search
* Sanborn, Joshua.
"Russian Historiography on the Origins of the First World War Since the Fischer Controversy".
Journal of Contemporary History (2013) 48#2 pp.
* Sharp, Heather.
"Representing Australia's Involvement in the First World War: Discrepancies between Public Discourses and School History Textbooks from 1916 to 1936".
Journal of Educational Media, Memory, and Society (2014) 6#1 pp. 1-23.
* Trout, Stephen.
"On the Battlefield of Memory: The First World War and American Remembrance, 1919-1941 (2013)
* Turan, Ömer.
"Turkish Historiography of the First World War".
Middle East Critique (2014) 23#2 pp.
* Winter, Jay, ed.
The Cambridge History of the First World War (2 vol.
Cambridge University Press, 2014)
