Adeline Virginia Woolf (; ; 25 January 1882 28 March 1941) was an English writer, considered one of the most important modernist 20th-century authors and also a pioneer in the use of stream of consciousness as a narrative device.
Woolf was born into an affluent household in South Kensington, London, the seventh child in a blended family of eight.
Her mother, Julia Prinsep Jackson, celebrated as a Pre-Raphaelite artist's model, had three children from her first marriage, while Woolf's father, Leslie Stephen, a notable man of letters, had one previous daughter.
The Stephens produced another four children, including the modernist painter Vanessa Bell.
While the boys in the family received college educations, the girls were home-schooled in English classics and Victorian literature.
An important influence in Virginia Woolf's early life was the summer home the family used in St Ives, Cornwall, where she first saw the Godrevy Lighthouse, which was to become central in her novel To the Lighthouse (1927).
Woolf's childhood came to an abrupt end in 1895 with the death of her mother and her first mental breakdown, followed two years later by the death of her stepsister and a mother figure to her, Stella Duckworth.
From 1897 to 1901, she attended the Ladies' Department of King's College London, where she studied classics and history and came into contact with early reformers of women's higher education and the women's rights movement.
Other important influences were her Cambridge-educated brothers and unfettered access to her father's vast library.
Encouraged by her father, Woolf began writing professionally in 1900.
Her father's death in 1905 caused another mental breakdown for Woolf.
Following his death, the Stephen family moved from Kensington to the more bohemian Bloomsbury, where they adopted a free-spirited lifestyle.
It was in Bloomsbury where, in conjunction with the brothers' intellectual friends, they formed the artistic and literary Bloomsbury Group.
Following her 1912 marriage to Leonard Woolf, the couple founded the Hogarth Press in 1917, which published much of her work.
The couple rented a home in Sussex and moved there permanently in 1940.
Throughout her life, Woolf was troubled by her mental illness.
She was institutionalized several times and attempted suicide at least twice.
Her illness is considered to have been bipolar disorder, for which there was no effective intervention during her lifetime.
In 1941, at age 59, Woolf died by putting rocks in her coat pockets and drowning herself in the River Ouse at Lewes.
During the interwar period, Woolf was an important part of London's literary and artistic society.
In 1915 she published her first novel, The Voyage Out, through her half-brother's publishing house, Gerald Duckworth and Company.
Her best-known works include the novels Mrs Dalloway (1925),
To the Lighthouse (1927) and , "A woman must have money and a room of her own if she is to write fiction."
Woolf became one of the central subjects of the 1970s movement of feminist criticism and her works have since garnered much attention and widespread commentary for "inspiring feminism."
Her works have been translated into more than 50 languages.
A large body of literature is dedicated to her life and work, and she has been the subject of plays, novels and films.
Woolf is commemorated today by statues, societies dedicated to her work and a building at the University of London.
Life
Family of origin
Virginia Woolf was born Adeline Virginia Stephen on 25 January 1882 at 22 Hyde Park Gate in South Kensington, London to Julia (née Jackson) (1846-1895) and Leslie Stephen (1832-1904), writer, historian, essayist, biographer and mountaineer.
Julia Jackson was born in 1846 in Calcutta, Bengal, British India to John Jackson and Maria "Mia" Theodosia Pattle, from two Anglo-Indian families.
A modernist, she was one of the pioneers of using stream of consciousness as a narrative device, alongside contemporaries such as Marcel Proust, Dorothy Richardson and James Joyce.
It was meant to console Vita for the loss of her ancestral home, Knole House, though it is also a satirical treatment of Vita and her work.
In Orlando, the techniques of historical biographers are being ridiculed; the character of a pompous biographer is being assumed in order for it to be mocked.
"The Waves (1931) presents a group of six friends whose reflections, which are closer to recitatives than to interior monologues proper, create a wave-like atmosphere that is more akin to a prose poem than to a plot-centred novel".
Woolf is featured as one of the women who has lived in the titular house.
* Virginia is portrayed by both Lydia Leonard and Catherine McCormack in the BBC's three-part drama series Life in Squares (2015).
* On 25 January 2018, Google showed a doodle celebrating her 136th birthday.
*In many Barnes & Noble stores, Woolf is featured in Gary Kelly's Author Mural Panels, an imprint of the Barnes & Noble Author brand that also features other notable authors like Hurston, Tagore, and Kafka.
Adaptations
A number of Virginia Woolf's works have been adapted for the screen, and her play Freshwater (1935) is the basis for a 1994 chamber opera, Freshwater, by Andy Vores.
The final segment of the 2018 Anthology film London Unplugged is adapted from her short story Kew Gardens.
Septimus and Clarissa, a stage adaptation of Mrs. Dalloway was created and produced by the New York-based ensemble Ripe Time ( ) in 2011 at the Baruch Performing Arts Center.
It was adapted by Ellen McLaughlin and directed and devised by Rachel Dickstein.
It was nominated for a 2012 Drama League award for Outstanding Production, a Drama Desk nomination for Outstanding Score (Gina Leishman) and a Joe A. Calloway Award nomination for outstanding direction (Rachel Dickstein.)
Legacy
Virginia Woolf is known for her contributions to twentieth-century literature and her essays, as well as the influence she has had on literary, particularly feminist criticism.
A number of authors have stated that their work was influenced by Virginia Woolf, including Margaret Atwood, Michael Cunningham, Gabriel García Márquez, and Toni Morrison.
Her iconic image is instantly recognisable from the Beresford portrait of her at twenty (at the top of this page) to the Beck and Macgregor portrait in her mother's dress in Vogue at forty-four (see image) or Man Ray's cover of Time magazine (see image) at 55.
Family trees
see , , ,
Notes
Bibliography
Books and theses
Biography: Virginia Woolf
** Vol.
I: Virginia Stephen 1882 to 1912.
London: Hogarth Press. 1972.
** Vol. II: Virginia Woolf 1912 to 1941.
London: Hogarth Press. 1972.
* (Illustrations of Woolf's London homes are excerpted at .)
Mental health
* https:/ gp 9789400757479 additional excerpts
Biography: Other
Literary commentary
* http:/ rdpc 10174 1/Moments%20of%20Being.pdf additional excerpt
Bloomsbury
Chapters and contributions
Articles
;Journals
;Dictionaries and encyclopaedias
;Newspapers and magazines
* https:/ web http:/ cm viewArticle.aip?id
10801&page
2 archived version
* https:/ web http:/ himmelfarb.php archived version
Websites and documents
;Blogs
;British Library
Literary commentary
;British Library
Virginia Woolf's homes and venues
Virginia Woolf biography
Timelines
Genealogy
Images
Maps
Audiovisual media
* https:/ core mind-and-times-virginia-woolf-directed-eric-neal-young-2002 excerpt
Selected online texts
;Audiofiles
Archival material
Bibliography notes
Bibliography references
