Tardar Sauce Interactive, hosted at the Mashable House, where she appeared for two-hours each day as Grumpy Cat.
As part of her Spokescat sponsorship, Friskies paid travel expenses to SXSW in Austin, Texas, in order to film "Will Kitty Play With It?"
CNN, CBS, and CNET called Grumpy Cat the undisputed "biggest star" of SXSW Interactive over Elon Musk, Al Gore, and Neil Gaiman.
Over 600 fans waited for hours in the line, which was nearly three blocks long, to take a photo.
Among the crowds were Internet entrepreneur Dennis Crowley, singer Andrew W.K., and actor Ian Somerhalder.
Somerhalder took photos with Grumpy Cat and called her his "new love", and described her as "very peaced out", "sweet as pumpkin pie", and "kind of amazing".
*Season finale appearance on ABC Network's, The Bachelorette.
*Featured as a special guest on the November 17, 2014, edition of WWE Monday Night Raw.
* Special appearance on Disney Channel's Bizaardvark.
Friskies sponsorship
Grumpy Cat appeared in episodes of the Friskies YouTube game show "Will Kitty Play With It?"
In September 2013, it was announced that Grumpy Cat would become the Official Spokescat of Friskies.
TMZ reported that for Grumpy Cat's SXSW Interactive appearance in Austin, Texas, Friskies paid for first class flights, a private hotel room with king-sized bed, a personal assistant, a chauffeur, and unlimited Friskies food and bottled water.
and Anderson Live, and visited Time for a photoshoot.
Merchandising
Grumpy Cat Limited held eight trademarks in August 2018 registered with the United States Patent and Trademark Office; 1082 items were available on the official Grumpy Cat online shop.
Licensed merchandise
Licensed merchandise like t-shirts and mugs are advertised on the Grumpy Cat website and sold at Hot Topic.
Stuffed toys are also available, the original official plush was produced by Gund, though as of August 2018, no Grumpy Cat merchandise was available on the Gund website.
Ganz, the company behind Webkinz, produced a small Grumpy Cat plush which allowed anyone to play with her electronic likeness on the Webkinz website.
Additionally, Chronicle Books has published The Grumpy Cat Wall Calendar each year since 2013, with a 2019 edition available as of August 2018.
Books
The official Grumpy Cat book, Grumpy Cat: A Grumpy Book, was published on July 23, 2013, by Chronicle Books.
Another Grumpy Cat book called The Grumpy Guide to Life: Observations by Grumpy Cat was published by Chronicle Books and debuted at #3 on The New York Times Best Seller list in the Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous category.
Dynamite Entertainment publishes a comic book about Grumpy Cat and her brother, titled The Misadventures of Grumpy Cat and Pokey.
Dover Publications has also published Grumpy Cat paper doll, sticker, coloring, and tattoo books.
Digital products
In December 2013, an official video game called Grumpy Cat: Unimpressed was released by Ganz Studios and is playable on Facebook, iOS devices and Android devices.
The game is a match-three game where if combos are performed, Grumpy Cat's insults will appear.
The players unlock her memes as they pass each level and she can be made angry with meows, hairballs and laser pointers.
In June 2016, Weather Creative Inc. released a weather app iOS and Android devices called Grumpy Cat Weather as a follow-up to the popular 2013 Grumpy Cat theme in its Weather Kitty weather app.
In it, users can check Grumpy's dry and witty forecast every day.
In December 2016, Lucky Kat Studios released a game app for iOS and Android devices called Grumpy Cat's Worst Game Ever.
Players can attempt to win mini-games, unlock iMessage stickers (iOS only), share memes, and more.
Legal issues
Grumpy Cat Limited v. Grenade Beverage LLC
In May 2013, Grumpy Cat Limited partnered with Grenade Beverage LLC to market "Grumppuccino" iced coffee beverages.
In December 2015, Grumpy Cat Limited filed a lawsuit against Grenade Beverage LLC citing trademark infringement when the beverage company expanded its line of Grumpy Cat coffee offerings beyond what was originally agreed upon, producing and marketing a Grumpy Cat roasted ground coffee even after being specifically told in writing via email that they were not approved to do so.
In January 2018, the California Federal Court jury sided with Grumpy Cat Limited and ordered Grenade Beverage Company to pay $710,000 in damages for copyright and trademark infringement, as well as a $1 nominal damage fee for breach of contract.
Death
Tardar Sauce died at her home in the arms of her owner Tabatha following complications from a urinary tract infection on May 14, 2019.
Her death was announced on May 17, 2019, on social media and she was mourned by many people across the globe.
Tributes were posted worldwide.
In May 2013, Broken Road Productions optioned Grumpy Cat for a "Garfield-like feature film" adaptation.
Film producer Todd Garner said, "We think we can build a big family comedy around this character".
Aubrey Plaza voiced the Grumpy Cat character, and was also a producer on the film.
On November 6, 2014, Lifetime released a tongue-in-cheek video about the casting and Plaza's "process" for becoming the voice of Grumpy Cat.
Earnings
In March 2013, Bryan Bundesen indicated that Grumpy Cat earned them income in the "mid-five figures", which increased to "low-six-figures" by May 2013.
Recognition
*MSNBC named Grumpy Cat 2012's most influential cat.
*Grumpy Cat won BuzzFeed's Meme of the Year Award at the 2013 Webby Awards.
*Grumpy Cat won first prize Golden Kitty at the second annual Internet Cat Video Film Festival.
*Grumpy Cat won a Lifetime Achievement Award at the 2013 Friskies.
*Swarm by Foursquare released a limited-edition sticker featuring Grumpy Cat.
*Grumpy Cat won People's Voice Award in the Social Content and Marketing - Animals Category at the 2015 Webby Awards.
