Tarantulas comprise a group of large and often hairy spiders belonging to the family Theraphosidae.
Currently, about 1,000 species have been identified.
The term tarantula is usually used to describe members of the family Theraphosidae, although many other members of the same infraorder (Mygalomorphae) are commonly referred to as "tarantulas" or "false tarantulas".
Some of the more common species have become popular in the exotic pet trade.
New World species kept as pets have urticating hairs that can cause irritation to the skin, and in extreme cases, cause damage to the eyes.
Like other Arachnida, a tarantula’s body comprises two main parts, the prosoma (or cephalothorax) and the opisthosoma (or abdomen).
The prosoma and opisthosoma are connected by the pedicel, or pregenital somite.
This waist-like connecting piece is actually part of the prosoma and gives the opisthosoma a wide range of motion relative to the prosoma.
Tarantula sizes can range from as small as the size of a BB Pellet to as large as a dinner plate when the legs are fully extended.
Depending on the species, the body length of tarantulas ranges from , with leg spans of .
Leg span is determined by measuring from the tip of the back leg to the tip of the front leg on the opposite side.
Some of the largest species of tarantula may weigh over ; the largest of all, the goliath birdeater (Theraphosa blondi) from Venezuela and Brazil, has been reported to attain a weight of and a leg-span up to , males being longer and females greater in girth.
The fang size of this tarantula reaches a maximum of .
The name derived from that of the southern Italian town of Taranto.
The term "tarantula" subsequently was applied to almost any large, unfamiliar species of ground-dwelling spider, in particular to the Mygalomorphae and especially to the New World Theraphosidae.
Compared to tarantulas, wolf spiders are not particularly large or hairy, so among English speakers in particular, the usage eventually shifted in favour of the Theraphosidae, though they are barely related to the wolf spiders, being in a different infraorder.
New World and other divergent usages
When theraphosids were encountered in the Americas, they were named "tarantulas", causing usage of the term to shift to the tropical spiders.
Nevertheless, these spiders belong to the infraorder Mygalomorphae, and are not closely related to wolf spiders.
The name "tarantula" is also incorrectly applied to other large-bodied spiders, including the purseweb spiders or atypical tarantulas, the funnel-webs (Dipluridae and Hexathelidae), and the "dwarf tarantulas".
These spiders are related to tarantulas (all being mygalomorphs), but are classified in different families.
Huntsman spiders of the family Sparassidae have also been termed "tarantulas" because of their large size.
In fact, they are not related, belonging to the infraorder Araneomorphae.
The element pelma in genus names
Many theraphosid genera have names, either accepted or synonymous, containing the element pelma.
This can be traced back to Carl Ludwig Koch in 1850,
Nervous system
A tarantula's central nervous system (brain) is located in the bottom of the inner prosoma.
A tarantula perceives its surroundings primarily via sensory organs called setae (hairs or spines).
Although a tarantula has eight eyes like most spiders, touch is its keenest sense, and in hunting, it primarily depends on vibrations given off by the movements of its prey.
A tarantula's setae are very sensitive organs and are used to sense chemical signatures, vibrations, wind direction, and possibly even sound.
Tarantulas are also very responsive to the presence of certain chemicals such as pheromones.
The eyes are located above the chelicerae on the forward part of the prosoma.
They are small and usually set in two rows of four.
Most tarantulas are not able to see much more than light, darkness, and motion.
Arboreal tarantulas generally have better vision compared with terrestrial tarantulas.
Respiratory system
All types of tarantulas have two sets of book lungs (breathing organs); the first pair is located in a cavity inside the lower front part of the abdomen near where the abdomen connects to the cephalothorax, and the second pair is slightly farther back on the abdomen.
Air enters the cavity through a tiny slit on each side of and near the front of the abdomen.
Each lung consists of 15 or more thin sheets of folded tissue arranged like the pages of a book.
These sheets of tissue are supplied by blood vessels.
As air enters each lung, oxygen is taken into the blood stream through the blood vessels in the lungs.
Needed moisture may also be absorbed from humid air by these organs.
Circulatory system
A tarantula’s blood is unique (not only in appearance); an oxygen-transporting protein is present (the copper-based hemocyanin), but not enclosed in blood cells such as the erythrocytes of mammals.
A tarantula’s blood is not true blood, but rather a liquid called haemolymph, or hemolymph.
At least four types of hemocytes, or hemolymph cells, are known.
The tarantula’s heart is a long, slender tube located along the top of the opisthosoma.
The heart is neurogenic as opposed to myogenic, so nerve cells instead of muscle cells initiate and coordinate the heart.
The heart pumps hemolymph to all parts of the body through open passages often referred to as sinuses, and not through a circular system of blood vessels.
If the exoskeleton is breached, loss of hemolymph will kill the tarantula unless the wound is small enough that the hemolymph can dry and close the wound.
Predators
Despite their large size and fearsome appearance and reputation, tarantulas themselves are prey for many other animals.
The most specialized of these predators are large members of the wasp family Pompilidae such as the wasp Hemipepsis ustulata.
These wasps are called "tarantula hawks".
The largest tarantula hawks, such as those in the genus Pepsis, track, attack, and kill large tarantulas.
They use olfaction to find the lair of a tarantula.
The wasp must deliver a sting to the underside of the spider's cephalothorax, exploiting the thin membrane between the basal leg segments.
This paralyzes the spider, and the wasp then drags it back into its burrow before depositing an egg on the prey's abdomen.
The wasp then seals the spider in its burrow and flies off to search for more hosts.
The wasp egg hatches into a larva and feeds on the spider's inessential parts, and as it approaches pupation, it consumes the remainder.
Other arthropods, such as large scorpions and giant centipedes, are also known to prey on tarantulas.
Tarantulas are also preyed upon by a wide variety of vertebrates.
Many of these, including lizards, frogs, birds, and mammals, are generalist predators of all kinds of large arthropods.
Mammals that have been known to prey on tarantulas, such as the coati, kinkajou, and opossum in the New World, and mongooses and the honey badger in the Old World, are often immune to the venom of their arthropod prey.
Humans also consume tarantulas for food in their native ranges.
They are considered a delicacy in certain cultures (e.g. Venezuela and Cambodia).
They can be roasted over an open fire to remove the hairs (described further below) and then eaten.
Tarantulas have evolved specialized hairs to defend themselves against predators.
Besides the normal "hairs" covering the body, some tarantulas also have a dense covering of irritating hairs called urticating hairs, on the opisthosoma, that they sometimes use as protection against enemies.
These hairs are present on New World species, but not on specimens from the Old World.
Urticating hairs are usually kicked off the abdomen by the tarantula, but some may simply rub the abdomen against the target, like the genus Avicularia.
These fine hairs are barbed and serve to irritate.
They can be lethal to small animals such as rodents.
Some people are sensitive to these hairs, and develop serious itching and rashes at the site.
Exposure of the eyes and respiratory system to urticating hairs should be strictly avoided.
Species with urticating hairs can kick these hairs off; they are flicked into the air at a target using their back pairs of legs.
Tarantulas also use these hairs for other purposes, such as to mark territory or to line their shelters (the latter such practice may discourage flies from feeding on the spiderlings).
Urticating hairs do not grow back, but are replaced with each molt.
The intensity, number, and flotation of the hairs depends on the species of tarantula.
To predators and other enemies, these hairs can range from being lethal to simply being a deterrent.
With humans, they can cause irritation to eyes, nose, and skin, and more dangerously, the lungs and airways, if inhaled.
The symptoms range from species to species, from person to person, from a burning itch to a minor rash.
In some cases, tarantula hairs have caused permanent damage to human eyes.
Some setae are used to stridulate, which makes a hissing sound.
These hairs are usually found on the chelicerae.
Stridulation seems to be more common in Old World species.
Bites and urticating bristles
All tarantulas are venomous and some bites cause serious discomfort that might persist for several days.
In general, the effects of the bites of all kinds of tarantula are not well known.
While the bites of many species are known to be no worse than a wasp sting, accounts of bites by some species are reported to be very painful and to produce intense spasms that may recur over a period of several days; the venom of the African tarantula Pelinobius muticus also causes strong hallucinations.
For Poecilotheria species, researchers have described more than 20 bites with the delayed onset of severe and diffuse muscle cramps, lasting for several days, that in most cases resolved completely with the use of benzodiazepines and magnesium.
In all cases, seeking medical aid is advised.
Because other proteins are included when a toxin is injected, some individuals may suffer severe symptoms due to an allergic reaction rather than to the venom.
Such allergic effects can be life-threatening.
Additionally, the large fangs of a tarantula can inflict painful puncture wounds, which can lead to secondary bacterial infections if not properly treated.
Before biting, a tarantula may signal its intention to attack by rearing up into a "threat posture", which may involve raising its prosoma and lifting its front legs into the air, spreading and extending its fangs, and (in certain species) making a loud hissing by stridulating.
Tarantulas often hold this position for longer than the duration of the original threat.
Their next step, short of biting, may be to slap down on the intruder with their raised front legs.
If that response fails to deter the attacker, the tarantulas of the Americas may next turn away and flick urticating hairs toward the pursuing predator.
The next response may be to leave the scene entirely, but especially if no line of retreat is available, their final response may also be to whirl suddenly and bite.
Some tarantulas are well known to give "dry bites", i.e., they may defensively bite some animal that intrudes on their space and threatens them, but they do not pump venom into the wound.
New World tarantulas are equipped with urticating hairs (technically bristles) on their abdomens, and almost always throw these barbed bristles as the first line of defense.
These bristles irritate sensitive areas of the body and especially seem to target curious animals that may sniff these bristles into the mucous membranes of the nose.
Some species have more effective urticating bristles than others.
The goliath birdeater is known for its particularly irritating urticating bristles.
They can penetrate the cornea, so eye protection should be worn when handling such tarantulas.
Old World tarantulas have no urticating bristles and are more likely to attack when disturbed.
They often have more potent, medically significant venom, and are faster and much more nervous and defensive than New World species.
Some dangerous spider species are related to tarantulas and are frequently confused with them.
A popular urban legend maintains that deadly varieties of tarantula exist somewhere in South America.
This claim is often made without identifying a particular spider, although the "banana tarantula" is sometimes named.
A likely candidate for the true identity of this spider is the dangerous Brazilian wandering spider (Phoneutria fera) of the family Ctenidae, as it is sometimes found hiding in clusters of bananas and is one of several spiders called "banana spiders".
It is not technically a tarantula, but it is fairly large (4- to 5-inch legspan), somewhat hairy, and is highly venomous to humans.
Another dangerous type of spiders that have been confused with tarantulas are the Australian funnel-web spiders.
The best known species of these is the Sydney funnel-web spider (Atrax robustus) a spider that is aggressive, highly venomous, and (prior to the development of antivenom in the 1980s) was responsible for numerous deaths in Australia.
These spiders are members of the same suborder as tarantulas, Opisthothelae.
Some Australians use the slang term "triantelope" (a corruption of the incorrect term tarantula, which is also used) for large, hairy, and harmless members of the huntsman spider family, which are often found on interior household walls and in automobiles.
Sexual dimorphism
Some tarantula species exhibit pronounced sexual dimorphism.
Males tend to be smaller (especially their abdomens, which can appear quite narrow) and may be dull in color when compared to their female counterparts, as in the species Haplopelma lividum.
Mature male tarantulas also may have tibial hooks on their front legs, which are used to restrain the female's fangs during copulation.
Males typically have longer legs than the females.
A juvenile male's sex can be determined by looking at a cast exuvia for exiandrous fusillae or spermathecae.
Females possess spermathecae, except for the species Sickius longibulbi and Encyocratella olivacea.
Males have much shorter lifespans than females because they die relatively soon after maturing.
Few live long enough for a postultimate molt, which is unlikely in natural habitats because they are vulnerable to predation, but has happened in captivity, though rarely.
Most males do not live through this molt, as they tend to get their emboli, mature male sexual organs on pedipalps, stuck in the molt.
Most tarantula fanciers regard females as more desirable as pets due to their much longer lifespans.
Wild-caught tarantulas are often mature males because they wander out in the open and are more likely to be caught.
Lifecycle
Like other spiders, tarantulas have to shed their exoskeleton periodically to grow, a process called molting.
A young tarantula may do this several times a year as a part of the maturation process, while full-grown specimens only molt once a year or less, or sooner, to replace lost limbs or lost urticating hairs.
Clearly, molting will soon occur when the exoskeleton takes on a darker shade.
If a tarantula previously used its urticating hairs, the bald patch turns from a peach color to deep blue.
The tarantula also stops feeding and becomes more lethargic during this time.
Tarantulas may live for years; most species take two to five years to reach adulthood, but some species may take up to 10 years to reach full maturity.
Upon reaching adulthood, males typically have but a 1.0- to 1.5-year period left to live and immediately go in search of a female with which to mate.
Male tarantulas rarely molt again once they reach adulthood, but they may attempt to do so, usually becoming stuck during the molt due to their sexual organs and dying in the process.
Females continue to molt after reaching maturity.
Female specimens have been known to reach 30 to 40 years of age, and have survived on water alone for up to two years.
Grammostola rosea spiders are known for only eating once or twice a week and for living up to 20 years in captivity.
Reproduction
After reaching sexual maturity, a female tarantula normally mates and lays eggs once per year, although they do not always do so.
As with other spiders, the mechanics of intercourse are quite different from those of mammals.
Once a male spider reaches maturity and becomes motivated to mate, he weaves a web mat on a flat surface.
The spider then rubs his abdomen on the surface of this mat, and in so doing, releases a quantity of semen.
He may then insert his pedipalps (short, leg-like appendages between the chelicerae and front legs) into the pool of semen.
The pedipalps absorb the semen and keep it viable until a mate can be found.
When a male spider detects the presence of a female, the two exchange signals to establish that they are of the same species.
These signals may also lull the female into a receptive state.
If the female is receptive, then the male approaches her and inserts his pedipalps into an opening in the lower surface of her abdomen, the opisthosoma.
After the semen has been transferred to the receptive female's body, the male swiftly leaves the scene before the female recovers her appetite.
Although females may show some aggression after mating, the male rarely becomes a meal.
Taxonomy
Linnaeus placed all spiders in a single genus, Aranea.
In 1802, Charles Athanase Walckenaer separated mygalomorph spiders into a separate genus, Mygale, leaving all other spiders in Aranea.
However, Mygale had already been used in 1800 by Georges Cuvier for a genus of mammals (in Greek, mygale means "shrew").
Accordingly, in 1869, Tamerlan Thorell used the family name "Theraphosoidae" (modern Theraphosidae) for the mygalomorph spiders known to him, rather than "Mygalidae" (as used, for example, by John Blackwall).
Thorell later split the family into a number of genera, including Theraphosa.
Subfamilies
These subfamilies are recognised:
*Acanthopelminae - not accepted in some schemes as synonymous with Ischnocolinae
*Spelopelminae - typically not accepted, Hemirrhagus being treated as Theraphosinae
Genera
, the World Spider Catalog accepts the following genera:
*Acanthopelma F. O. Pickard-Cambridge, 1897 - Guyana
*Acanthoscurria Ausserer, 1871 - South America, Guatemala
*Acentropelma Pocock, 1901 - Belize, Mexico, Guatemala
*Agnostopelma Pérez-Miles & Weinmann, 2010 - Colombia
*Anoploscelus Pocock, 1897 - Uganda, Tanzania, Rwanda
*Antillena Bertani, Huff & Fukushima, 2017 - Dominican Republic
*Aphonopelma Pocock, 1901 - North America, Central America
*Augacephalus Gallon, 2002 - South Africa, Mozambique, Eswatini
*Avicularia Lamarck, 1818 - South America, Trinidad and Tobago, Panama
*Brachypelma Simon, 1891 - Mexico, Costa Rica, Guatemala
*Bumba Pérez-Miles, Bonaldo & Miglio, 2014 - Brazil, Venezuela, Ecuador
*Catanduba Yamamoto, Lucas & Brescovit, 2012 - Brazil
*Citharacanthus Pocock, 1901 - Cuba, Central America, Mexico
*Coremiocnemis Simon, 1892 - Malaysia, Indonesia, Australia
*Cyclosternum Ausserer, 1871 - South America, Mexico, Costa Rica
*Cyriocosmus Simon, 1903 - South America, Trinidad and Tobago
*Davus O. Pickard-Cambridge, 1892 - Central America, Mexico
*Guyruita Guadanucci, Lucas, Indicatti & Yamamoto, 2007 - Brazil, Venezuela
*Hapalotremus Simon, 1903 - Bolivia, Peru, Argentina
*Harpactirella Purcell, 1902 - South Africa, Morocco
*Ischnocolus Ausserer, 1871 - Africa, Asia, Brazil, Europe
*Kochiana Fukushima, Nagahama & Bertani, 2008 - Brazil
*Lampropelma Simon, 1892 - Indonesia, Malaysia, Singapore
*Lasiodora C. L. Koch, 1850 - South America, Costa Rica
*Lasiodorides Schmidt & Bischoff, 1997 - Ecuador, Peru
*Lyrognathus Pocock, 1895 - Indonesia, India, Malaysia
*Magnacarina Mendoza, Locht, Kaderka, Medina & Pérez-Miles, 2016 - Mexico
*Megaphobema Pocock, 1901 - Costa Rica, Colombia, Ecuador
*Melloleitaoina Gerschman & Schiapelli, 1960 - Argentina
*Neoholothele Guadanucci & Weinmann, 2015 - Colombia, Trinidad and Tobago, Venezuela
*Neostenotarsus Pribik & Weinmann, 2004 - French Guiana
*Nesipelma Schmidt & Kovařík, 1996 - St. Kitts and Nevis
*Orphnaecus Simon, 1892 - Papua New Guinea, Philippines
*Phormictopus Pocock, 1901 - Cuba, Argentina, Brazil
*Plesiophrictus Pocock, 1899 - India, Micronesia, Sri Lanka
*Proshapalopus Mello-Leitão, 1923 - Brazil, Colombia
*Psalmopoeus Pocock, 1895 - Trinidad, South America, Central America, Mexico
*Psednocnemis West, Nunn & Hogg, 2012 - Malaysia, Indonesia
*Pseudhapalopus Strand, 1907 - South America, Trinidad
*Pseudoclamoris Hüsser, 2018 - Colombia, Peru, Ecuador
*Selenogyrus Pocock, 1897 - C�te d'Ivoire, Sierra Leone
*Sericopelma Ausserer, 1875 - Central America, Brazil, Mexico
*Stichoplastoris Rudloff, 1997 - El Salvador, Costa Rica, Panama
*Tapinauchenius Ausserer, 1871 - South America, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
*Trichopelma Simon, 1888 - Caribbean, South America, Central America
*Umbyquyra Gargiulo, Brescovit & Lucas, 2018 - Bolivia, Brazil
*Vitalius Lucas, Silva & Bertani, 1993 - Brazil, Argentina
*Xenesthis Simon, 1891 - Panama, Venezuela, Colombia
Fossil record
Although fossils of mygalomorph spiders date back to the Triassic, only two specimens have been found so far which can be convincingly assigned to the Theraphosidae.
One is from the Dominican Republic amber; the other is from Chiapas (Mexican) amber.
Both these ambers are quite young, being Miocene in age or about 16 million years old.
Further reading
