Electricity is the set of physical phenomena associated with the presence and motion of matter that has a property of electric charge.
In early days, electricity was considered as being unrelated to magnetism.
Later on, many experimental results and the development of Maxwell's equations indicated that both electricity and magnetism are from a single phenomenon: electromagnetism.
Various common phenomena are related to electricity, including lightning, static electricity, electric heating, electric discharges and many others.
The presence of an electric charge, which can be either positive or negative, produces an electric field.
The movement of electric charges is an electric current and produces a magnetic field.
When a charge is placed in a location with a non-zero electric field, a force will act on it.
The magnitude of this force is given by Coulomb's law.
Thus, if that charge were to move, the electric field would be doing work on the electric charge.
Thus we can speak of electric potential at a certain point in space, which is equal to the work done by an external agent in carrying a unit of positive charge from an arbitrarily chosen reference point to that point without any acceleration and is typically measured in volts.
Electricity is at the heart of many modern technologies, being used for:
* electric power where electric current is used to energise equipment;
* electronics which deals with electrical circuits that involve active electrical components such as vacuum tubes, transistors, diodes and integrated circuits, and associated passive interconnection technologies.
Electrical phenomena have been studied since antiquity, though progress in theoretical understanding remained slow until the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries.
Even then, practical applications for electricity were few, and it would not be until the late nineteenth century that electrical engineers were able to put it to industrial and residential use.
The rapid expansion in electrical technology at this time transformed industry and society, becoming a driving force for the Second Industrial Revolution.
Electricity's extraordinary versatility means it can be put to an almost limitless set of applications which include transport, heating, lighting, communications, and computation.
Electrical power is now the backbone of modern industrial society.
History
Long before any knowledge of electricity existed, people were aware of shocks from electric fish.
Ancient Egyptian texts dating from 2750 BCE referred to these fish as the "Thunderer of the Nile", and described them as the "protectors" of all other fish.
Electric fish were again reported millennia later by ancient Greek, Roman and Arabic naturalists and physicians.
Several ancient writers, such as Pliny the Elder and Scribonius Largus, attested to the numbing effect of electric shocks delivered by electric catfish and electric rays, and knew that such shocks could travel along conducting objects.
Patients suffering from ailments such as gout or headache were directed to touch electric fish in the hope that the powerful jolt might cure them.
Possibly the earliest and nearest approach to the discovery of the identity of lightning, and electricity from any other source, is to be attributed to the Arabs, who before the 15th century had the Arabic word for lightning ra‘ad () applied to the electric ray.
Ancient cultures around the Mediterranean knew that certain objects, such as rods of amber, could be rubbed with cat's fur to attract light objects like feathers.
Thales of Miletus made a series of observations on static electricity around 600 BCE, from which he believed that friction rendered amber magnetic, in contrast to minerals such as magnetite, which needed no rubbing.
Thales was incorrect in believing the attraction was due to a magnetic effect, but later science would prove a link between magnetism and electricity.
According to a controversial theory, the Parthians may have had knowledge of electroplating, based on the 1936 discovery of the Baghdad Battery, which resembles a galvanic cell, though it is uncertain whether the artifact was electrical in nature.
Electricity would remain little more than an intellectual curiosity for millennia until 1600, when the English scientist William Gilbert wrote De Magnete, in which he made a careful study of electricity and magnetism, distinguishing the lodestone effect from static electricity produced by rubbing amber.
This association gave rise to the English words "electric" and "electricity", which made their first appearance in print in Thomas Browne's Pseudodoxia Epidemica of 1646.
Further work was conducted in the 17th and early 18th centuries by Otto von Guericke, Robert Boyle, Stephen Gray and C. F. du Fay.
Later in the 18th century, Benjamin Franklin conducted extensive research in electricity, selling his possessions to fund his work.
In June 1752 he is reputed to have attached a metal key to the bottom of a dampened kite string and flown the kite in a storm-threatened sky.
A succession of sparks jumping from the key to the back of his hand showed that lightning was indeed electrical in nature.
He also explained the apparently paradoxical behavior of the Leyden jar as a device for storing large amounts of electrical charge in terms of electricity consisting of both positive and negative charges.
While the early 19th century had seen rapid progress in electrical science, the late 19th century would see the greatest progress in electrical engineering.
Through such people as Alexander Graham Bell, Ottó Bláthy, Thomas Edison, Galileo Ferraris, Oliver Heaviside, Ányos Jedlik, William Thomson, 1st Baron Kelvin, Charles Algernon Parsons, Werner von Siemens, Joseph Swan, Reginald Fessenden, Nikola Tesla and George Westinghouse, electricity turned from a scientific curiosity into an essential tool for modern life.
In 1887, Heinrich Hertz discovered that electrodes illuminated with ultraviolet light create electric sparks more easily.
In 1905, Albert Einstein published a paper that explained experimental data from the photoelectric effect as being the result of light energy being carried in discrete quantized packets, energising electrons.
This discovery led to the quantum revolution.
Einstein was awarded the Nobel Prize in Physics in 1921 for "his discovery of the law of the photoelectric effect".
The photoelectric effect is also employed in photocells such as can be found in solar panels and this is frequently used to make electricity commercially.
The first solid-state device was the "cat's-whisker detector" first used in the 1900s in radio receivers.
A whisker-like wire is placed lightly in contact with a solid crystal (such as a germanium crystal) to detect a radio signal by the contact junction effect.
In a solid-state component, the current is confined to solid elements and compounds engineered specifically to switch and amplify it.
Current flow can be understood in two forms: as negatively charged electrons, and as positively charged electron deficiencies called holes.
These charges and holes are understood in terms of quantum physics.
The building material is most often a crystalline semiconductor.
Solid-state electronics came into its own with the emergence of transistor technology.
The first working transistor, a germanium-based point-contact transistor, was invented by John Bardeen and Walter Houser Brattain at Bell Labs in 1947, followed by the bipolar junction transistor in 1948.
These early transistors were relatively bulky devices that were difficult to manufacture on a mass-production basis.
They were followed by the silicon-based MOSFET (metal-oxide-semiconductor field-effect transistor, or MOS transistor), invented by Mohamed M. Atalla and Dawon Kahng at Bell Labs in 1959.
It was the first truly compact transistor that could be miniaturised and mass-produced for a wide range of uses, leading to the silicon revolution.
Solid-state devices started becoming prevalent from the 1960s, with the transition from vacuum tubes to semiconductor diodes, transistors, integrated circuit (IC) chips, MOSFETs, and light-emitting diode (LED) technology.
The most common electronic device is the MOSFET, which has become the most widely manufactured device in history.
Common solid-state MOS devices include microprocessor chips and semiconductor memory.
A special type of semiconductor memory is flash memory, which is used in USB flash drives and mobile devices, as well as solid-state drive (SSD) technology to replace mechanically rotating magnetic disc hard disk drive (HDD) technology.
Concepts
Electric charge
The presence of charge gives rise to an electrostatic force: charges exert a force on each other, an effect that was known, though not understood, in antiquity.
A lightweight ball suspended from a string can be charged by touching it with a glass rod that has itself been charged by rubbing with a cloth.
If a similar ball is charged by the same glass rod, it is found to repel the first: the charge acts to force the two balls apart.
Two balls that are charged with a rubbed amber rod also repel each other.
However, if one ball is charged by the glass rod, and the other by an amber rod, the two balls are found to attract each other.
These phenomena were investigated in the late eighteenth century by Charles-Augustin de Coulomb, who deduced that charge manifests itself in two opposing forms.
This discovery led to the well-known axiom: like-charged objects repel and opposite-charged objects attract.
The electromagnetic force is very strong, second only in strength to the strong interaction, but unlike that force it operates over all distances.
In comparison with the much weaker gravitational force, the electromagnetic force pushing two electrons apart is 1042 times that of the gravitational attraction pulling them together.
Study has shown that the origin of charge is from certain types of subatomic particles which have the property of electric charge.
Electric charge gives rise to and interacts with the electromagnetic force, one of the four fundamental forces of nature.
The most familiar carriers of electrical charge are the electron and proton.
Experiment has shown charge to be a conserved quantity, that is, the net charge within an electrically isolated system will always remain constant regardless of any changes taking place within that system.
Within the system, charge may be transferred between bodies, either by direct contact, or by passing along a conducting material, such as a wire.
The amount of charge is usually given the symbol Q and expressed in coulombs; each electron carries the same charge of approximately −1.6022×10−19 coulomb.
The proton has a charge that is equal and opposite, and thus +1.6022×10−19 coulomb.
Charge is possessed not just by matter, but also by antimatter, each antiparticle bearing an equal and opposite charge to its corresponding particle.
Charge can be measured by a number of means, an early instrument being the gold-leaf electroscope, which although still in use for classroom demonstrations, has been superseded by the electronic electrometer.
By historical convention, a positive current is defined as having the same direction of flow as any positive charge it contains, or to flow from the most positive part of a circuit to the most negative part.
Current defined in this manner is called conventional current.
The motion of negatively charged electrons around an electric circuit, one of the most familiar forms of current, is thus deemed positive in the opposite direction to that of the electrons.
However, depending on the conditions, an electric current can consist of a flow of charged particles in either direction, or even in both directions at once.
The positive-to-negative convention is widely used to simplify this situation.
The process by which electric current passes through a material is termed electrical conduction, and its nature varies with that of the charged particles and the material through which they are travelling.
Examples of electric currents include metallic conduction, where electrons flow through a conductor such as metal, and electrolysis, where ions (charged atoms) flow through liquids, or through plasmas such as electrical sparks.
While the particles themselves can move quite slowly, sometimes with an average drift velocity only fractions of a millimetre per second,
Current causes several observable effects, which historically were the means of recognising its presence.
That water could be decomposed by the current from a voltaic pile was discovered by Nicholson and Carlisle in 1800, a process now known as electrolysis.
Their work was greatly expanded upon by Michael Faraday in 1833.
Current through a resistance causes localised heating, an effect James Prescott Joule studied mathematically in 1840.
He had discovered electromagnetism, a fundamental interaction between electricity and magnetics.
The level of electromagnetic emissions generated by electric arcing is high enough to produce electromagnetic interference, which can be detrimental to the workings of adjacent equipment.
In engineering or household applications, current is often described as being either direct current (DC) or alternating current (AC).
These terms refer to how the current varies in time.
Direct current, as produced by example from a battery and required by most electronic devices, is a unidirectional flow from the positive part of a circuit to the negative.
If, as is most common, this flow is carried by electrons, they will be travelling in the opposite direction.
Alternating current is any current that reverses direction repeatedly; almost always this takes the form of a sine wave.
and its strength at any one point is defined as the force (per unit charge) that would be felt by a stationary, negligible charge if placed at that point.
whose term 'lines of force' still sometimes sees use.
The field lines are the paths that a point positive charge would seek to make as it was forced to move within the field; they are however an imaginary concept with no physical existence, and the field permeates all the intervening space between the lines.
The most visible natural occurrence of this is lightning, caused when charge becomes separated in the clouds by rising columns of air, and raises the electric field in the air to greater than it can withstand.
The voltage of a large lightning cloud may be as high as 100 MV and have discharge energies as great as 250 kWh.
The field strength is greatly affected by nearby conducting objects, and it is particularly intense when it is forced to curve around sharply pointed objects.
This principle is exploited in the lightning conductor, the sharp spike of which acts to encourage the lightning stroke to develop there, rather than to the building it serves to protect
Electric potential
The concept of electric potential is closely linked to that of the electric field.
A small charge placed within an electric field experiences a force, and to have brought that charge to that point against the force requires work.
The electric potential at any point is defined as the energy required to bring a unit test charge from an infinite distance slowly to that point.
It is usually measured in volts, and one volt is the potential for which one joule of work must be expended to bring a charge of one coulomb from infinity.
Electric potential is a scalar quantity, that is, it has only magnitude and not direction.
It may be viewed as analogous to height: just as a released object will fall through a difference in heights caused by a gravitational field, so a charge will 'fall' across the voltage caused by an electric field.
As relief maps show contour lines marking points of equal height, a set of lines marking points of equal potential (known as equipotentials) may be drawn around an electrostatically charged object.
The equipotentials cross all lines of force at right angles.
They must also lie parallel to a conductor's surface, otherwise this would produce a force that will move the charge carriers to even the potential of the surface.
The electric field was formally defined as the force exerted per unit charge, but the concept of potential allows for a more useful and equivalent definition: the electric field is the local gradient of the electric potential.
Usually expressed in volts per metre, the vector direction of the field is the line of greatest slope of potential, and where the equipotentials lie closest together.
Ørsted did not fully understand his discovery, but he observed the effect was reciprocal: a current exerts a force on a magnet, and a magnetic field exerts a force on a current.
The phenomenon was further investigated by Ampère, who discovered that two parallel current-carrying wires exerted a force upon each other: two wires conducting currents in the same direction are attracted to each other, while wires containing currents in opposite directions are forced apart.
The interaction is mediated by the magnetic field each current produces and forms the basis for the international definition of the ampere.
Experimentation by Faraday in 1831 revealed that a wire moving perpendicular to a magnetic field developed a potential difference between its ends.
Further analysis of this process, known as electromagnetic induction, enabled him to state the principle, now known as Faraday's law of induction, that the potential difference induced in a closed circuit is proportional to the rate of change of magnetic flux through the loop.
Exploitation of this discovery enabled him to invent the first electrical generator in 1831, in which he converted the mechanical energy of a rotating copper disc to electrical energy.
The resistor is perhaps the simplest of passive circuit elements: as its name suggests, it resists the current through it, dissipating its energy as heat.
The resistance is a consequence of the motion of charge through a conductor: in metals, for example, resistance is primarily due to collisions between electrons and ions.
Ohm's law is a basic law of circuit theory, stating that the current passing through a resistance is directly proportional to the potential difference across it.
The resistance of most materials is relatively constant over a range of temperatures and currents; materials under these conditions are known as 'ohmic'.
The ohm, the unit of resistance, was named in honour of Georg Ohm, and is symbolised by the Greek letter Ω. 1 Ω is the resistance that will produce a potential difference of one volt in response to a current of one amp.
Electronics
Electronics deals with electrical circuits that involve active electrical components such as vacuum tubes, transistors, diodes, optoelectronics, sensors and integrated circuits, and associated passive interconnection technologies.
The nonlinear behaviour of active components and their ability to control electron flows makes amplification of weak signals possible and electronics is widely used in information processing, telecommunications, and signal processing.
The ability of electronic devices to act as switches makes digital information processing possible.
Interconnection technologies such as circuit boards, electronics packaging technology, and other varied forms of communication infrastructure complete circuit functionality and transform the mixed components into a regular working system.
Today, most electronic devices use semiconductor components to perform electron control.
The study of semiconductor devices and related technology is considered a branch of solid state physics, whereas the design and construction of electronic circuits to solve practical problems come under electronics engineering.
Electromagnetic wave
Faraday's and Ampère's work showed that a time-varying magnetic field acted as a source of an electric field, and a time-varying electric field was a source of a magnetic field.
Thus, when either field is changing in time, then a field of the other is necessarily induced.
It was not until the invention of the voltaic pile in the eighteenth century that a viable source of electricity became available.
The voltaic pile, and its modern descendant, the electrical battery, store energy chemically and make it available on demand in the form of electrical energy.
The invention in the late nineteenth century of the transformer meant that electrical power could be transmitted more efficiently at a higher voltage but lower current.
Efficient electrical transmission meant in turn that electricity could be generated at centralised power stations, where it benefited from economies of scale, and then be despatched relatively long distances to where it was needed.
Since electrical energy cannot easily be stored in quantities large enough to meet demands on a national scale, at all times exactly as much must be produced as is required.
a rate of growth that is now being experienced by emerging economies such as those of India or China.
Historically, the growth rate for electricity demand has outstripped that for other forms of energy.
Environmental concerns with electricity generation have led to an increased focus on generation from renewable sources, in particular from wind and solar.
While debate can be expected to continue over the environmental impact of different means of electricity production, its final form is relatively clean.
The invention of a practical incandescent light bulb in the 1870s led to lighting becoming one of the first publicly available applications of electrical power.
Although electrification brought with it its own dangers, replacing the naked flames of gas lighting greatly reduced fire hazards within homes and factories.
Public utilities were set up in many cities targeting the burgeoning market for electrical lighting.
In the late 20th century and in modern times, the trend has started to flow in the direction of deregulation in the electrical power sector.
The resistive Joule heating effect employed in filament light bulbs also sees more direct use in electric heating.
While this is versatile and controllable, it can be seen as wasteful, since most electrical generation has already required the production of heat at a power station.
A number of countries, such as Denmark, have issued legislation restricting or banning the use of resistive electric heating in new buildings.
Electricity is however still a highly practical energy source for heating and refrigeration, with air conditioning/heat pumps representing a growing sector for electricity demand for heating and cooling, the effects of which electricity utilities are increasingly obliged to accommodate.
Electricity is used within telecommunications, and indeed the electrical telegraph, demonstrated commercially in 1837 by Cooke and Wheatstone, was one of its earliest applications.
With the construction of first intercontinental, and then transatlantic, telegraph systems in the 1860s, electricity had enabled communications in minutes across the globe.
Optical fibre and satellite communication have taken a share of the market for communications systems, but electricity can be expected to remain an essential part of the process.
The effects of electromagnetism are most visibly employed in the electric motor, which provides a clean and efficient means of motive power.
A stationary motor such as a winch is easily provided with a supply of power, but a motor that moves with its application, such as an electric vehicle, is obliged to either carry along a power source such as a battery, or to collect current from a sliding contact such as a pantograph.
Electrically powered vehicles are used in public transportation, such as electric buses and trains, and an increasing number of battery-powered electric cars in private ownership.
Electronic devices make use of the transistor, perhaps one of the most important inventions of the twentieth century, and a fundamental building block of all modern circuitry.
A modern integrated circuit may contain several billion miniaturised transistors in a region only a few centimetres square.
Electricity and the natural world
Physiological effects
A voltage applied to a human body causes an electric current through the tissues, and although the relationship is non-linear, the greater the voltage, the greater the current.
The threshold for perception varies with the supply frequency and with the path of the current, but is about 0.1 mA to 1 mA for mains-frequency electricity, though a current as low as a microamp can be detected as an electrovibration effect under certain conditions.
If the current is sufficiently high, it will cause muscle contraction, fibrillation of the heart, and tissue burns.
Electrical phenomena in nature
Electricity is not a human invention, and may be observed in several forms in nature, a prominent manifestation of which is lightning.
Many interactions familiar at the macroscopic level, such as touch, friction or chemical bonding, are due to interactions between electric fields on the atomic scale.
The Earth's magnetic field is thought to arise from a natural dynamo of circulating currents in the planet's core.
Certain crystals, such as quartz, or even sugar, generate a potential difference across their faces when subjected to external pressure.
This phenomenon is known as piezoelectricity, from the Greek piezein (πιέζειν), meaning to press, and was discovered in 1880 by Pierre and Jacques Curie.
The effect is reciprocal, and when a piezoelectric material is subjected to an electric field, a small change in physical dimensions takes place.
while others, termed electrogenic, are able to generate voltages themselves to serve as a predatory or defensive weapon.
An electric shock stimulates this system, and causes muscles to contract.
Action potentials are also responsible for coordinating activities in certain plants.
In the 19th and early 20th century, electricity was not part of the everyday life of many people, even in the industrialised Western world.
The popular culture of the time accordingly often depicted it as a mysterious, quasi-magical force that can slay the living, revive the dead or otherwise bend the laws of nature.
This attitude began with the 1771 experiments of Luigi Galvani in which the legs of dead frogs were shown to twitch on application of animal electricity.
"Revitalization" or resuscitation of apparently dead or drowned persons was reported in the medical literature shortly after Galvani's work.
These results were known to Mary Shelley when she authored Frankenstein (1819), although she does not name the method of revitalization of the monster.
The revitalization of monsters with electricity later became a stock theme in horror films.
As the public familiarity with electricity as the lifeblood of the Second Industrial Revolution grew, its wielders were more often cast in a positive light, such as the workers who "finger death at their gloves' end as they piece and repiece the living wires" in Rudyard Kipling's 1907 poem Sons of Martha.
Electrically powered vehicles of every sort featured large in adventure stories such as those of Jules Verne and the Tom Swift books.
The masters of electricity, whether fictional or real-including scientists such as Thomas Edison, Charles Steinmetz or Nikola Tesla-were popularly conceived of as having wizard-like powers.
With electricity ceasing to be a novelty and becoming a necessity of everyday life in the later half of the 20th century, it required particular attention by popular culture only when it stops flowing, an event that usually signals disaster.
The people who keep it flowing, such as the nameless hero of Jimmy Webb’s song "Wichita Lineman" (1968), are still often cast as heroic, wizard-like figures.
* Ampère's circuital law, connects the direction of an electric current and its associated magnetic currents.
* Electric potential energy, the potential energy of a system of charges
* Hydraulic analogy, an analogy between the flow of water and electric current
Notes
* Benjamin, P. (1898).
https:/ books?id=VLsKAAAAIAAJ A history of electricity (The intellectual rise in electricity) from antiquity to the days of Benjamin Franklin.
New York: J. Wiley & Sons.
