Asteroids are minor planets, especially of the inner Solar System.
Larger asteroids have also been called planetoids.
These terms have historically been applied to any astronomical object orbiting the Sun that did not resolve into a disc in a telescope and was not observed to have characteristics of an active comet such as a tail.
As minor planets in the outer Solar System were discovered that were found to have volatile-rich surfaces similar to comets, these came to be distinguished from the objects found in the main asteroid belt.
In this article, the term "asteroid" refers to the minor planets of the inner Solar System, including those co-orbital with Jupiter.
There exist millions of asteroids, many the shattered remnants of planetesimals, bodies within the young Sun's solar nebula that never grew large enough to become planets.
The vast majority of known asteroids orbit within the main asteroid belt located between the orbits of Mars and Jupiter, or are co-orbital with Jupiter (the Jupiter trojans).
However, other orbital families exist with significant populations, including the near-Earth objects.
Individual asteroids are classified by their characteristic spectra, with the majority falling into three main groups: C-type, M-type, and S-type.
These were named after and are generally identified with carbon-rich, metallic, and silicate (stony) compositions, respectively.
The sizes of asteroids varies greatly; the largest, Ceres, is almost across.
Asteroids are somewhat arbitrarily differentiated from comets and meteoroids.
In the case of comets, the difference is one of composition: while asteroids are mainly composed of mineral and rock, comets are primarily composed of dust and ice.
Furthermore, asteroids formed closer to the sun, preventing the development of cometary ice.
The difference between asteroids and meteoroids is mainly one of size: meteoroids have a diameter of one meter or less, whereas asteroids have a diameter of greater than one meter.
Finally, meteoroids can be composed of either cometary or asteroidal materials.
Only one asteroid, 4 Vesta, which has a relatively reflective surface, is normally visible to the naked eye, and this only in very dark skies when it is favorably positioned.
Rarely, small asteroids passing close to Earth may be visible to the naked eye for a short time.
, the Minor Planet Center had data on almost 745,000 objects in the inner and outer Solar System, of which almost 504,000 had enough information to be given numbered designations.
The United Nations declared 30 June as International Asteroid Day to educate the public about asteroids.
The date of International Asteroid Day commemorates the anniversary of the Tunguska asteroid impact over Siberia, Russian Federation, on 30 June 1908.
In April 2018, the B612 Foundation reported "It's 100 percent certain we'll be hit by a devastating asteroid, but we're not 100 percent sure when."
Also in 2018, physicist Stephen Hawking,
in his final book Brief Answers to the Big Questions, considered an asteroid collision to be the biggest threat to the planet.
In June 2018, the US National Science and Technology Council warned that America is unprepared for an asteroid impact event, and has developed and released the "National Near-Earth Object Preparedness Strategy Action Plan" to better prepare.
Discovery
The first asteroid to be discovered, Ceres, was originally considered to be a new planet.
This was followed by the discovery of other similar bodies, which, with the equipment of the time, appeared to be points of light, like stars, showing little or no planetary disc, though readily distinguishable from stars due to their apparent motions.
This prompted the astronomer Sir William Herschel to propose the term "asteroid", coined in Greek as ἀστεροειδής, or asteroeidēs, meaning 'star-like, star-shaped', and derived from the Ancient Greek
However, it is becoming increasingly common for the term "asteroid" to be restricted to minor planets of the inner Solar System.
Currently only the largest object in the asteroid belt, Ceres, at about across, has been placed in the dwarf planet category.
Formation
It is thought that planetesimals in the asteroid belt evolved much like the rest of the solar nebula until Jupiter neared its current mass, at which point excitation from orbital resonances with Jupiter ejected over 99% of planetesimals in the belt.
Simulations and a discontinuity in spin rate and spectral properties suggest that asteroids larger than approximately in diameter accreted during that early era, whereas smaller bodies are fragments from collisions between asteroids during or after the Jovian disruption.
Ceres and Vesta grew large enough to melt and differentiate, with heavy metallic elements sinking to the core, leaving rocky minerals in the crust.
In the Nice model, many Kuiper-belt objects are captured in the outer asteroid belt, at distances greater than 2.6 AU.
Most were later ejected by Jupiter, but those that remained may be the D-type asteroids, and possibly include Ceres.
Distribution within the Solar System
Various dynamical groups of asteroids have been discovered orbiting in the inner Solar System.
Their orbits are perturbed by the gravity of other bodies in the Solar System and by the Yarkovsky effect.
Significant populations include:
Asteroid belt
The majority of known asteroids orbit within the asteroid belt between the orbits of Mars and Jupiter, generally in relatively low-eccentricity (i.e. not very elongated) orbits.
This belt is now estimated to contain between 1.1 and 1.9 million asteroids larger than in diameter, and millions of smaller ones.
These asteroids may be remnants of the protoplanetary disk, and in this region the accretion of planetesimals into planets during the formative period of the Solar System was prevented by large gravitational perturbations by Jupiter.
Trojans
Trojans are populations that share an orbit with a larger planet or moon, but do not collide with it because they orbit in one of the two Lagrangian points of stability, L4 and L5, which lie 60° ahead of and behind the larger body.
The most significant population of trojans are the Jupiter trojans.
Although fewer Jupiter trojans have been discovered (), it is thought that they are as numerous as the asteroids in the asteroid belt.
Trojans have been found in the orbits of other planets, including Venus, Earth, Mars, Uranus, and Neptune.
Near-Earth asteroids
Near-Earth asteroids, or NEAs, are asteroids that have orbits that pass close to that of Earth.
Asteroids that actually cross Earth's orbital path are known as Earth-crossers.
, 14,464 near-Earth asteroids are known and the number over one kilometer in diameter is estimated to be 900-1,000.
Characteristics
Size distribution
Asteroids vary greatly in size, from almost for the largest down to rocks just 1 meter across.
The three largest are very much like miniature planets: they are roughly spherical, have at least partly differentiated interiors, and are thought to be surviving protoplanets.
The vast majority, however, are much smaller and are irregularly shaped; they are thought to be either battered planetesimals or fragments of larger bodies.
The dwarf planet Ceres is by far the largest asteroid, with a diameter of .
The next largest are 4 Vesta and 2 Pallas, both with diameters of just over .
Vesta is the only main-belt asteroid that can, on occasion, be visible to the naked eye.
On some rare occasions, a near-Earth asteroid may briefly become visible without technical aid; see 99942 Apophis.
The mass of all the objects of the asteroid belt, lying between the orbits of Mars and Jupiter, is estimated to be about 2.8-, or about 4% of the mass of the Moon.
Of this, Ceres comprises , a third of the total.
Adding in the next three most massive objects, Vesta (9%), Pallas (7%), and Hygiea (3%), brings this figure up to 51%; whereas the three after that, 511 Davida (1.2%), 704 Interamnia (1.0%), and 52 Europa (0.9%), only add another 3% to the total mass.
The number of asteroids then increases rapidly as their individual masses decrease.
The number of asteroids decreases markedly with size.
Although this generally follows a power law, there are 'bumps' at and , where more asteroids than expected from a logarithmic distribution are found.
Largest asteroids
Although their location in the asteroid belt excludes them from planet status, the three largest objects, Ceres, Vesta, and Pallas, are intact protoplanets that share many characteristics common to planets, and are atypical compared to the majority of "potato"-shaped asteroids.
The fourth largest asteroid, Hygiea, has an undifferentiated interior, like the majority of asteroids.
Between them, the four largest asteroids constitute half the mass of the asteroid belt.
Ceres is the only asteroid with a fully ellipsoidal shape and hence the only one that is a dwarf planet.
It has a much higher absolute magnitude than the other asteroids, of around 3.32, and may possess a surface layer of ice.
Like the planets, Ceres is differentiated: it has a crust, a mantle and a core.
its composition is mainly of basaltic rock such as olivine.
Aside from the large crater at its southern pole, Rheasilvia, Vesta also has an ellipsoidal shape.
Vesta is the parent body of the Vestian family and other V-type asteroids, and is the source of the HED meteorites, which constitute 5% of all meteorites on Earth.
Pallas is unusual in that, like Uranus, it rotates on its side, with its axis of rotation tilted at high angles to its orbital plane.
Its composition is similar to that of Ceres: high in carbon and silicon, and perhaps partially differentiated.
Pallas is the parent body of the Palladian family of asteroids.
Hygiea is the largest carbonaceous asteroid and, unlike the other largest asteroids, lies relatively close to the plane of the ecliptic.
It is the largest member and presumed parent body of the Hygiean family of asteroids.
Because there is no sufficiently large crater on the surface to be the source of that family, as there is on Vesta, it is thought that Hygiea may have been completely disrupted in the collision that formed the Hygiean family, and recoalesced after losing a bit less than 2% of its mass.
known, compared to the remaining mass of the asteroid belt.
Rotation
Measurements of the rotation rates of large asteroids in the asteroid belt show that there is an upper limit.
Very few asteroids with a diameter larger than 100 meters have a rotation period smaller than 2.2 hours.
For asteroids rotating faster than approximately this rate, the inertial force at the surface is greater than the gravitational force, so any loose surface material would be flung out.
However, a solid object should be able to rotate much more rapidly.
This suggests that most asteroids with a diameter over 100 meters are rubble piles formed through accumulation of debris after collisions between asteroids.
Composition
The physical composition of asteroids is varied and in most cases poorly understood.
Ceres appears to be composed of a rocky core covered by an icy mantle, where Vesta is thought to have a nickel-iron core, olivine mantle, and basaltic crust.
Hygiea, however, which appears to have a uniformly primitive composition of carbonaceous chondrite, is thought to be the largest undifferentiated asteroid.
Most of the smaller asteroids are thought to be piles of rubble held together loosely by gravity, though the largest are probably solid.
Some asteroids have moons or are co-orbiting binaries: Rubble piles, moons, binaries, and scattered asteroid families are thought to be the results of collisions that disrupted a parent asteroid, or, possibly, a planet.
Asteroids contain traces of amino acids and other organic compounds, and some speculate that asteroid impacts may have seeded the early Earth with the chemicals necessary to initiate life, or may have even brought life itself to Earth (also see panspermia).
In August 2011, a report, based on NASA studies with meteorites found on Earth, was published suggesting DNA and RNA components (adenine, guanine and related organic molecules) may have been formed on asteroids and comets in outer space.
Composition is calculated from three primary sources: albedo, surface spectrum, and density.
The last can only be determined accurately by observing the orbits of moons the asteroid might have.
So far, every asteroid with moons has turned out to be a rubble pile, a loose conglomeration of rock and metal that may be half empty space by volume.
The investigated asteroids are as large as 280 km in diameter, and include 121 Hermione (268×186×183 km), and 87 Sylvia (384×262×232 km).
Only half a dozen asteroids are larger than 87 Sylvia, though none of them have moons; however, some smaller asteroids are thought to be more massive, suggesting they may not have been disrupted, and indeed 511 Davida, the same size as Sylvia to within measurement error, is estimated to be two and a half times as massive, though this is highly uncertain.
The fact that such large asteroids as Sylvia can be rubble piles, presumably due to disruptive impacts, has important consequences for the formation of the Solar System: Computer simulations of collisions involving solid bodies show them destroying each other as often as merging, but colliding rubble piles are more likely to merge.
This means that the cores of the planets could have formed relatively quickly.
On 7 October 2009, the presence of water ice was confirmed on the surface of 24 Themis using NASA’s Infrared Telescope Facility.
The surface of the asteroid appears completely covered in ice.
As this ice layer is sublimating, it may be getting replenished by a reservoir of ice under the surface.
Organic compounds were also detected on the surface.
Scientists hypothesize that some of the first water brought to Earth was delivered by asteroid impacts after the collision that produced the Moon.
The presence of ice on 24 Themis supports this theory.
On 22 January 2014, European Space Agency (ESA) scientists reported the detection, for the first definitive time, of water vapor on Ceres, the largest object in the asteroid belt.
The detection was made by using the far-infrared abilities of the Herschel Space Observatory.
The finding is unexpected because comets, not asteroids, are typically considered to "sprout jets and plumes".
According to one of the scientists, "The lines are becoming more and more blurred between comets and asteroids."
Although the early original criticism had not undergone peer review, a more recent peer-reviewed study was subsequently published.
Medium-sized asteroids such as Mathilde and 243 Ida that have been observed up close also reveal a deep regolith covering the surface.
Of the big four, Pallas and Hygiea are practically unknown.
Vesta has compression fractures encircling a radius-size crater at its south pole but is otherwise a spheroid.
Ceres seems quite different in the glimpses Hubble has provided, with surface features that are unlikely to be due to simple craters and impact basins, but details will be expanded with the Dawn spacecraft, which entered Ceres orbit on 6 March 2015.
Color
Asteroids become darker and redder with age due to space weathering.
However evidence suggests most of the color change occurs rapidly, in the first hundred thousands years, limiting the usefulness of spectral measurement for determining the age of asteroids.
Classification
Asteroids are commonly categorized according to two criteria: the characteristics of their orbits, and features of their reflectance spectrum.
Orbital classification
Many asteroids have been placed in groups and families based on their orbital characteristics.
Apart from the broadest divisions, it is customary to name a group of asteroids after the first member of that group to be discovered.
Groups are relatively loose dynamical associations, whereas families are tighter and result from the catastrophic break-up of a large parent asteroid sometime in the past.
Families are more common and easier to identify within the main asteroid belt, but several small families have been reported among the Jupiter trojans.
Main belt families were first recognized by Kiyotsugu Hirayama in 1918 and are often called Hirayama families in his honor.
About 30-35% of the bodies in the asteroid belt belong to dynamical families each thought to have a common origin in a past collision between asteroids.
A family has also been associated with the plutoid dwarf planet .
Quasi-satellites and horseshoe objects
Some asteroids have unusual horseshoe orbits that are co-orbital with Earth or some other planet.
Examples are 3753 Cruithne and .
The first instance of this type of orbital arrangement was discovered between Saturn's moons Epimetheus and Janus.
Sometimes these horseshoe objects temporarily become quasi-satellites for a few decades or a few hundred years, before returning to their earlier status.
Both Earth and Venus are known to have quasi-satellites.
Such objects, if associated with Earth or Venus or even hypothetically Mercury, are a special class of Aten asteroids.
However, such objects could be associated with outer planets as well.
Spectral classification
In 1975, an asteroid taxonomic system based on color, albedo, and spectral shape was developed by Clark R. Chapman, David Morrison, and Ben Zellner.
These properties are thought to correspond to the composition of the asteroid's surface material.
The original classification system had three categories: C-types for dark carbonaceous objects (75% of known asteroids), S-types for stony (silicaceous) objects (17% of known asteroids) and U for those that did not fit into either C or S.
This classification has since been expanded to include many other asteroid types.
The number of types continues to grow as more asteroids are studied.
The two most widely used taxonomies now used are the Tholen classification and SMASS classification.
The former was proposed in 1984 by David J. Tholen, and was based on data collected from an eight-color asteroid survey performed in the 1980s.
This resulted in 14 asteroid categories.
In 2002, the Small Main-Belt Asteroid Spectroscopic Survey resulted in a modified version of the Tholen taxonomy with 24 different types.
Both systems have three broad categories of C, S, and X asteroids, where X consists of mostly metallic asteroids, such as the M-type.
There are also several smaller classes.
The proportion of known asteroids falling into the various spectral types does not necessarily reflect the proportion of all asteroids that are of that type; some types are easier to detect than others, biasing the totals.
Problems
Originally, spectral designations were based on inferences of an asteroid's composition.
However, the correspondence between spectral class and composition is not always very good, and a variety of classifications are in use.
This has led to significant confusion.
Although asteroids of different spectral classifications are likely to be composed of different materials, there are no assurances that asteroids within the same taxonomic class are composed of similar materials.
Naming
A newly discovered asteroid is given a provisional designation (such as ) consisting of the year of discovery and an alphanumeric code indicating the half-month of discovery and the sequence within that half-month.
Once an asteroid's orbit has been confirmed, it is given a number, and later may also be given a name (e.g. 433 Eros).
The formal naming convention uses parentheses around the number (e.g. (433) Eros), but dropping the parentheses is quite common.
Informally, it is common to drop the number altogether, or to drop it after the first mention when a name is repeated in running text.
In addition, names can be proposed by the asteroid's discoverer, within guidelines established by the International Astronomical Union.
Symbols
The first asteroids to be discovered were assigned iconic symbols like the ones traditionally used to designate the planets.
By 1855 there were two dozen asteroid symbols, which often occurred in multiple variants.
In 1851, after the fifteenth asteroid (Eunomia) had been discovered, Johann Franz Encke made a major change in the upcoming 1854 edition of the Berliner Astronomisches Jahrbuch (BAJ, Berlin Astronomical Yearbook).
He introduced a disk (circle), a traditional symbol for a star, as the generic symbol for an asteroid.
The circle was then numbered in order of discovery to indicate a specific asteroid (although he assigned ① to the fifth, Astraea, while continuing to designate the first four only with their existing iconic symbols).
The numbered-circle convention was quickly adopted by astronomers, and the next asteroid to be discovered (16 Psyche, in 1852) was the first to be designated in that way at the time of its discovery.
However, Psyche was given an iconic symbol as well, as were a few other asteroids discovered over the next few years .
20 Massalia was the first asteroid that was not assigned an iconic symbol, and no iconic symbols were created after the 1855 discovery of 37 Fides.
That year Astraea's number was increased to ⑤, but the first four asteroids, Ceres to Vesta, were not listed by their numbers until the 1867 edition.
The circle was soon abbreviated to a pair of parentheses, which were easier to typeset and sometimes omitted altogether over the next few decades, leading to the modern convention.
The first close-up photographs of asteroid-like objects were taken in 1971, when the Mariner 9 probe imaged Phobos and Deimos, the two small moons of Mars, which are probably captured asteroids.
These images revealed the irregular, potato-like shapes of most asteroids, as did later images from the Voyager probes of the small moons of the gas giants.
The first true asteroid to be photographed in close-up was 951 Gaspra in 1991, followed in 1993 by 243 Ida and its moon Dactyl, all of which were imaged by the Galileo probe en route to Jupiter.
The first dedicated asteroid probe was NEAR Shoemaker, which photographed 253 Mathilde in 1997, before entering into orbit around 433 Eros, finally landing on its surface in 2001.
Other asteroids briefly visited by spacecraft en route to other destinations include 9969 Braille (by Deep Space 1 in 1999), and 5535 Annefrank (by Stardust in 2002).
From September to November 2005, the Japanese Hayabusa probe studied 25143 Itokawa in detail and was plagued with difficulties, but returned samples of its surface to Earth on 13 June 2010.
The European Rosetta probe (launched in 2004) flew by 2867 Šteins in 2008 and 21 Lutetia, the third-largest asteroid visited to date, in 2010.
In September 2007, NASA launched the Dawn spacecraft, which orbited 4 Vesta from July 2011 to September 2012, and has been orbiting the dwarf planet 1 Ceres since 2015.
4 Vesta is the second-largest asteroid visited to date.
On 13 December 2012, China's lunar orbiter Chang'e 2 flew within of the asteroid 4179 Toutatis on an extended mission.
The Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency (JAXA) launched the Hayabusa2 probe in December 2014, and plans to return samples from 162173 Ryugu in December 2020.
In June 2018, the US National Science and Technology Council warned that America is unprepared for an asteroid impact event, and has developed and released the "National Near-Earth Object Preparedness Strategy Action Plan" to better prepare.
In September 2016, NASA launched the OSIRIS-REx sample return mission to asteroid 101955 Bennu, which it reached in December 2018.
, the probe is in orbit around the asteroid.
Planned and future missions
In early 2013, NASA announced the planning stages of a mission to capture a near-Earth asteroid and move it into lunar orbit where it could possibly be visited by astronauts and later impacted into the Moon.
On 19 June 2014, NASA reported that asteroid 2011 MD was a prime candidate for capture by a robotic mission, perhaps in the early 2020s.
It has been suggested that asteroids might be used as a source of materials that may be rare or exhausted on Earth (asteroid mining), or materials for constructing space habitats (see Colonization of the asteroids).
Materials that are heavy and expensive to launch from Earth may someday be mined from asteroids and used for space manufacturing and construction.
In the U.S. Discovery program the Psyche spacecraft proposal to 16 Psyche and Lucy spacecraft to Jupiter trojans made it to the semi-finalist stage of mission selection.
In January 2017, Lucy and Psyche mission were both selected as NASA's Discovery Program missions 13 and 14 respectively.
Location of Ceres (within asteroid belt) compared to other bodies of the Solar System
Fiction
Asteroids and the asteroid belt are a staple of science fiction stories.
Asteroids play several potential roles in science fiction: as places human beings might colonize, resources for extracting minerals, hazards encountered by spacecraft traveling between two other points, and as a threat to life on Earth or other inhabited planets, dwarf planets, and natural satellites by potential impact.
Gallery
File:951 Gaspra.jpg|951 Gaspra is the first asteroid to be imaged in close-up, imaged by Galileo on (enhanced color)
File:PIA02475 Eros' Bland Butterscotch Colors.jpg|Several views of 433 Eros in natural color, imaged by NEAR on
File:Dawn-image-070911.jpg|Vesta imaged by Dawn on
File:Ceres processed.jpg|Ceres imaged by Dawn on
* BOOTES (Burst Observer and Optical Transient Exploring System)
* NEOSSat Canada's new satellite
Notes
Further reading
Further information about asteroids
* https:/ figure/The-cumulative-number-of-known-asteroids-and-the-yearly-discovery-rate-are-plotted-above_fig1_278734323 Logarithmic graph of asteroid discoveries from 1801-2015 (see Logarithmic scale)
* Audio program: https:/ programmes web http:/ faq
minorplanets.php
When Did the Asteroids Become Minor Planets?
