Aelius Galenus or Claudius Galenus (; September 129 AD - /), often Anglicized as Galen and better known as Galen of Pergamon (), was a Greek physician, surgeon and philosopher in the Roman Empire.
Arguably the most accomplished of all medical researchers of antiquity, Galen influenced the development of various scientific disciplines, including anatomy, physiology, pathology, and neurology, as well as philosophy and logic.
The son of Aelius Nicon, a wealthy architect with scholarly interests, Galen received a comprehensive education that prepared him for a successful career as a physician and philosopher.
Born in the ancient Greek city of Pergamon (present-day Bergama, Turkey), Galen travelled extensively, exposing himself to a wide variety of medical theories and discoveries before settling in Rome, where he served prominent members of Roman society and eventually was given the position of personal physician to several emperors.
Galen's understanding of anatomy and medicine was principally influenced by the then-current theory of humorism (also known as the four humors - black bile, yellow bile, blood, and phlegm), as advanced by ancient Greek physicians such as Hippocrates.
His theories dominated and influenced Western medical science for more than 1,300 years.
His anatomical reports, based mainly on dissection of monkeys, especially the Barbary macaque, and pigs, remained uncontested until 1543, when printed descriptions and illustrations of human dissections were published in the seminal work De humani corporis fabrica by Andreas Vesalius where Galen's physiological theory was accommodated to these new observations.
Galen's theory of the physiology of the circulatory system remained unchallenged until ca.
1242, when Ibn al-Nafis published his book Sharh tashrih al-qanun li’ Ibn Sina (Commentary on Anatomy in Avicenna's Canon), in which he reported his discovery of the pulmonary circulation.
Galen saw himself as both a physician and a philosopher, as he wrote in his treatise entitled That the Best Physician Is Also a Philosopher.
Galen was very interested in the debate between the rationalist and empiricist medical sects, and his use of direct observation, dissection and vivisection represents a complex middle ground between the extremes of those two viewpoints.
Many of his works have been preserved and/or translated from the original Greek, although many were destroyed and some credited to him are believed to be spurious.
Although there is some debate over the date of his death, he was no younger than seventy when he died.
In medieval Europe, Galen's writings on anatomy became the mainstay of the medieval physician's university curriculum, but because of the collapse of the Roman Empire in the West they suffered greatly from stasis and intellectual stagnation.
However, in the Eastern Roman Empire and the Abbasid Caliphate they continued to be studied and followed.
Some of Galen's ideas were incorrect, as he did not dissect a human body.
Greek and Roman taboos had meant that dissection was usually banned in ancient times, but in Middle Ages it changed: medical teachers and students at Bologna began to open human bodies, and Mondino de Luzzi (ca. 1275-1326) produced the ﬁrst known anatomy textbook based on human dissection.
Galen's original Greek texts gained renewed prominence during the early modern period.
In the 1530s, Belgian anatomist and physician Andreas Vesalius took on a project to translate many of Galen's Greek texts into Latin.
Vesalius's most famous work, De humani corporis fabrica, was greatly influenced by Galenic writing and form.
Early life: AD 129-161
Galen's name , Galēnos comes from the adjective "", "calm".
Galen describes his early life in On the affections of the mind.
He was born in September AD 129.
and attracted both Stoic and Platonic philosophers, to whom Galen was exposed at age 14.
His studies also took in each of the principal philosophical systems of the time, including Aristotelian and Epicurean.
His father had planned a traditional career for Galen in philosophy or politics and took care to expose him to literary and philosophical influences.
However, Galen states that in around AD 145 his father had a dream in which the god Asclepius (Aesculapius) appeared and commanded Nicon to send his son to study medicine.
Again, no expense was spared, and following his earlier liberal education, at 16 he began studies at the prestigious local sanctuary or Asclepieum dedicated to Asclepius, god of medicine, as a θεραπευτής (therapeutes, or attendant) for four years.
There he came under the influence of men like Aeschrion of Pergamon, Stratonicus and Satyrus.
Asclepiea functioned as spas or sanitoria to which the sick would come to seek the ministrations of the priesthood.
Romans frequented the temple at Pergamon in search of medical relief from illness and disease.
It was also the haunt of notable people such as Claudius Charax the historian, Aelius Aristides the orator, Polemo the sophist, and Cuspius Rufinus the Consul. and travelled and studied widely including such destinations as Smyrna (now Izmir), Corinth, Crete, Cilicia (now Çukurova), Cyprus, and finally the great medical school of Alexandria, exposing himself to the various schools of thought in medicine.
In 157, aged 28, he returned to Pergamon as physician to the gladiators of the High Priest of Asia, one of the most influential and wealthy men in Asia.
Galen claims that the High Priest chose him over other physicians after he eviscerated an ape and challenged other physicians to repair the damage.
When they refused, Galen performed the surgery himself and in so doing won the favor of the High Priest of Asia.
Over his four years there, he learned the importance of diet, fitness, hygiene and preventive measures, as well as living anatomy, and the treatment of fractures and severe trauma, referring to their wounds as "windows into the body".
Only five deaths among the gladiators occurred while he held the post, compared to sixty in his predecessor's time, a result that is in general ascribed to the attention he paid to their wounds.
At the same time he pursued studies in theoretical medicine and philosophy.
Later years: AD 162-217
Galen went to Rome in 162 and made his mark as a practicing physician.
His impatience brought him into conflict with other doctors and he felt menaced by them.
His demonstrations there antagonized the less skilled and more conservative physicians in the city.
When Galen's animosity with the Roman medical practitioners became serious, he feared he might be exiled or poisoned, so he left the city.
Rome had engaged in foreign wars in 161; Marcus Aurelius and his colleague Lucius Verus were in the north fighting the Marcomanni.
During the autumn of 169 when Roman troops were returning to Aquileia, a great plague broke out, and the emperor summoned Galen back to Rome.
He was ordered to accompany Marcus and Verus to Germany as the court physician.
The following spring Marcus was persuaded to release Galen after receiving a report that Asclepius was against the project.
He was left behind to act as physician to the imperial heir Commodus.
It was here in court that Galen wrote extensively on medical subjects.
Ironically, Lucius Verus died in 169, and Marcus Aurelius himself died in 180, both victims of the plague.
Galen was the physician to Commodus for much of the emperor’s life and treated his common illnesses.
According to Dio Cassius 72.14.3-4, in about 189, under Commodus’ reign, a pestilence occurred which at its height killed 2,000 people a day in Rome.
This was most likely the same plague that struck Rome during Marcus Aurelius’ reign.
Galen wrote: "I return to the case of Eudemus.
He was thoroughly attacked by the three attacks of quartan ague, and the doctors had given him up, as it was now mid-winter."
Some Roman physicians criticized Galen for his use of the prognosis in his treatment of Eudemus.
This practice conflicted with the then-current standard of care, which relied upon divination and mysticism.
Galen retaliated against his detractors by defending his own methods.
Garcia-Ballester quotes Galen as saying: "In order to diagnose, one must observe and reason.
This was the basis of his criticism of the doctors who proceeded alogos and askeptos."
However, Eudemus warned Galen that engaging in conflict with these physicians could lead to his assassination.
"Eudemus said this, and more to the same effect; he added that if they were not able to harm me by unscrupulous conduct they would proceed to attempts at poisoning.
Among other things he told me that, some ten years before, a young man had come to the city and had given, like me practical demonstrations of the resources of our art; this young man was put to death by poison, together with two servants who accompanied him."
Garcia-Ballester says the following of Galen’s use of prognosis: "In modern medicine, we are used to distinguishing between the diagnostic judgment (the scientific knowledge of what a patient has) and the prognostic judgment (the conjecture about what will happen to him.)
For Galen, to understand a clinical case technically, ‘to diagnose’, was, among other things, to know with greater or lesser certainty the outcome for the patient, ‘to prognosticate’.
Prognosis, then, is one of the essential problems and most important objectives of Galenic diagnosis.
Galen was concerned with distinguishing prognosis from divination or prophecy, both to improve diagnosis technically and to enhance the physician's reputation."
Death
The 11th-century Suda lexicon states that Galen died at the age of 70, which would place his death in about the year 199.
However, there is a reference in Galen's treatise "On Theriac to Piso" (which may, however, be spurious) to events of 204.
There are also statements in Arabic sources that he died in Sicily at age 87, after 17 years studying medicine and 70 practicing it, which would mean he died about 217.
According to these sources, the tomb of Galenus in Palermo was still well preserved in tenth century.
Nutton believes that "On Theriac to Piso" is genuine, that the Arabic sources are correct, and that the Suda has erroneously interpreted the 70 years of Galen's career in the Arabic tradition as referring to his whole lifespan.
Boudon-Millot more or less concurs and favours a date of 216.
Contributions to medicine
Galen contributed a substantial amount to the Hippocratic understanding of pathology.
Under Hippocrates' bodily humors theory, differences in human moods come as a consequence of imbalances in one of the four bodily fluids: blood, yellow bile, black bile, and phlegm.
Galen promoted this theory and the typology of human temperaments.
In Galen's view, an imbalance of each humor corresponded with a particular human temperament (blood-sanguine, black bile-melancholic, yellow bile-choleric, and phlegm-phlegmatic).
Thus, individuals with sanguine temperaments are extroverted and social; choleric people have energy, passion, and charisma; melancholics are creative, kind, and considerate; and phlegmatic temperaments are characterized by dependability, kindness, and affection.
Galen's principal interest was in human anatomy, but Roman law had prohibited the dissection of human cadavers since about 150 BC.
Because of this restriction, Galen performed anatomical dissections on living (vivisection) and dead animals, mostly focusing on pigs and primates.
In one experiment, Galen used bellows to inflate the lungs of a dead animal.
Galen's work on the anatomy remained largely unsurpassed and unchallenged up until the 16th century in Europe.
In the middle of the 16th century, the anatomist Andreas Vesalius challenged the anatomical knowledge of Galen by conducting dissections on human cadavers.
These investigations allowed Vesalius to refute aspects of Galen's anatomy.
Among Galen's major contributions to medicine was his work on the circulatory system.
He was the first to recognize that there are distinct differences between venous (dark) and arterial (bright) blood.
Although his anatomical experiments on animal models led him to a more complete understanding of the circulatory system, nervous system, respiratory system, and other structures, his work contained scientific errors.
In his work De motu musculorum, Galen explained the difference between motor and sensory nerves, discussed the concept of muscle tone, and explained the difference between agonists and antagonists.
Galen was a skilled surgeon, operating on human patients.
Many of his procedures and techniques would not be used again for centuries, such as the procedures he performed on brains and eyes.
His surgical experiments included ligating the arteries of living animals.
Although many 20th century historians have claimed that Galen believed the lens to be in the exact center of the eye, Galen actually understood that the crystalline lens is located in the anterior aspect of the human eye.
At first reluctantly but then with increasing vigour, Galen promoted Hippocratic teaching, including venesection and bloodletting, then unknown in Rome.
This was sharply criticised by the Erasistrateans, who predicted dire outcomes, believing that it was not blood but pneuma that flowed in the veins.
Galen, however, staunchly defended venesection in his three books on the subject and in his demonstrations and public disputations.
Contributions to philosophy
Although the main focus of his work was on medicine, anatomy, and physiology, Galen also wrote about logic and philosophy.
His writings were influenced by earlier Greek and Roman thinkers, including Plato, Aristotle, and the Stoics.
Galen was concerned to combine philosophical thought with medical practice, as in his brief work That the Best Physician is also a Philosopher he took aspects from each group and combined them with his original thought.
He regarded medicine as an interdisciplinary field that was best practiced by utilizing theory, observation, and experimentation in conjunction.
Several schools of thought existed within the medical field during Galen's lifetime, the main two being the Empiricists and Rationalists (also called Dogmatists or Philosophers), with the Methodists being a smaller group.
The Empiricists emphasized the importance of physical practice and experimentation, or "active learning" in the medical discipline.
In direct opposition to the Empiricists were the Rationalists, who valued the study of established teachings in order to create new theories in the name of medical advancements.
The Methodists formed somewhat of a middle ground, as they were not as experimental as the Empiricists, nor as theoretical as the Rationalists.
The Methodists mainly utilized pure observation, showing greater interest in studying the natural course of ailments than making efforts to find remedies.
Galen's education had exposed him to the five major schools of thought (Platonists, Peripatetics, Stoics, Epicureans, Pyrrhonists), with teachers from the Rationalist sect and from the Empiricist sect.
Opposition to the Stoics
Galen was well known for his advancements in medicine and the circulatory system, but he was also concerned with philosophy.
He developed his own tripartite soul model following the examples of Plato; some scholars refer to him as a Platonist.
Galen developed a theory of personality based on his understanding of fluid circulation in humans, and he believed that there was a physiological basis for mental disorders.
Galen connected many of his theories to the pneuma and he opposed the Stoics' definition of and use of the pneuma.
Localization of function
One of Galen's major works, On the Doctrines of Hippocrates and Plato, sought to demonstrate the unity of the two subjects and their views.
Using their theories, combined with Aristotle's, Galen developed a tripartite soul consisting of similar aspects.
This idea is now referred to as localization of function.
Galen's assignments were revolutionary for the time period, which set the precedent for future localization theories.
Galen believed each part of this tripartite soul controlled specific functions within the body and that the soul, as a whole, contributed to the health of the body, strengthening the "natural functioning capacity of the organ or organs in question".
So profuse was Galen's output that the surviving texts represent nearly half of all the extant literature from ancient Greece.
amounting to some 10 million words.
Although his surviving works amount to some 3 million words, this is thought to represent less than a third of his complete writings.
In AD 191, a fire in the Temple of Peace destroyed many of his works, in particular treatises on philosophy.
Because Galen's works were not translated into Latin in the ancient period, and because of the collapse of the Roman Empire in the West, the study of Galen, along with the Greek medical tradition as a whole, went into decline in Western Europe during the Early Middle Ages, when very few Latin scholars could read Greek.
However, in general, Galen and the ancient Greek medical tradition continued to be studied and followed in the Eastern Roman Empire, commonly known as the Byzantine Empire.
All of the extant Greek manuscripts of Galen were copied by Byzantine scholars.
In the Abbasid period (after AD 750)
Arab Muslims began to be interested in Greek scientific and medical texts for the first time, and had some of Galen's texts translated into Arabic, often by Syrian Christian scholars (see below).
As a result, some texts of Galen exist only in Arabic translation, while others exist only in medieval Latin translations of the Arabic.
In some cases scholars have even attempted to translate from the Latin or Arabic back into Greek where the original is lost.
For some of the ancient sources, such as Herophilus, Galen's account of their work is all that survives.
Even in his own time, forgeries and unscrupulous editions of his work were a problem, prompting him to write On his Own Books.
Forgeries in Latin, Arabic or Greek continued until the Renaissance.
Some of Galen's treatises have appeared under many different titles over the years.
Sources are often in obscure and difficult-to-access journals or repositories.
Although written in Greek, by convention the works are referred to by Latin titles, and often by merely abbreviations of those.
No single authoritative collection of his work exists, and controversy remains as to the authenticity of a number of works attributed to Galen.
As a consequence, research on Galen's work is fraught with hazard.
The most complete compendium of Galen's writings, surpassing even modern projects like the Corpus Medicorum Graecorum, is the one compiled and translated by Karl Gottlob Kühn of Leipzig between 1821 and 1833.
the Emperor Marcus Aurelius describing him as "Primum sane medicorum esse, philosophorum autem solum" (first among doctors and unique among philosophers Praen 14: 660).
Other contemporary authors in the Greek world confirm this including Theodotus the Shoemaker, Athenaeus and Alexander of Aphrodisias.
The 7th-century poet George of Pisida went so far as to refer to Christ as a second and neglected Galen.
Galen continued to exert an important influence over the theory and practice of medicine until the mid-17th century in the Byzantine and Arabic worlds and Europe.
Hippocrates and Galen form important landmarks of 600 years of Greek medicine.
A. J. Brock describes them as representing the foundation and apex respectively.
A few centuries after Galen, Palladius Iatrosophista stated, in his commentary on Hippocrates, that Hippocrates sowed and Galen reaped.
Thus Galen summarised and synthesised the work of his predecessors, and it is in Galen's words (Galenism) that Greek medicine was handed down to subsequent generations, such that Galenism became the means by which Greek medicine was known to the world.
Often, this was in the form of restating and reinterpreting, such as in Magnus of Nisibis' 4th-century work on urine, which was in turn translated into Arabic.
So strong was Galenism that other authors such as Hippocrates began to be seen through a Galenic lens, while his opponents became marginalised and other medical sects such as Asclepiadism slowly disappeared.
into Arabic.
Arabic sources, such as Muhammad ibn Zakarīya al-Rāzi (AD 865-925), continue to be the source of discovery of new or relatively inaccessible Galenic writings.
the works of Galen were not accepted unquestioningly, but as a challengeable basis for further inquiry.
A strong emphasis on experimentation and empiricism led to new results and new observations, which were contrasted and combined with those of Galen by writers such as al-Rāzi, Ali ibn Abbas al-Majusi, Abu al-Qasim al-Zahrawi, Ibn Sina (Avicenna), Ibn Zuhr and Ibn al-Nafis.
For example, Ibn al-Nafis' discovery of the pulmonary circulation contradicted the Galenic theory on the heart.
The influence of Galen's writings, including humorism, remains strong in modern Unani medicine, now closely identified with Islamic culture, and widely practiced from India (where it is officially recognized) to Morocco.
Reintroduction to the Latin West
From the 11th century onwards, Latin translations of Islamic medical texts began to appear in the West, alongside the Salerno school of thought, and were soon incorporated into the curriculum at the universities of Naples and Montpellier.
From that time, Galenism took on a new, unquestioned authority, Galen even being referred to as the "Medical Pope of the Middle Ages".
The most important translator of Galen's works into Latin was Niccolò di Deoprepio da Reggio, who spent several years working on Galen.
Niccolò worked at the Angevin Court during the reign of king Robert of Naples.
Among Niccolò's translations is a piece from a medical treatise by Galen, of which the original text is lost.
Renaissance
The Renaissance, and the fall of the Byzantine Empire (1453), were accompanied by an influx of Greek scholars and manuscripts to the West, allowing direct comparison between the Arabic commentaries and the original Greek texts of Galen.
This New Learning and the Humanist movement, particularly the work of Linacre, promoted literae humaniores including Galen in the Latin scientific canon, De Naturalibus Facultatibus appearing in London in 1523.
Debates on medical science now had two traditions, the more conservative Arabian and the liberal Greek.
Galenism's final defeat came from a combination of the negativism of Paracelsus and the constructivism of the Italian Renaissance anatomists, such as Vesalius in the 16th century.
The examinations of Vesalius also disproved medical theories of Aristotle and Mondino de Liuzzi.
One of the best known examples of Vesalius' overturning of Galenism was his demonstration that the interventricular septum of the heart was not permeable, as Galen had taught (Nat Fac III xv).
However, this had been revealed two years before by Michael Servetus in his fateful "Christianismi restitutio" (1553) with only three copies of the book surviving, but these remaining hidden for decades; the rest were burned shortly after its publication because of persecution of Servetus by religious authorities.
Michael Servetus, using the name "Michel de Villeneuve" during his stay in France, was Vesalius' fellow student and the best Galenist at the University of Paris, according to Johann Winter von Andernach, who taught both.
In the Galenism of the Renaissance, editions of the Opera Omnia by Galen were very important.
It was begun in Venice in 1541-1542 by the Guinta.
There were fourteen editions of the book from that date until 1625.
Just one edition was produced from Lyon between 1548 and 1551.
The Lyon edition has commentaries on breathing and blood streaming that correct the work of earlier renowned authors such as Vesalius, Caius or Janus Cornarius.
"Michel De Villeneuve" had contracts with Jean Frellon for that work, and the Servetus scholar-researcher Francisco Javier González Echeverría presented research that became an accepted communication in the International Society for the History of Medicine, which concluded that Michael De Villeneuve (Michael Servetus) is the author of the commentaries of this edition of Frellon, in Lyon.
Another convincing case where understanding of the body was extended beyond where Galen had left it came from these demonstrations of the nature of human circulation and the subsequent work of Andrea Cesalpino, Fabricio of Acquapendente and William Harvey.
Contemporary scholarship
Galenic scholarship remains an intense and vibrant field, following renewed interest in his work, dating from the German encyclopedia Realencyclopädie der Classischen Altertumswissenschaft.
In 2018, the University of Basel discovered that a mysterious Greek papyrus with mirror writing on both sides, which was at the collection of Basilius Amerbach, a professor of jurisprudence at the University of Basel in the 16th century, is an unknown medical document of Galen or an unknown commentary on his work.
The medical text describes the phenomenon of ‘hysterical apnea’.
Notes
Sources
:: The works of Galen are listed in Galenic corpus.
* Algra K (ed.)
The Cambridge History of Hellenistic Philosophy.
Cambridge University Press, 2005. ,
* http:/ articlerender.fcgi?artid=2175042 Boudon-Millot V (ed. and trans.)
Galien: Introduction générale; Sur l'ordre de ses propres livres; Sur ses propres livres; Que l'excellent médecin est aussi philosophe Paris: Les Belles Lettres.
2007,
* http:/ g/galen.htm Boylen M. Galen.
Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy
* Brodersen K. Galenos, Die verbrannte Bibliothek: Peri Alypias.
Marix, Wiesbaden 2015,
* https:/ books?id=al9FH5tynlAC Debru A. "Galen on Pharmacology: Philosophy, History, and Medicine : Proceedings of the Vth International Galen Colloquium", Lille, 16-18 March 1995 BRILL 1997 ,
* http:/ articlerender.fcgi?tool
pubmed&pubmedid
12937057 Dunn PM.
Galen (AD 129-200) of Pergamun: anatomist and experimental physiologist.
Arch Dis Child Fetal Neonatal Ed. 2003 Sep;88 (5):F441-3.
* https:/ books?id=X8eyqsqFgQ8C
Everson S. (ed.)
Language.
Cambridge University Press, 1994 ,
* https:/ books?id=Hf1htsj-usAC French RK.
Medicine Before Science: The Rational and Learned Doctor from the Middle Ages to the Enlightenment.
Cambridge University Press, 2003. ,
* http:/ ~pswpc gleason Stanford Working Papers in Classics January 2007
* Gleason MW.
Making Men: Sophists and Self-Presentation in Ancient Rome.
Princeton 1995
* http:/ catalogue/catalogue.asp?isbn=9780521819541 Hankinson RJ (ed.)
The Cambridge Companion to Galen.
CUP 2008
* Hankinson R.J. Cause and explanation in ancient Greek thought.
Oxford University Press, 1998 ,
* Johannes Ilberg.
"Aus Galens Praxis.
Neue Jahrbücher für das Klassische Altertum", Geschichte und Deutsche Literatur 15: 276-312, 1905
* Hakim Syed Zillur Rahman (ed.).
Jawami Kitab Al-Nabd Al-Saghir by Galen (2007), Ibn Sina Academy of Medieval Medicine & Sciences, Aligarh, India;
* Hakim Syed Zillur Rahman (ed.).
Kitab fi Firaq al Tibb by Galen (2008), Ibn Sina Academy of Medieval Medicine & Sciences, Aligarh, India;
* Hakim Syed Zillur Rahman (ed.).
Kitab al Anasir by Galen (2008), Ibn Sina Academy of Medieval Medicine & Sciences, Aligarh, India;
* Hakim Syed Zillur Rahman (ed.).
Kitab al Mizaj of Galen (2008), Ibn Sina Academy of Medieval Medicine & Sciences, Aligarh, India;
* Kotrc RF, Walters KR.
"A bibliography of the Galenic Corpus.
A newly researched list and arrangement of the titles of the treatises extant in Greek, Latin, and Arabic".
Trans Stud Coll Physicians Phila.
1979 December;1 (4):256-304
* http:/ login?uri= bulletin_of_the_history_of_medicine 73.1mattern.html Mattern SP.
Physicians and the Roman Imperial Aristocracy: The Patronage of Therapeutics.
Bulletin of the History of Medicine.
Volume 73, Number 1, Spring 1999, pp.
* https:/ books?id=NrEeAAAAIAAJ Metzger BM.
New Testament Studies: Philological, Versional, and Patristic.
BRILL 1980 ,
* http:/ al-tawhid title.htm Muhaqqiq M. Medical Sects in Islam.
al-Tawhid Islamic Journal, vol.
VIII, No.2
* Nutton V. "Roman Medicine, 250 BC to AD 200, and Medicine in Late Antiquity and the Early Middle Ages", in Lawrence C. (ed.)
The Western Medical Tradition: 800-1800 A.D. 1995
* https:/ books?id=oShfkIhduowC Nutton V. Ancient Medicine.
Routledge, 2004 ,
* https:/ books?id=lzO3zQ3dK0cC Osler W. The Evolution of Modern Medicine 1913.
Plain Label Books 1987.
Chapter II: Greek Medicine
* Peterson DW.
"Observations on the chronology of the Galenic Corpus".
Bull Hist Med 51 (3): 484, 1977
* Siegel RE.
Galen's System of Physiology and Medicine, Basel 1968 (this text is not regarded highly by most Galen scholars)
* Siegel RE.
Galen on Sense Perception, His Doctrines, Observations and Experiments on Vision, Hearing, Smell, Taste, Touch and Pain, and Their Historical Sources.
Karger, Basel 1970 (this text is not regarded highly by most Galen scholars)
* Siegel RE.
Galen on Psychology, Psychopathology, and Function and Diseases of the Nervous System 1973 (this text is not regarded highly by most Galen scholars)
* https:/ books?id=wJ4YAAAAIAAJ Smith WG.
Dictionary of Greek and Roman Biography and Mythology.
J Walton 1849
* Stakelum JW, Galen and the Logic of Proposition, Rome, Angelicum, 1940
* Taylor HO.
Greek Biology And Medicine.
Marshall Jones 1922. :
The Final System - Galen
* Temkin O. Galenism: Rise and Decline of a Medical Philosophy.
Cornell University Press, Ithaca 1973
* https:/ books?id=mhNUGgG2eacC The Cambridge Ancient History: Second Edition.
The High Empire A.D. 70-192 Cambridge University Press, 2000 ,
* http:/ Thesaurus Linguae Graecae: TLG
* https:/ books?id=Aesg-6eBWCYC van der Eijk P. Medicine and Philosophy in Classical Antiquity: Doctors and Philosophers on Nature, Soul, Health and Disease.
Cambridge University Press, 2005 ,
* https:/ books?id=jGk8AAAAIAAJ Watson PB.
Marcus Aurelius Antoninus.
Harper & brothers, 1884
Further reading
* Garcia Ballester, Luis. 2002.
Galen and Galenism.
Theory and Medical Practice from Antiquity to the European Renaissance.
Collected Studies Series 710.
Aldershot, UK: Ashgate Variorum.
* Gilbert, N. Ward. 1960.
Renaissance Concepts of Method.
New York: Columbia University Press.
Gill, Christopher, Tim Whitmarsh, and John Wilkins, eds. 2012.
Galen and the World of Knowledge.
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge Univ.
Press.
* Kudlien, Fridolf, and Richard J Durling.
Galen's Method of Healing: Proceedings of the 1982 Galen Symposium.
Leiden: E.J. Brill.
* Lloyd, G. E. R. 1991.
Methods and Problems in Greek Science.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
* Mattern, Susan P. 2013.
The Prince of Medicine: Galen In the Roman Empire.
New York: Oxford University Press.
* Nutton, Vivian.
Ancient Medicine.
London and New York: Routledge.
* Rocca, Julius. 2003.
Galen on the Brain: Anatomical Knowledge and Physiological Speculation in the Second Century A.D. Studies in Ancient Medicine 26.
Leiden, The Netherlands, and Boston: Brill.
* Rosen, Ralph M. 2013.
“Galen on Poetic Testimony” In Writing Science: Medical and Mathematical Authorship in Ancient Greece.
Edited by M. Asper, 177-189.
Berlin: De Gruyter.
* Rosen, Ralph M. 2013.
“Galen, Plato, and the Physiology of Eros."
In Eros Edited by E. Sanders, C. Carey and N. Lowe, 111-27.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
* Sarton, George. 1954.
Galen of Pergamon.
Lawrence: University of Kansas Press.
* Walzer, Richard. 1949.
Galen On Jews and Christians.
London: Oxford University Press.
Primary sources
