Domestic sheep (Ovis aries) are quadrupedal, ruminant mammals typically kept as livestock.
Like most ruminants, sheep are members of the order Artiodactyla, the even-toed ungulates.
Although the name sheep applies to many species in the genus Ovis, in everyday usage it almost always refers to Ovis aries.
Numbering a little over one billion, domestic sheep are also the most numerous species of sheep.
An adult female sheep is referred to as a ewe (), an intact male as a ram or occasionally a tup, a castrated male as a wether, and a younger sheep as a lamb.
Sheep are most likely descended from the wild mouflon of Europe and Asia.
One of the earliest animals to be domesticated for agricultural purposes, sheep are raised for fleeces, meat (lamb, hogget or mutton) and milk.
A sheep's wool is the most widely used animal fiber, and is usually harvested by shearing.
s for science.
Sheep husbandry is practised throughout the majority of the inhabited world, and has been fundamental to many civilizations.
In the modern era, Australia, New Zealand, the southern and central South American nations, and the British Isles are most closely associated with sheep production.
Sheepraising has a large lexicon of unique terms which vary considerably by region and dialect.
Use of the word sheep began in Middle English as a derivation of the Old English word ; it is both the singular and plural name for the animal.
A group of sheep is called a flock, herd or mob.
Many other specific terms for the various life stages of sheep exist, generally related to lambing, shearing, and age.
Being a key animal in the history of farming, sheep have a deeply entrenched place in human culture, and find representation in much modern language and symbology.
As livestock, sheep are most often associated with pastoral, Arcadian imagery.
Sheep figure in many mythologies-such as the Golden Fleece-and major religions, especially the Abrahamic traditions.
In both ancient and modern religious ritual, sheep are used as sacrificial animals.
History
The exact line of descent between domestic sheep and their wild ancestors is unclear.
The most common hypothesis states that Ovis aries is descended from the Asiatic (O. orientalis) species of mouflon.
The rearing of sheep for secondary products, and the resulting breed development, began in either southwest Asia or western Europe.
Initially, sheep were kept solely for meat, milk and skins.
Archaeological evidence from statuary found at sites in Iran suggests that selection for woolly sheep may have begun around 6000 BC,
Sheep husbandry spread quickly in Europe.
Excavations show that in about 6000 BC, during the Neolithic period of prehistory, the Castelnovien people, living around Châteauneuf-les-Martigues near present-day Marseille in the south of France, were among the first in Europe to keep domestic sheep.
Practically from its inception, ancient Greek civilization relied on sheep as primary livestock, and were even said to name individual animals.
European colonists spread the practice to the New World from 1493 onwards.
A few primitive breeds of sheep retain some of the characteristics of their wild cousins, such as short tails.
Depending on breed, domestic sheep may have no horns at all (i.e. polled), or horns in both sexes, or in males only.
Most horned breeds have a single pair, but a few breeds may have several.
While white wool is desirable for large commercial markets, there is a niche market for colored fleeces, mostly for handspinning.
Comparison with goats
Sheep and goats are closely related: both are in the subfamily Caprinae.
However, they are separate species, so hybrids rarely occur, and are always infertile.
A hybrid of a ewe and a buck (a male goat) is called a sheep-goat hybrid (only a single such animal has been confirmed), and is not to be confused with the sheep-goat chimera, though both are known as geep.
Visual differences between sheep and goats include the beard of goats and divided upper lip of sheep.
Sheep tails also hang down, even when short or docked, while the short tails of goats are held upwards.
Also, sheep breeds are often naturally polled (either in both sexes or just in the female), while naturally polled goats are rare .
Males of the two species differ in that buck goats acquire a unique and strong odor during the rut, whereas rams do not.
Some sources give a count of a thousand or more breeds, but these numbers cannot be verified, according to some sources.
1314 breeds as of 1995 and 1229 breeds as of 2006.
For the purpose of such tallies, the FAO definition of a breed is "either a subspecific group of domestic livestock with definable and identifiable external characteristics that enable it to be separated by visual appraisal from other similarly defined groups within the same species or a group for which geographical and/or cultural separation from phenotypically similar groups has led to acceptance of its separate identity."
A sheep may also be of a fat-tailed type, which is a dual-purpose sheep common in Africa and Asia with larger deposits of fat within and around its tail.
Breeds are often categorized by the type of their wool.
Fine wool breeds are those that have wool of great crimp and density, which are preferred for textiles.
Most of these were derived from Merino sheep, and the breed continues to dominate the world sheep industry.
Downs breeds have wool between the extremes, and are typically fast-growing meat and ram breeds with dark faces.
Some major medium wool breeds, such as the Corriedale, are dual-purpose crosses of long and fine-wooled breeds and were created for high-production commercial flocks.
Long wool breeds are the largest of sheep, with long wool and a slow rate of growth.
Long wool sheep are most valued for crossbreeding to improve the attributes of other sheep types.
For example: the American Columbia breed was developed by crossing Lincoln rams (a long wool breed) with fine-wooled Rambouillet ewes.
Coarse or carpet wool sheep are those with a medium to long length wool of characteristic coarseness.
Breeds traditionally used for carpet wool show great variability, but the chief requirement is a wool that will not break down under heavy use (as would that of the finer breeds).
As the demand for carpet-quality wool declines, some breeders of this type of sheep are attempting to use a few of these traditional breeds for alternative purposes.
Others have always been primarily meat-class sheep.
A minor class of sheep are the dairy breeds.
Dual-purpose breeds that may primarily be meat or wool sheep are often used secondarily as milking animals, but there are a few breeds that are predominantly used for milking.
These sheep produce a higher quantity of milk and have slightly longer lactation curves.
In the quality of their milk, the fat and protein content percentages of dairy sheep vary from non-dairy breeds, but lactose content does not.
A last group of sheep breeds is that of fur or hair sheep, which do not grow wool at all.
Hair sheep are similar to the early domesticated sheep kept before woolly breeds were developed, and are raised for meat and pelts.
Some modern breeds of hair sheep, such as the Dorper, result from crosses between wool and hair breeds.
For meat and hide producers, hair sheep are cheaper to keep, as they do not need shearing.
Preferences for breeds with uniform characteristics and fast growth have pushed heritage (or heirloom) breeds to the margins of the sheep industry.
Both sheep and goats use their lips and tongues to select parts of the plant that are easier to digest or higher in nutrition.
The fermenting organisms include bacteria, fungi, and protozoa.
The bolus is periodically regurgitated back to the mouth as cud for additional chewing and salivation.
Other than forage, the other staple feed for sheep is hay, often during the winter months.
The ability to thrive solely on pasture (even without hay) varies with breed, but all sheep can survive on this diet.
Grazing behavior
Sheep follow a diurnal pattern of activity, feeding from dawn to dusk, stopping sporadically to rest and chew their cud.
Ideal pasture for sheep is not lawnlike grass, but an array of grasses, legumes and forbs.
Types of land where sheep are raised vary widely, from pastures that are seeded and improved intentionally to rough, native lands.
Common plants toxic to sheep are present in most of the world, and include (but are not limited to) cherry, some oaks and acorns, tomato, yew, rhubarb, potato, and rhododendron.
Effects on pasture
Sheep are largely grazing herbivores, unlike browsing animals such as goats and deer that prefer taller foliage.
With a much narrower face, sheep crop plants very close to the ground and can overgraze a pasture much faster than cattle.
Research conducted in Imperial County, California compared lamb grazing with herbicides for weed control in seedling alfalfa fields.
Three trials demonstrated that grazing lambs were just as effective as herbicides in controlling winter weeds.
Entomologists also compared grazing lambs to insecticides for insect control in winter alfalfa.
In this trial, lambs provided insect control as effectively as insecticides.
Behavior
Flock behavior
Sheep are flock animals and strongly gregarious; much sheep behavior can be understood on the basis of these tendencies.
The dominance hierarchy of sheep and their natural inclination to follow a leader to new pastures were the pivotal factors in sheep being one of the first domesticated livestock species.
Furthermore, in contrast to the red deer and gazelle (two other ungulates of primary importance to meat production in prehistoric times), sheep do not defend territories although they do form home ranges.
All sheep have a tendency to congregate close to other members of a flock, although this behavior varies with breed,
Flock behaviour in sheep is generally only exhibited in groups of four or more sheep; fewer sheep may not react as expected when alone or with few other sheep.
Those who are moving sheep may exploit this behavior by leading sheep with buckets of feed.
Dominance hierarchy
Sheep establish a dominance hierarchy through fighting, threats and competitiveness.
Dominant animals are inclined to be more aggressive with other sheep, and usually feed first at s have an almost linear hierarchy whereas there is a less rigid structure in Border Leicesters when a competitive feeding situation arises.
In sheep, position in a moving flock is highly correlated with social dominance, but there is no definitive study to show consistent voluntary leadership by an individual sheep.
Their flocking behavior and quickness to flee and panic can make shepherding a difficult endeavor for the uninitiated.
Despite these perceptions, a University of Illinois monograph on sheep reported their intelligence to be just below that of pigs and on par with that of cattle.
In addition to long-term facial recognition of individuals, sheep can also differentiate emotional states through facial characteristics.
Vocalisations
Sounds made by domestic sheep include bleats, grunts, rumbles and snorts.
Bleating ("baaing") is used mostly for contact communication, especially between dam and lambs, but also at times between other flock members.
The bleats of individual sheep are distinctive, enabling the ewe and her lambs to recognize each other's vocalizations.
Vocal communication between lambs and their dam declines to a very low level within several weeks after parturition.
Pregnant ewes may grunt when in labor.
Rumbling sounds are made by the ram during courting; somewhat similar rumbling sounds may be made by the ewe, and is often elicited from startled sheep.
Senses
In sheep breeds lacking facial wool, the visual field is wide.
In 10 sheep (Cambridge, Lleyn and Welsh Mountain breeds, which lack facial wool), the visual field ranged from 298° to 325°, averaging 313.1°, with binocular overlap ranging from 44.5° to 74°, averaging 61.7°.
In some breeds, unshorn facial wool can limit the visual field; in some individuals, this may be enough to cause "wool blindness".
In 60 Merinos, visual fields ranged from 219.1° to 303.0°, averaging 269.9°, and the binocular field ranged from 8.9° to 77.7°, averaging 47.5°; 36% of the measurements were limited by wool, although photographs of the experiments indicate that only limited facial wool regrowth had occurred since shearing.
In addition to facial wool (in some breeds), visual field limitations can include ears and (in some breeds) horns, behavioral responses indicating depth perception are seen in lambs at one day old.
Sheep are thought to have colour vision, and can distinguish between a variety of colours: black, red, brown, green, yellow and white.
Sight is a vital part of sheep communication, and when grazing, they maintain visual contact with each other.
Each sheep lifts its head upwards to check the position of other sheep in the flock.
This constant monitoring is probably what keeps the sheep in a flock as they move along grazing.
Sheep become stressed when isolated; this stress is reduced if they are provided with a mirror, indicating that the sight of other sheep reduces stress.
Taste is the most important sense in sheep, establishing forage preferences, with sweet and sour plants being preferred and bitter plants being more commonly rejected.
Touch and sight are also important in relation to specific plant characteristics, such as succulence and growth form.
The ram uses his vomeronasal organ (sometimes called the Jacobson's organ) to sense the pheromones of ewes and detect when they are in estrus.
The ewe uses her vomeronasal organ for early recognition of her neonate lamb.
Reproduction
Sheep follow a similar reproductive strategy to other herd animals.
A group of ewes is generally mated by a single ram, who has either been chosen by a breeder or (in feral populations) has established dominance through physical contest with other rams.
Ewes have estrus cycles about every 17 days, during which they emit a scent and indicate readiness through physical displays towards rams.
A minority of rams (8% on average) display a preference for homosexuality
In feral sheep, rams may fight during the rut to determine which individuals may mate with ewes.
Rams, especially unfamiliar ones, will also fight outside the breeding period to establish dominance; rams can kill one another if allowed to mix freely.
and normal labor takes one to three hours.
Although some breeds regularly throw larger litters of lambs, most produce single or twin lambs.
During or soon after labor, ewes and lambs may be confined to small lambing jugs, small pens designed to aid both careful observation of ewes and to cement the bond between them and their lambs.
In the case of any such problems, those present at lambing may assist the ewe by extracting or repositioning lambs.
Most lambs begin life being born outdoors.
After lambs are several weeks old, lamb marking (ear tagging, docking, mulesing, and castrating) is carried out.
Vaccinations are usually carried out at this point as well.
Ear tags with numbers are attached, or ear marks are applied, for ease of later identification of sheep.
Docking and castration are commonly done after 24 hours (to avoid interference with maternal bonding and consumption of colostrum) and are often done not later than one week after birth, to minimize pain, stress, recovery time and complications.
The first course of vaccinations (commonly anti-clostridial) is commonly given at an age of about 10 to 12 weeks; i.e. when the concentration of maternal antibodies passively acquired via colostrum is expected to have fallen low enough to permit development of active immunity.
Ewes are often revaccinated annually about 3 weeks before lambing, to provide high antibody concentrations in colostrum during the first several hours after lambing.
Ram lambs that will either be slaughtered or separated from ewes before sexual maturity are not usually castrated.
Throughout history, much of the money and labor of sheep husbandry has aimed to prevent sheep ailments.
Historically, shepherds often created remedies by experimentation on the farm.
In some developed countries, including the United States, sheep lack the economic importance for drug companies to perform expensive clinical trials required to approve more than a relatively limited number of drugs for ovine use.
However, extra-label drug use in sheep production is permitted in many jurisdictions, subject to certain restrictions.
In the US, for example, regulations governing extra-label drug use in animals are found in 21 CFR (Code of Federal Regulations)
Part 530.
In the 20th and 21st centuries, a minority of sheep owners have turned to alternative treatments such as homeopathy, herbalism and even traditional Chinese medicine to treat sheep veterinary problems.
The need for traditional anti-parasite drugs and antibiotics is widespread, and is the main impediment to certified organic farming with sheep.
Excessive stress can compromise the immune system.
Pain, fear and several other stressors can cause secretion of epinephrine (adrenaline).
Considerable epinephrine secretion in the final days before slaughter can adversely affect meat quality (by causing glycogenolysis, removing the substrate for normal post-slaughter acidification of meat) and result in meat becoming more susceptible to colonization by spoilage bacteria.
Common forms of preventive medication for sheep are vaccinations and treatments for parasites.
Both external and internal parasites are the most prevalent malady in sheep, and are either fatal, or reduce the productivity of flocks.
Nose bots are fly larvae that inhabit a sheep's sinuses, causing breathing difficulties and discomfort.
Common signs are a discharge from the nasal passage, sneezing, and frantic movement such as head shaking.
External parasites may be controlled through the use of backliners, sprays or immersive sheep dips.
These painful conditions cause lameness and hinder feeding.
Ovine Johne's disease is a wasting disease that affects young sheep.
Bluetongue disease is an insect-borne illness causing fever and inflammation of the mucous membranes.
Ovine rinderpest (or peste des petits ruminants) is a highly contagious and often fatal viral disease affecting sheep and goats.
Sheep may also be affected by primary or secondary photosensitization.
Tetanus can also afflict sheep through wounds from shearing, docking, castration, or vaccination.
The organism also can be introduced into the reproductive tract by unsanitary humans who assist ewes during lambing.
A few sheep conditions are transmissible to humans.
Orf (also known as scabby mouth, contagious ecthyma or soremouth) is a skin disease leaving lesions that is transmitted through skin-to-skin contact.
Cutaneous anthrax is also called woolsorter's disease, as the spores can be transmitted in unwashed wool.
More seriously, the organisms that can cause spontaneous enzootic abortion in sheep are easily transmitted to pregnant women.
Also of concern are the prion disease scrapie and the virus that causes foot-and-mouth disease (FMD), as both can devastate flocks.
The latter poses a slight risk to humans.
During the 2001 FMD pandemic in the UK, hundreds of sheep were culled and some rare British breeds were at risk of extinction due to this.
Other animals that occasionally prey on sheep include: felines, bears, birds of prey, ravens and feral hogs.
Sheep producers have used a wide variety of measures to combat predation.
Pre-modern shepherds used their own presence, livestock guardian dogs, and protective structures such as barns and fencing.
Fencing (both regular and electric), penning sheep at night and lambing indoors all continue to be widely used.
causing significant decreases in predator populations.
In the wake of the environmental and conservation movements, the use of these methods now usually falls under the purview of specially designated government agencies in most developed countries.
The 1970s saw a resurgence in the use of livestock guardian dogs and the development of new methods of predator control by sheep producers, many of them non-lethal.
Other countries such as New Zealand have smaller flocks but retain a large international economic impact due to their export of sheep products.
Sheep also play a major role in many local economies, which may be niche markets focused on organic or sustainable agriculture and local food customers.
Especially in developing countries, such flocks may be a part of subsistence agriculture rather than a system of trade.
Sheep themselves may be a medium of trade in barter economies.
In the 21st century, the sale of meat is the most profitable enterprise in the sheep industry, even though far less sheep meat is consumed than chicken, pork or beef.
Sheep intestine can be formed into sausage casings, and lamb intestine has been formed into surgical sutures, as well as strings for musical instruments and tennis rackets.
Of all sheep byproducts, perhaps the most valuable is and other products.
Farmers may also choose to focus on a particular breed of sheep in order to sell registered purebred animals, as well as provide a ram rental service for breeding.
A new option for deriving profit from live sheep is the rental of flocks for grazing; these "mowing services" are hired in order to keep unwanted vegetation down in public spaces and to lessen fire hazard.
Despite the falling demand and price for sheep products in many markets, sheep have distinct economic advantages when compared with other livestock.
They do not require expensive housing, such as that used in the intensive farming of chickens or pigs.
They are an efficient use of land; roughly six sheep can be kept on the amount that would suffice for a single cow or horse.
Sheep can also consume plants, such as noxious weeds, that most other animals will not touch, and produce more young at a faster rate.
Also, in contrast to most livestock species, the cost of raising sheep is not necessarily tied to the price of feed crops such as grain, soybeans and corn.
Combined with the lower cost of quality sheep, all these factors combine to equal a lower overhead for sheep producers, thus entailing a higher profitability potential for the small farmer.
However, small flocks, from 10 to 50 ewes, often are not profitable because they tend to be poorly managed.
The primary reason is that mechanization is not feasible, so return per hour of labor is not maximized.
Small farm flocks generally are used simply to control weeds on irrigation ditches or maintained as a hobby.
As food
Sheep meat and milk were one of the earliest staple proteins consumed by human civilization after the transition from hunting and gathering to agriculture.
"Mutton" is derived from the Old French moton, which was the word for sheep used by the Anglo-Norman rulers of much of the British Isles in the Middle Ages.
This became the name for sheep meat in English, while the Old English word sceap was kept for the live animal.
Throughout modern history, "mutton" has been limited to the meat of mature sheep usually at least two years of age; "lamb" is used for that of immature sheep less than a year.
In the 21st century, the nations with the highest consumption of sheep meat are the Arab States of the Persian Gulf, New Zealand, Australia, Greece, Uruguay, the United Kingdom and Ireland.
In comparison, countries such as the U.S. consume only a pound or less (under 0.5 kg), with Americans eating 50 pounds (22 kg) of pork and 65 pounds (29 kg) of beef.
today it is used predominantly in cheese and yogurt making.
Sheep have only two teats, and produce a far smaller volume of milk than cows.
Many of these products are now often made with cow's milk, especially when produced outside their country of origin.
In science
Sheep are generally too large and reproduce too slowly to make ideal research subjects, and thus are not a common model organism.
They have, however, played an influential role in some fields of science.
In particular, the Roslin Institute of Edinburgh, Scotland used sheep for genetics research that produced groundbreaking results.
In 1995, two ewes named Megan and Morag were the first mammals cloned from differentiated cells.
A year later, a Finnish Dorset sheep named Dolly, dubbed "the world's most famous sheep" in Scientific American, was the first mammal to be cloned from an adult somatic cell.
Following this, Polly and Molly were the first mammals to be simultaneously cloned and transgenic.
As of 2008, the sheep genome has not been fully sequenced, although a detailed genetic map has been published, and a draft version of the complete genome produced by assembling sheep DNA sequences using information given by the genomes of other mammals.
In 2012, a transgenic sheep named "Peng Peng" was cloned by Chinese scientists, who spliced his genes with that of a roundworm (C. elegans) in order to increase production of fats healthier for human consumption.
In the study of natural selection, the population of Soay sheep that remain on the island of Hirta have been used to explore the relation of body size and coloration to reproductive success.
Soay sheep come in several colors, and researchers investigated why the larger, darker sheep were in decline; this occurrence contradicted the rule of thumb that larger members of a population tend to be more successful reproductively.
The feral Soays on Hirta are especially useful subjects because they are isolated.
Sheep are one of the few animals where the molecular basis of the diversity of male sexual preferences has been examined.
However, this research has been controversial, and much publicity has been produced by a study at the Oregon Health and Science University that investigated the mechanisms that produce homosexuality in rams.
Organizations such as PETA campaigned against the study, accusing scientists of trying to cure homosexuality in the sheep.
OHSU and the involved scientists vehemently denied such accusations.
Pregnant sheep are also a useful model for human pregnancy, and have been used to investigate the effects on fetal development of malnutrition and hypoxia.
In behavioral sciences, sheep have been used in isolated cases for the study of facial recognition, as their mental process of recognition is qualitatively similar to humans.
Cultural impact
Sheep have had a strong presence in many cultures, especially in areas where they form the most common type of livestock.
In the English language, to call someone a sheep or ovine may allude that they are timid and easily led.
In contradiction to this image, male sheep are often used as symbols of virility and power; the logos of the Los Angeles Rams football team and the Dodge Ram pickup truck allude to males of the bighorn sheep, Ovis canadensis.
Counting sheep is popularly said to be an aid to sleep, and some ancient systems of counting sheep persist today.
Sheep also enter in colloquial sayings and idiom frequently with such phrases as "black sheep".
To call an individual a black sheep implies that they are an odd or disreputable member of a group.
This usage derives from the recessive trait that causes an occasional black lamb to be born into an entirely white flock.
These black sheep were considered undesirable by shepherds, as black wool is not as commercially viable as white wool.
Religion and folklore
In antiquity, symbolism involving sheep cropped up in religions in the ancient Near East, the Mideast, and the Mediterranean area: Çatalhöyük, ancient Egyptian religion, the Cana'anite and Phoenician tradition, Judaism, Greek religion, and others.
Religious symbolism and ritual involving sheep began with some of the first known faiths: Skulls of rams (along with bulls) occupied central placement in shrines at the Çatalhöyük settlement in 8,000 BCE.
In Ancient Egyptian religion, the ram was the symbol of several gods: Khnum, Heryshaf and Amun (in his incarnation as a god of fertility).
There are many ancient Greek references to sheep: that of Chrysomallos, the golden-fleeced ram, continuing to be told through into the modern era.
Astrologically, Aries, the ram, is the first sign of the classical Greek zodiac, and the sheep is the eighth of the twelve animals associated with the 12-year cycle of in the Chinese zodiac, related to the Chinese calendar.
Sheep are occasionally sacrificed to commemorate important secular events in Islamic cultures.
Greeks and Romans sacrificed sheep regularly in religious practice, and Judaism once sacrificed sheep as a Korban (sacrifice), such as the Passover lamb .
Ovine symbols-such as the ceremonial blowing of a shofar-still find a presence in modern Judaic traditions.
Collectively, followers of Christianity are often referred to as a flock, with Christ as the Good Shepherd, and sheep are an element in the Christian iconography of the birth of Jesus.
Some Christian saints are considered patrons of shepherds, and even of sheep themselves.
Christ is also portrayed as the Sacrificial lamb of God (Agnus Dei) and Easter celebrations in Greece and Romania traditionally feature a meal of Paschal lamb.
A church leader is often called the pastor, which is derived from the Latin word for shepherd.
In many western Christian traditions bishops carry a staff, which also serves as a symbol of the episcopal office, known as a crosier, which is modeled on the shepherd's crook.
Sheep are key symbols in fables and nursery rhymes like The Wolf in Sheep's Clothing, Little Bo Peep, Baa, Baa, Black Sheep, and Mary Had a Little Lamb; novels such as George Orwell's Animal Farm and Haruki Murakami's A Wild Sheep Chase; songs such as Bach's Sheep may safely graze (Schafe können sicher weiden) and Pink Floyd's Sheep, and poems like William Blake's "The Lamb".
Sources
