Undertale is a role-playing video game created by American indie developer Toby Fox.
The player controls a child who has fallen into the Underground: a large, secluded region under the surface of the Earth, separated by a magic barrier.
The player meets various monsters during the journey back to the surface.
Some monsters might engage the player in a fight.
The combat system involves the player navigating through mini-bullet hell attacks by the opponent.
They can opt to pacify or subdue monsters in order to spare them instead of killing them.
These choices affect the game, with the dialogue, characters, and story changing based on outcomes.
Fox developed the entirety of the game independently, including writing and composing the score.
Additional art was created by other artists, primarily Temmie Chang.
The game took inspiration from several sources.
These include the Mother and Mario & Luigi role-playing series, the bullet hell shooter series Touhou Project, and the British comedy show Mr. Bean.
Originally, Undertale was meant to be two hours in length and was set to be released in mid-2014.
However, development was delayed over the next three years.
The game was released for Microsoft Windows and OS X in September 2015.
It was also ported to Linux in July 2016, PlayStation 4 and PlayStation Vita in August 2017, and the Nintendo Switch in September 2018.
The game was acclaimed for its thematic material, intuitive combat system, musical score, originality, story, dialogue, and characters.
The game sold over one million copies and was nominated for multiple accolades and awards.
Several gaming publications and conventions listed Undertale as Game of the Year.
The first chapter of a related game, Deltarune, was released on October 31, 2018.
Gameplay
Undertale is a role-playing game that uses a top-down perspective.
Choices made by the player radically affect the plot and general progression of the game, with the player's morality acting as the cornerstone for the game's development.
When players encounter enemies in either scripted events or random encounters, they enter a battle mode.
During battles, players control a small heart which represents their soul, and must avoid attacks unleashed by the opposing monster similar to a bullet hell shooter.
When players participate in a boss battle on a second playthrough, the dialogue will be altered depending on actions in previous playthroughs.
A human child falls into the Underground and encounters Flowey, a sentient flower who teaches them the game's mechanics and encourages them to raise their "LV", or "LOVE", by gaining "EXP" through killing monsters.
When Flowey attempts to murder the human to take their soul for himself, the human is rescued by Toriel, a motherly goat-like monster, who teaches the human to solve puzzles and survive conflict in the Underground without killing.
She intends to adopt the human, wanting to protect them from Asgore Dreemurr, the king of the Underground.
The human eventually leaves Toriel to search for Asgore's castle, which contains the barrier leading to the surface world.
Along the way, the human encounters several monsters, including: the skeletons Sans and Papyrus, two brothers who act as for the Underground; Undyne, the head of the royal guard; Alphys, the kingdom's royal scientist; and Mettaton, a robotic television host Alphys created.
Some of them are fought, with the human having to choose whether to kill them or to show mercy; should the human spare them, they may choose to become friends.
During their travels, the human learns the cause of the war between humans and monsters.
Asriel, the son of Asgore and Toriel, befriended a human child who fell into the Underground and was adopted by Asgore and Toriel.
One day, the child was fatally poisoned by some flowers.
When Asriel returned their body to the humans, they attacked and killed him, resulting in Asgore declaring war.
Asgore now seeks to break the barrier, which requires him to collect seven human souls, of which he has six.
The game's ending depends on how the player resolved encounters with monsters.
Flowey is revealed to be a reincarnation of Asriel, created as part of Alphys's experiments.
Toriel intervenes before the human fights Asgore and is joined by the other monsters the human has befriended.
Flowey ambushes the group, using the souls of all the monsters to take an older Asriel's form to fight the human.
The human connects with their new friends during the fight, eventually triumphing.
Asriel reverts to his child form, destroys the barrier, and expresses his remorse to the others before leaving.
The human falls unconscious and is awoken to see their friends surrounding them, with the knowledge of the human's name - Frisk.
The monsters reintegrate with the humans on the surface, while Frisk has the option of accepting Toriel as their adoptive mother.
Another ending ensues if the player kills all monsters,
The game's dialogue system was inspired by Shin Megami Tensei (1992), To celebrate the one year anniversary of the game, Fox released five unused musical works on his blog in 2016.
Undertale soundtrack has been well received by critics as part of the success of the game, in particular for its use of various leitmotifs for the various characters used throughout various tracks.
Fox expressed interest in releasing Undertale on other platforms, but was initially unable to port it to Nintendo platforms without reprogramming the game due to the engine's lack of support for these platforms.
Sony Interactive Entertainment announced during E3 2017 that Undertale would get a release for the PlayStation 4 and PlayStation Vita, a Japanese localization, and a retail version published by Fangamer.
These versions were released on August 15, 2017.
A Nintendo Switch version was revealed during a March 2018 Nintendo Direct, though no release date was given at the time; Undertales release on Switch highlighted a deal made between Nintendo and YoYo Games to allow users of GameMaker Studio 2 to directly export their games to the Switch.
The Switch version was released on September 15, 2018 in Japan, and on September 18, 2018 worldwide.
All console ports are published courtesy of Japanese localizer 8-4 in all regions.
Other Undertale media and merchandise have been released, including toy figurines and plush toys based on characters from the game.
The game's official soundtrack was released by video game music label Materia Collective in 2015, simultaneously with the game's release.
Additionally, two official Undertale cover albums have been released: the 2015 metal/electronic album Determination by RichaadEB and Ace Waters, and the 2016 jazz album Live at Grillby by Carlos Eiene, better known as insaneintherainmusic.
Another album of jazz duets based on Undertales songs, Prescription for Sleep, was performed and released in 2016 by saxophonist Norihiko Hibino and pianist Ayaki Sato.
A 2xLP vinyl edition of the Undertale soundtrack, produced by iam8bit, was also released in the same year.
Two official UNDERTALE Piano Collections sheet music books and digital albums, arranged by David Peacock and performed by Augustine Mayuga Gonzales, were released in 2017 and 2018 by Materia Collective.
A Mii Fighter costume based on Sans was made available for download in the crossover title
Super Smash Bros. Ultimate in September 2019, marking the character's official debut as a 3D model.
This costume also adds a new arrangement of "Megalovania" by Fox as a music track.
Super Smash Bros. director Masahiro Sakurai noted that Sans was a popular request to appear in the game.
Deltarune
After previously teasing something Undertale-related a day earlier, Fox released the first chapter of Deltarune on October 31, 2018 for Windows and macOS for free.
Deltarune is "not the world of Undertale", according to Fox, though characters and settings may bring some of Undertales world to mind, the name Deltarune is an anagram of Undertale.
Fox clarified that Deltarune will be a larger project than Undertale; Fox stated it took him a few years to create the first chapter of Deltarune, much longer than it took him to complete the Undertale demo.
Because of the larger scope, he anticipates getting a team to help develop Deltarune, and has no anticipated timetable when it will be completed.
Once the game is ready, Fox will release the game as one whole package.
Fox plans for Deltarune to have only one ending, regardless of what choices the player makes in the game.
Japanese digital PlayStation 4 and PlayStation Vita sales surpassed 100,000 copies sold by February 2018.
Daniel Tack of Game Informer called the game's combat system "incredibly nuanced", commenting on the uniqueness of each enemy encounter.
Accolades
Undertale has received multiple awards and nominations from several gaming publications.
It won Game of the Year from The Jimquisition
