The Call of the Wild is a short adventure novel by Jack London, published in 1903 and set in Yukon, Canada, during the 1890s Klondike Gold Rush, when strong sled dogs were in high demand.
The central character of the novel is a dog named Buck.
The story opens at a ranch in Santa Clara Valley, California, when Buck is stolen from his home and sold into service as a sled dog in Alaska.
He becomes progressively feral in the harsh environment, where he is forced to fight to survive and dominate other dogs.
By the end, he sheds the veneer of civilization, and relies on primordial instinct and learned experience to emerge as a leader in the wild.
London spent almost a year in the Yukon, and his observations form much of the material for the book.
The story was serialized in the Saturday Evening Post in the summer of 1903 and was published a month later in book form.
The book's great popularity and success made a reputation for London.
As early as 1923, the story was adapted to film, and it has since seen several more cinematic adaptations.
Plot summary
The story opens with Buck, a large and powerful St. Bernard-Scotch Shepherd hybrid,{{sfn|London|1903|loc=. From his teammates, he quickly learns to survive cold winter nights and the pack society.
A rivalry develops between Buck and the vicious, quarrelsome lead dog, Spitz.
Buck eventually beats Spitz in a fight and kills him, and then becomes the new leader of the team.
When François and Perrault complete the round-trip of the Yukon Trail in record time-returning to Skagway with their dispatches-and are given new orders from the Canadian government, their team is then sold to a "Scotch half-breed" man, who is also working the mail service.
The dogs must now carry heavy loads to the mining areas, and the journeys they make are tiresome and long.
During this run of the trail, Buck seems to have memories of his canine ancestor hanging out with a short-legged "hairy man".
Meanwhile, the weary dogs become weak, and one of the team, Dave, a morose husky, becomes terminally sick and is eventually shot.
Buck's next owners are a trio of stampeders from the American Southland (present-day contiguous United States)-a spoiled woman called Mercedes, her sheepish husband Charles, and her arrogant brother Hal-who are inexperienced at surviving in the Northern wilderness.
They struggle to control the sled and ignore helpful advice from others-in particular, the warnings that the spring melt poses dangers.
When Mercedes is told her sled is too heavy, she dumps out crucial supplies in favor of fashion objects.
They also foolishly create a team of 14 dogs, erroneously thinking they can go faster with more dogs.
They overfeed the over-worked dogs, and then are forced to starve them when the food supply becomes low.
Most dogs on the team die from either weakness, neglect, or sickness-leaving only five dogs when they pull into White River.
There, they meet John Thornton, an experienced outdoorsman, who notices the dogs have been poorly treated and are in a weakened condition.
He warns the trio against crossing the river, but they ignore his advice and order Buck to move on.
Exhausted, starving, and sensing the danger ahead, Buck refuses and continues to lie unmoving in the snow.
After Buck is beaten by Hal, Thornton, disgusted by the driver's treatment of Buck, hits Hal with the butt of his ax and cuts Buck free from his traces.
Unable to cross Thornton, the trio leaves and tries to cross the river with the remaining dogs, but as Thornton warned, the ice breaks, and the dogs and humans (and their sled) fall into the river and drown.
Buck comes to love and grow devoted to Thornton as he nurses him back to health.
He saves Thornton when the man falls into a river.
After Thornton takes him on trips to pan for gold, a bonanza king (someone who hit it rich in a certain area), named Matthewson, wagers Thornton on the dog's strength and devotion.
Buck wins by breaking a half-ton () sled free of the frozen ground, pulling it and winning US$1,600 in gold dust.
A king of the Skookum Benches offers a large sum to buy Buck, but Thornton has grown fond of him and declines.
Using his winnings, Thornton retires his debts but elects to continue searching for gold with friends Pete and Hans-sledding Buck and six other dogs-looking for a fabled Lost Cabin.
Once at a suitable gold find, the dogs have nothing to do-and Buck has more ancestor-memories of hanging out with the primitive "hairy man".
The first chapter opens with the first quatrain of John Myers O'Hara's poem, Atavism, published in 1902 in The Bookman.
The stanza outlines one of the main motifs of The Call of the Wild: that Buck when removed from the "sun-kissed" Santa Clara Valley where he was raised, will revert to his wolf heritage with its innate instincts and characteristics.
The themes are conveyed through London's use of symbolism and imagery which, according to Labor, vary in the different phases of the story.
The imagery and symbolism in the first phase, to do with the journey and self-discovery, depict physical violence, with strong images of pain and blood.
In the second phase, fatigue becomes a dominant image and death is a dominant symbol, as Buck comes close to being killed.
The third phase is a period of renewal and rebirth and takes place in the spring, before ending with the fourth phase, when Buck fully reverts to nature is placed in a vast and "weird atmosphere", a place of pure emptiness.
The setting is allegorical.
The southern lands represent the soft, materialistic world; the north symbolizes a world beyond civilization and is inherently competitive.
The harshness, brutality, and emptiness in Alaska reduce life to its essence, as London learned, and shows in Buck's story.
Buck must defeat Spitz, the dog who symbolically tries to get ahead and take control.
When Buck is sold to Charles, Hal, and Mercedes, he finds himself in a camp that is dirty.
They treat their dogs badly; they are artificial interlopers in the pristine landscape.
Conversely, Buck's next masters, John Thornton, and his two companions are described as "living close to the earth".
They keep a clean camp, treat their animals well, and represent man's nobility in nature.
Unlike Buck, Thornton loses his fight with his fellow species, and not until Thornton's death does Buck revert fully to the wild and his primordial state.
The characters too are symbolic of types.
Charles, Hal, and Mercedes symbolize vanity and ignorance, while Thornton and his companions represent loyalty, purity, and love.
Much of the imagery is stark and simple with an emphasis on images of cold, snow, ice, darkness, meat, and blood.
London varied his prose style to reflect the action.
He wrote in an over-affected style in his descriptions of Charles, Hal, and Mercedes' camp as a reflection of their intrusion in the wilderness.
Conversely, when describing Buck and his actions, London wrote in a style that was pared down and simple-a style that would influence and be the forebear of Hemingway's style.
The story was written as a frontier adventure and in such a way that it worked well as a serial.
As Doctorow points out, it is good episodic writing that embodies the style of magazine adventure writing popular in that period.
"It leaves us with satisfaction at its outcome, a story well and truly told," he said.
Reception and legacy
The Call of the Wild was enormously popular from the moment it was published.
H. L. Menken wrote of London's story: "No other popular writer of his time did any better writing than you will find in The Call of the Wild."
A reviewer for The New York Times wrote of it in 1903: "If nothing else makes Mr. London's book popular, it ought to be rendered so by the complete way in which it will satisfy the love of dog fights apparently inherent in every man."
The reviewer for The Atlantic Monthly wrote that it was a book: "untouched by bookishness...
The making and the achievement of such a hero Buck constitute, not a pretty story at all, but a very powerful one."
The book secured London a place in the canon of American literature.
The first printing of 10,000 copies sold out immediately; it is still one of the best known stories written by an American author, and continues to be read and taught in schools.
It has been published in 47 languages.
London's first success, the book secured his prospects as a writer and gained him a readership that stayed with him throughout his career.
After the success of The Call of the Wild London wrote to Macmillan in 1904 proposing a second book (White Fang) in which he wanted to describe the opposite of Buck: a dog that transforms from wild to tame: "I'm going to reverse the process...Instead of devolution of decivilization ...
I'm going to give the evolution, the civilization of a dog."
Adaptations
The first adaptation of London's story was a silent film made in 1923.
The 1935 version starring Clark Gable and Loretta Young expanded John Thornton's role and was the first "talkie" to feature the story.
The 1972 movie The Call of the Wild, starring Charlton Heston as John Thornton, was filmed in Finland.
The 1978 Snoopy TV special What a Nightmare, Charlie Brown! is another adaptation.
In 1981, an anime film titled Call of the Wild: Howl Buck was released, starring Mike Reynolds and Bryan Cranston.
A 1997 adaptation called The Call of the Wild: Dog of the Yukon starred Rutger Hauer and was narrated by Richard Dreyfuss.
The Hollywood Reporter said that Graham Ludlow's adaptation was, "... a pleasant surprise.
Much more faithful to Jack London's 1903 classic than the two Hollywood versions."
A comic adaptation had been made in 1998 for Boys Life magazine.
Due to cultural sensitivities, the Yeehat Indians are omitted, and John Thorton's killers are now white criminals, who as before, are also killed by Buck.
Chris Sanders is directing another film adaptation titled Call of the Wild, a live-action/computer-animated film scheduled to release on February 21, 2020 by 20th Century Fox.
Harrison Ford will star as the lead role and Terry Notary will portray Buck through motion-capture.
Bibliography
Further reading
*Fusco, Richard.
"On Primitivism in The Call of the Wild.
American Literary Realism, 1870-1910.
Vol. 20, No. 1 (Fall, 1987), pp.
* McCrum, Robert.
https:/ books may 100-best-novels-call-of-the-wild-jack-london The 100 best novels: No 35 - The Call of the Wild by Jack London (1903)
"The 100 best novels: No 35 - The Call of the Wild by Jack London (1903)".
The Guardian.
May 2014.
Retrieved 5 September 2015.
