A weasel is a mammal of the genus Mustela of the family Mustelidae.
The genus Mustela includes the least weasels, polecats, stoats, ferrets, pine martins and mink.
Members of this genus are small, active predators, with long and slender bodies and short legs.
The family Mustelidae (which also includes badgers, otters, honey badger and wolverines) is often referred to as the "weasel family".
In the UK, the term "weasel" usually refers to the smallest species, the least weasel (M. nivalis).
Weasels vary in length from , females being smaller than the males, and usually have red or brown upper coats and white bellies; some populations of some species moult to a wholly white coat in winter.
They have long, slender bodies, which enable them to follow their prey into burrows.
Their tails may be from long.
Species
The following information is according to the Integrated Taxonomic Information System.
1 Europe and Northern Asia division excludes China.
Hybrids in this genus include the polecat-ferret hybrid and the polecat-mink hybrid.
Cultural meanings
Weasels have been assigned a variety of cultural meanings.
In Greek culture, a weasel near one's house is a sign of bad luck, even evil, "especially if there is in the household a girl about to be married", since the animal (based on its Greek etymology) was thought to be an unhappy bride who was transformed into a weasel and consequently delights in destroying wedding dresses.
In early-modern Mecklenburg, Germany, amulets from weasels were deemed to have strong magic; the period between August 15 and September 8 was specifically designated for the killing of weasels.
In North America, Native Americans (in the region of Chatham County, North Carolina) deemed the weasel to be a bad sign; crossing its path meant a "speedy death".
According to Daniel Defoe also, meeting a weasel is a bad omen.
In English-speaking areas, weasel can be an insult, noun or verb, for someone regarded as sneaky, conniving or untrustworthy.
Similarly, "weasel words" is a critical term for words or phrasing that are vague, misleading or equivocal.
Japanese folklore
In Japan, were seen as yōkai (causing strange occurrences).
According to the encyclopedia Wakan Sansai Zue from the Edo period, a nate of weasels would cause conflagrations, and the cry of a weasel was considered a harbinger of misfortune.
In the Niigata Prefecture, the sound of a nate of weasels making a rustle resembled six people hulling rice, so was called the "", and it was an omen for one's home to decline or flourish.
It is said that when people chase after this sound, the sound stops.
They are also said to shapeshift like the fox (kitsune) or tanuki, and the nyūdō-bōzu told about in legends in the Tōhoku region and the Chūbu region are considered weasels in disguise, and they are also said to shapeshift into ōnyūdō and little monks.
and "ten" were considered to be weasels that have reached one hundred years of age and became yōkai that possessed supernatural powers.
Another theory is that when weasels reach several hundred years of age, they become mujina (badger).
In Japanese weasels are called and in the Tōhoku Region and Shinshu, it was believed that there were families that were able to use a certain practice to freely use kudagitsune as iizuna-tsukai or kitsune-mochi.
It is said that Mount Iizuna, from the Nagano Prefecture, got its name due to how the gods gave people mastery of this technique from there.
According to the folkloristician Mutō Tetsujō, "They are called izuna in the Senboku District, Akita Prefecture, and there are also the ichiko (itako) that use them."
Also, in the Kitaakita District, they are called mōsuke (猛助), and they are feared as yōkai even more than foxes (kitsune).
Kamaitachi
Kamaitachi is a phenomenon wherein one who is idle is suddenly injured as if his or her skin were cut by a scythe.
In the past, this was thought to be "the deed of an invisible yōkai weasel".
An alternate theory, asserts that kamaitachi is derived from , so were not originally related to weasels at all.
Notes
Further reading
* Nowak, Ronald M., and Ernest P. Walker.
Walker's Carnivores of the World.
Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 2005. , .
* https:/ stream synopsisofweasel00merriala_djvu.txt C. Hart Merriam, Synopsis of the Weasels of North America, Washington, Government Printing Office, 1896.
