Aspasia (;
According to some later accounts, before the eruption of the Peloponnesian War (431&ndash;404 BC), Pericles, some of his closest associates (including the philosopher Anaxagoras and sculptor Phidias) and Aspasia faced a series of personal and legal attacks.
Aspasia, in particular, was accused in comedy of corrupting the women of Athens in order to satisfy Pericles' perversions.
According to Plutarch, she was put on trial for impiety, with the comic poet Hermippus as prosecutor.
The historical nature of the accounts about these events is disputed; it is unlikely that a non-Athenian woman could be subject to legal charges of this kind (though her protector or kurios, in this case Pericles, might be), and no harm came to her as a result.
In The Acharnians, Aristophanes blames Aspasia for the Peloponnesian War.
He claims that the Megarian decree of Pericles, which excluded Megara from trade with Athens or its allies, was retaliation for prostitutes being kidnapped from the house of Aspasia by Megarians.
Plutarch reports also the taunting comments of other comic poets, such as Eupolis and Cratinus.
Aspasia was labeled the "New Omphale", "Deianira", "Hera" and "Helen".
Further attacks on Pericles' relationship with Aspasia are reported by Athenaeus.
Even Pericles' own son, Xanthippus, who had political ambitions, readily criticised his father about his domestic affairs.
Later years and death
In 429 BC during the Plague of Athens, Pericles witnessed the death of his sister and of both his legitimate sons, Paralus and Xanthippus, from his first wife.
With his morale undermined, he burst into tears, and not even Aspasia's companionship could console him.
Just before his death, the Athenians allowed a change in the citizenship law of 451 BC that made his half-Athenian son with Aspasia, Pericles the Younger, a citizen and legitimate heir, a decision all the more striking in considering that Pericles himself had proposed the law confining citizenship to those of Athenian parentage on both sides.
Pericles died of the plague in the autumn of 429 BC.
Plutarch cites Aeschines Socraticus, who wrote a dialogue on Aspasia (now lost), to the effect that after Pericles's death, Aspasia lived with Lysicles, an Athenian strategos (general) and democratic leader, with whom she had another son; and that she made him the first man at Athens.
in 428 BC .
With Lysicles' death the contemporaneous record ends.
According to Charles Kahn, Professor of Philosophy at the University of Pennsylvania, Diotima is in many respects Plato's response to Aeschines' Aspasia.
QTEMPLATE box
In Menexenus, Plato satirizes Aspasia's relationship with Pericles, and quotes Socrates as claiming ironically that she was a trainer of many orators and that since Pericles was educated by Aspasia, he would be superior in rhetoric to someone educated by Antiphon.
He also attributes authorship of the Funeral Oration to Aspasia and attacks his contemporaries' veneration of Pericles.
Kahn maintains that Plato has taken from Aeschines the motif of Aspasia as teacher of rhetoric for Pericles and Socrates.
As Martha L. Rose, Professor of History at Truman State University, explains, "only in comedy do dogs litigate, birds govern, or women declaim".
Xenophon mentions Aspasia twice in his Socratic writings: in Memorabilia and in Oeconomicus.
In both cases her advice is recommended to Critobulus by Socrates.
In Memorabilia Socrates quotes Aspasia as saying that the matchmaker should report truthfully on the good characteristics of the man.
In Oeconomicus Socrates defers to Aspasia as more knowledgeable about household management and the economic partnership between husband and wife.
Aeschines Socraticus and Antisthenes each named a Socratic dialogue after Aspasia (though neither survives except in fragments).
Our major sources for Aeschines Socraticus' Aspasia are Athenaeus, Plutarch, and Cicero.
In the dialogue, Socrates recommends that Callias send his son Hipponicus to Aspasia for instructions.
When Callias recoils at the notion of a female teacher, Socrates notes that Aspasia had favorably influenced Pericles and, after his death, Lysicles.
In a section of the dialogue, preserved in Latin by Cicero, Aspasia figures as a "female Socrates", counseling first Xenophon's wife and then Xenophon himself (the Xenophon in question is not the famous historian) about acquiring virtue through self-knowledge.
Aeschines presents Aspasia as a teacher and inspirer of excellence, connecting these virtues with her status as hetaira.
According to Kahn, every single episode in Aeschines' Aspasia is not only fictitious but incredible.
Of Antisthenes' Aspasia only two or three quotations are extant.
Antisthenes appears to have attacked not only Aspasia, but the entire family of Pericles, including his sons.
The philosopher believes that the great statesman chose the life of pleasure over virtue.
Thus, Aspasia is presented as the personification of the life of sexual indulgence.
In 1836, Walter Savage Landor, an English writer and poet, published Pericles and Aspasia, one of his most famous books.
Pericles and Aspasia is a rendering of classical Athens through a series of imaginary letters, which contain numerous poems.
The letters are frequently unfaithful to actual history but attempt to capture the spirit of the Age of Pericles.
Robert Hamerling is another novelist and poet who was inspired by Aspasia's personality.
In 1876 he published his novel Aspasia, a book about the manners and morals of the Age of Pericles and a work of cultural and historical interest.
Giacomo Leopardi, an Italian poet influenced by the movement of romanticism, published a group of five poems known as the circle of Aspasia.
These Leopardi poems were inspired by his painful experience of desperate and unrequited love for a woman named Fanny Targioni Tozzetti.
Leopardi called this person Aspasia, after the companion of Pericles.
In 1918, novelist and playwright George Cram Cook produced his first full-length play, The Athenian Women (an adaption of Lysistrata), which portrays Aspasia leading a strike for peace.
Cook combined an anti-war theme with a Greek setting.
American writer Gertrude Atherton in The Immortal Marriage (1927) treats the story of Pericles and Aspasia and illustrates the period of the Samian War, the Peloponnesian War and the Plague of Athens.
Taylor Caldwell's Glory and the Lightning (1974) is another novel that portrays the historical relationship of Aspasia and Pericles.
Fame and assessments
Aspasia's name is closely connected with Pericles' glory and fame.
Plutarch accepts her as a significant figure both politically and intellectually and expresses his admiration for a woman who "managed as she pleased the foremost men of the state, and afforded the philosophers occasion to discuss her in exalted terms and at great length".
A Syriac text, according to which Aspasia composed a speech and instructed a man to read it for her in the courts, confirms Aspasia's rhetorical fame.
Aspasia is said by the Suda, a 10th-century Byzantine encyclopedia, to have been "clever with regards to words," a sophist, and to have taught rhetoric.
QTEMPLATE box
On the basis of such assessments, researchers such as Cheryl Glenn, Professor at the Pennsylvania State University, argue that Aspasia seems to have been the only woman in classical Greece to have distinguished herself in the public sphere and must have influenced Pericles in the composition of his speeches.
Some scholars believe that Aspasia opened an academy for young women of good families or even invented the Socratic method.
However, Robert W. Wallace, Professor of classics at Northwestern University, underscores that "we cannot accept as historical the joke that Aspasia taught Pericles how to speak and hence was a master rhetorician or philosopher".
According to Wallace, the intellectual role Aspasia was given by Plato may have derived from comedy.
Kagan describes Aspasia as "a beautiful, independent, brilliantly witty young woman capable of holding her own in conversation with the best minds in Greece and of discussing and illuminating any kind of question with her husband".
Roger Just, a classicist and Professor of social anthropology at the University of Kent, believes that Aspasia was an exceptional figure, but her example alone is enough to underline the fact that any woman who was to become the intellectual and social equal of a man would have to be a hetaera.
Aspasia is a character of Assassin's Creed Odyssey who is portrayed as the lover and partner of the Athenian statesman Pericles.
Aspasia is the protagonist in Taylor Caldwell's novel Glory and the Lightning, 1974, Doubleday & Company.
Accuracy of historical sources
The main problem remains, as Jona Lendering points out, that most of the things we know about Aspasia are based on mere hypothesis.
Thucydides does not mention her; our only sources are the untrustworthy representations and speculations recorded by men in literature and philosophy, who did not care at all about Aspasia as a historical character.
This is the reason modern scholars express their scepticism about the historicity of Aspasia's life.
According to Charles W. Fornara and Loren J. Samons II, Professors of Classics and history, "it may well be, for all we know, that the real Aspasia was more than a match for her fictional counterpart".
Notes
Sources
; Primary sources (Greeks and Romans)
* Aristophanes, Acharnians.
https:/ stream n27 1up original text in Internet Archive
* Athenaeus of Naucratis, Deipnosophistae.
Translated by Yonge, C.D. http:/ 1711.dl cicero hopper cla wl3/wl303.htm A Portrait-study.
from The Works of Lucian of Samosata translated by H.W. Fowler and F.G. Fowler Oxford: The Clarendon Press 1905 at
* Plato, Menexenus.
Plato in Twelve Volumes, Vol. 9 translated by W.R.M. Lamb.
Cambridge, MA, Harvard University Press; London, William Heinemann Ltd. 1925 http:/ hopper hopper/text?doc=urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0007.tlg012.perseus-eng1 original text at Perseus program.
* Thucydides, The Peloponnesian War, I and III.
London, J.M. Dent; New York, E.P. Dutton.
In http:/ cgi-bin/ptext?doc
Perseus%3Atext%3A1999.01.0200&query
book%3D%233 Perseus program
* Xenophon, Memorabilia.
Xenophon in Seven Volumes, 4. E.C. Marchant.
Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA; William Heinemann, Ltd., London. 1923 http:/ cgi-bin etext/1173 at Gutenberg project, Last Updated: January 15, 2013.
; Secondary sources
* Mazzon, Daniela, Aspasia maestra e amante di Pericle, EdizioniAnordest, 2011 (in Italian) EAN9788896742280
* Mazzon, Daniela, Desiderata Aspasia.
Rapsodia mediterranea, one-act drama, 2012 (in Italian)
Further reading
