Stephen William Hawking (8 January 1942 - 14 March 2018) was an English theoretical physicist, cosmologist, and author who was director of research at the Centre for Theoretical Cosmology at the University of Cambridge at the time of his death.
He was the Lucasian Professor of Mathematics at the University of Cambridge between 1979 and 2009.
His scientific works included a collaboration with Roger Penrose on gravitational singularity theorems in the framework of general relativity and the theoretical prediction that black holes emit radiation, often called Hawking radiation.
Hawking was the first to set out a theory of cosmology explained by a union of the general theory of relativity and quantum mechanics.
He was a vigorous supporter of the many-worlds interpretation of quantum mechanics.
Hawking achieved commercial success with several works of popular science in which he discusses his own theories and cosmology in general.
His book A Brief History of Time appeared on the British Sunday Times best-seller list for a record-breaking 237 weeks.
Hawking was a Fellow of the Royal Society (FRS), a lifetime member of the Pontifical Academy of Sciences, and a recipient of the Presidential Medal of Freedom, the highest civilian award in the United States.
In 2002, Hawking was ranked number 25 in the BBC's poll of the 100 Greatest Britons.
In 1963, Hawking was diagnosed with an early-onset slow-progressing form of motor neurone disease (MND; also known as amyotrophic lateral sclerosis "ALS" or Lou Gehrig's disease) that gradually paralysed him over the decades.
Even after the loss of his speech, he was still able to communicate through a speech-generating device, initially through use of a hand-held switch, and eventually by using a single cheek muscle.
He died on 14 March 2018 at the age of 76, after living with the disease for more than 50 years.
and Isobel Eileen Hawking (née Walker; 1915-2013).
Hawking's mother was born into a family of doctors in Glasgow, Scotland.
His wealthy paternal great-grandfather, from Yorkshire, over-extended himself buying farm land and then went bankrupt in the great agricultural depression during the early 20th century.
In 1950, when Hawking's father became head of the division of parasitology at the National Institute for Medical Research, the family moved to St Albans, Hertfordshire.
In St Albans, the family was considered highly intelligent and somewhat eccentric; meals were often spent with each person silently reading a book.
They lived a frugal existence in a large, cluttered, and poorly maintained house and travelled in a converted London taxicab.
During one of Hawking's father's frequent absences working in Africa, the rest of the family spent four months in Majorca visiting his mother's friend Beryl and her husband, the poet Robert Graves.
Primary and secondary school years
Hawking began his schooling at the Byron House School in Highgate, London.
He later blamed its "progressive methods" for his failure to learn to read while at the school.
In St Albans, the eight-year-old Hawking attended St Albans High School for Girls for a few months.
At that time, younger boys could attend one of the houses.
Hawking attended two independent (i.e. fee-paying) schools, first Radlett School and from September 1952, St Albans School, The family placed a high value on education.
Hawking's father wanted his son to attend the well-regarded Westminster School, but the 13-year-old Hawking was ill on the day of the scholarship examination.
His family could not afford the school fees without the financial aid of a scholarship, so Hawking remained at St Albans.
A positive consequence was that Hawking remained close to a group of friends with whom he enjoyed board games, the manufacture of fireworks, model aeroplanes and boats, and long discussions about Christianity and extrasensory perception.
From 1958 on, with the help of the mathematics teacher Dikran Tahta, they built a computer from clock parts, an old telephone switchboard and other recycled components.
Although known at school as "Einstein", Hawking was not initially successful academically.
With time, he began to show considerable aptitude for scientific subjects and, inspired by Tahta, decided to read mathematics at university.
Hawking's thesis His inaugural lecture in this role was titled: "Is the End in Sight for Theoretical Physics?" and proposed N=8 Supergravity as the leading theory to solve many of the outstanding problems physicists were studying.
His promotion coincided with a health crisis which led to his accepting, albeit reluctantly, some nursing services at home.
At the same time, he was also making a transition in his approach to physics, becoming more intuitive and speculative rather than insisting on mathematical proofs.
"I would rather be right than rigorous", he told Kip Thorne.
In 1981, he proposed that information in a black hole is irretrievably lost when a black hole evaporates.
This information paradox violates the fundamental tenet of quantum mechanics, and led to years of debate, including "the Black Hole War" with Leonard Susskind and Gerard 't Hooft.
These awards did not significantly change Hawking's financial status, and motivated by the need to finance his children's education and home expenses, he decided in 1982 to write a popular book about the universe that would be accessible to the general public.
Instead of publishing with an academic press, he signed a contract with Bantam Books, a mass market publisher, and received a large advance for his book.
A first draft of the book, called A Brief History of Time, was completed in 1984.
One of the first messages Hawking produced with his speech-generating device was a request for his assistant to help him finish writing A Brief History of Time.
Peter Guzzardi, his editor at Bantam, pushed him to explain his ideas clearly in non-technical language, a process that required many revisions from an increasingly irritated Hawking.
The book was published in April 1988 in the US and in June in the UK, and it proved to be an extraordinary success, rising quickly to the top of best-seller lists in both countries and remaining there for months.
He reportedly declined a knighthood in the late 1990s in objection to the UK's science funding policy.
Hawking pursued his work in physics: in 1993 he co-edited a book on Euclidean quantum gravity with Gary Gibbons and published a collected edition of his own articles on black holes and the Big Bang.
In 1994, at Cambridge's Newton Institute, Hawking and Penrose delivered a series of six lectures that were published in 1996 as "The Nature of Space and Time".
In 1997, he conceded a 1991 public scientific wager made with Kip Thorne and John Preskill of Caltech.
Hawking had bet that Penrose's proposal of a "cosmic censorship conjecture"that there could be no "naked singularities" unclothed within a horizonwas correct.
After discovering his concession might have been premature, a new and more refined wager was made.
This one specified that such singularities would occur without extra conditions.
The same year, Thorne, Hawking and Preskill made another bet, this time concerning the black hole information paradox.
As part of another longstanding scientific dispute, Hawking had emphatically argued, and bet, that the Higgs boson would never be found.
The particle was proposed to exist as part of the Higgs field theory by Peter Higgs in 1964.
Hawking and Higgs engaged in a heated and public debate over the matter in 2002 and again in 2008, with Higgs criticising Hawking's work and complaining that Hawking's "celebrity status gives him instant credibility that others do not have."
The particle was discovered in July 2012 at CERN following construction of the Large Hadron Collider.
Hawking quickly conceded that he had lost his bet
In 2007, Hawking and his daughter Lucy published George's Secret Key to the Universe, a children's book designed to explain theoretical physics in an accessible fashion and featuring characters similar to those in the Hawking family.
The book was followed by sequels in 2009, 2011, 2014 and 2016.
He was awarded the Copley Medal from the Royal Society (2006),
On 20 July 2015, Hawking helped launch Breakthrough Initiatives, an effort to search for extraterrestrial life.
Hawking created Stephen Hawking: Expedition New Earth, a documentary on space colonisation, as a 2017 episode of Tomorrow's World.
In August 2015, Hawking said that not all information is lost when something enters a black hole and there might be a possibility to retrieve information from a black hole according to his theory.
In July 2017, Hawking was awarded an Honorary Doctorate from Imperial College London.
Hawking's final paper &ndash; A smooth exit from eternal inflation? &ndash; was posthumously published in the Journal of High Energy Physics on 27 April 2018.
Personal life
Marriages
Hawking met his future wife, Jane Wilde, at a party in 1962.
The following year, Hawking was diagnosed with motor neuron disease.
In October 1964, the couple became engaged to marry, aware of the potential challenges that lay ahead due to Hawking's shortened life expectancy and physical limitations.
Hawking later said that the engagement gave him "something to live for".
The two were married on 14 July 1965 in their shared hometown of St Albans.
The couple resided in Cambridge, within Hawking's walking distance to the Department of Applied Mathematics and Theoretical Physics (DAMTP).
During their first years of marriage, Jane lived in London during the week as she completed her degree at Westfield College.
They travelled to the United States several times for conferences and physics-related visits.
Jane began a PhD programme through Westfield College in medieval Spanish poetry (completed in 1981).
The couple had three children: Robert, born May 1967, Lucy, born November 1969, and Timothy, born April 1979.
Hawking rarely discussed his illness and physical challenges, evenin a precedent set during their courtshipwith Jane.
His disabilities meant that the responsibilities of home and family rested firmly on his wife's increasingly overwhelmed shoulders, leaving him more time to think about physics.
Upon his appointment in 1974 to a year-long position at the California Institute of Technology in Pasadena, California, Jane proposed that a graduate or post-doctoral student live with them and help with his care.
Hawking accepted, and Bernard Carr travelled with them as the first of many students who fulfilled this role.
Disability
Hawking had a rare early-onset slow-progressing form of motor neurone disease (MND; also known as amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, "ALS", or Lou Gehrig's disease), a terminal illness that affects and causes the degeneration of motor neurons of the brain and spinal cord, which gradually paralysed him over decades.
Hawking continued to use this type of chair until the early 1990s, at which time his ability to use his hands to drive a wheelchair deteriorated.
Hawking used a variety of different chairs from that time, including a DragonMobility Dragon elevating powerchair from 2007, as shown in the April 2008 photo of Hawking attending NASA's 50th anniversary; a Permobil C350 from 2014; and then a Permobil F3 from 2016.
Hawking's speech deteriorated, and by the late 1970s he could be understood by only his family and closest friends.
To communicate with others, someone who knew him well would interpret his speech into intelligible speech.
Spurred by a dispute with the university over who would pay for the ramp needed for him to enter his workplace, Hawking and his wife campaigned for improved access and support for those with disabilities in Cambridge, including adapted student housing at the university.
In general, Hawking had ambivalent feelings about his role as a disability rights champion: while wanting to help others, he also sought to detach himself from his illness and its challenges.
His lack of engagement in this area led to some criticism.
During a visit to CERN on the border of France and Switzerland in mid-1985, Hawking contracted pneumonia, which in his condition was life-threatening; he was so ill that Jane was asked if life support should be terminated.
She refused, but the consequence was a tracheotomy, which required round-the-clock nursing care and the removal of what remained of his speech.
The National Health Service was ready to pay for a nursing home, but Jane was determined that he would live at home.
The cost of the care was funded by an American foundation.
Nurses were hired for the three shifts required to provide the round-the-clock support he required.
One of those employed was Elaine Mason, who was to become Hawking's second wife.
For his communication, Hawking initially raised his eyebrows to choose letters on a spelling card, but in 1986 he received a computer program called the "Equalizer" from Walter Woltosz, CEO of Words Plus, who had developed an earlier version of the software to help his mother-in-law, who also suffered from ALS and had lost her ability to speak and write.
At the time, the date of Hawking's trip to space was projected to be as early as 2009, but commercial flights to space did not commence before his death.
Death
Hawking died at his home in Cambridge, England, on 14 March 2018, at the age of 76.
His family stated that he "died peacefully".
He was eulogised by figures in science, entertainment, politics, and other areas.
The Gonville and Caius College flag flew at half-mast and a book of condolences was signed by students and visitors.
A tribute was made to Hawking in the closing speech by IPC President Andrew Parsons at the closing ceremony of the 2018 Paralympic Winter Games in Pyeongchang, South Korea.
Hawking was born on the 300th anniversary of Galileo's death and died on the 139th anniversary of Einstein's birth.
His private funeral took place at 2 pm on the afternoon of 31 March 2018, Guests at the funeral included The Theory of Everything actors Eddie Redmayne and Felicity Jones, Queen guitarist and astrophysicist Brian May, and model Lily Cole.
In addition, actor Benedict Cumberbatch, who played Hawking in Hawking, astronaut Tim Peake, Astronomer Royal Martin Rees and physicist Kip Thorne provided readings at the service.
Following the cremation, a service of thanksgiving was held at Westminster Abbey on 15 June 2018, after which his ashes were interred in the Abbey's nave, between the graves of Sir Isaac Newton and Charles Darwin.
Inscribed on his memorial stone are the words "Here lies what was mortal of Stephen Hawking 1942-2018" and his most famed equation.
He directed, at least fifteen years before his death, that the Bekenstein-Hawking entropy equation be his epitaph.
In June 2018, it was announced that Hawking's words, set to music by Greek composer Vangelis, would be beamed into space from a European space agency satellite dish in Spain with the aim of reaching the nearest black hole, 1A 0620-00.
Hawking's final broadcast interview, about the detection of gravitational waves resulting from the collision of two neutron stars, occurred in October 2017.
His final words to the world appeared posthumously, in April 2018, in the form of a Smithsonian TV Channel documentary entitled, Leaving Earth: Or How to Colonize a Planet.
One of his final research studies, entitled A smooth exit from eternal inflation?, about the origin of the universe, was published in the Journal of High Energy Physics in May 2018.
Later, in October 2018, another of his final research studies, entitled Black Hole Entropy and Soft Hair, was published, and dealt with the "mystery of what happens to the information held by objects once they disappear into a black hole".
Also in October 2018, Hawking's last book, Brief Answers to the Big Questions, a popular science book presenting his final comments on the most important questions facing humankind, was published.
On 8 November 2018, an auction of 22 personal possessions of Stephen Hawking, including his doctoral thesis ("Properties of Expanding Universes", PhD thesis, Cambridge University, 1965) and wheelchair, took place, and fetched about £1.8 m (more than $2.3 m).
Proceeds from the auction sale of the wheelchair went to two charities, the Motor Neurone Disease Association and the Stephen Hawking Foundation; proceeds from Hawking's other items went to his estate.
The same month, it was reported that Hawking's nurse, Patricia Dowdy, had been handed an interim suspension in 2016 for "failures over his care and financial misconduct."
Personal views
Future of humanity
In 2006, Hawking posed an open question on the Internet: "In a world that is in chaos politically, socially and environmentally, how can the human race sustain another 100 years?
", later clarifying: "I don't know the answer.
That is why I asked the question, to get people to think about it, and to be aware of the dangers we now face."
Hawking expressed concern that life on Earth is at risk from a sudden nuclear war, a genetically engineered virus, global warming, or other dangers humans have not yet thought of.
Hawking stated: "I regard it as almost inevitable that either a nuclear confrontation or environmental catastrophe will cripple the Earth at some point in the next 1,000 years", and considered an "asteroid collision" to be the biggest threat to the planet.
Such a planet-wide disaster need not result in human extinction if the human race were to be able to colonise additional planets before the disaster.
However, he argued that we should be more frightened of capitalism exacerbating economic inequality than robots.
Hawking was concerned about the future emergence of a race of "superhumans" that would be able to design their own evolution In an interview published in The Guardian, Hawking regarded "the brain as a computer which will stop working when its components fail", and the concept of an afterlife as a "fairy story for people afraid of the dark".
In an interview with El Mundo, he said:
QTEMPLATE |Before we understand science, it is natural to believe that God created the universe.
But now science offers a more convincing explanation.
What I meant by 'we would know the mind of God' is, we would know everything that God would know, if there were a God, which there isn't.
I'm an atheist.
In addition, Hawking stated:
QTEMPLATE |If you like, you can call the laws of science 'God,’ but it wouldn’t be a personal God that you would meet and put questions to.
Hawking was disappointed by Brexit and warned against envy and isolationism.
Hawking was greatly concerned over health care, and maintained that without the UK National Health Service, he could not have survived into his 70s.
Hawking alleged ministers damaged the NHS, he blamed the Conservatives for cutting funding, weakening the NHS by privatisation, lowering staff morale through holding pay back and reducing social care.
Hawking accused Jeremy Hunt of cherry picking evidence which Hawking maintained debased science.
Hawking also stated, "There is overwhelming evidence that NHS funding and the numbers of doctors and nurses are inadequate, and it is getting worse."
In June 2017, Hawking endorsed the Labour Party in the 2017 UK general election, citing the Conservatives' proposed cuts to the NHS.
But he was also critical of Labour leader Jeremy Corbyn, expressing scepticism over whether the party could win a general election under him.
Hawking feared Donald Trump's policies on global warming could endanger the planet and make global warming irreversible.
He said, "Climate change is one of the great dangers we face, and it's one we can prevent if we act now.
By denying the evidence for climate change, and pulling out of the Paris Agreement, Donald Trump will cause avoidable environmental damage to our beautiful planet, endangering the natural world, for us and our children."
Hawking further stated that this could lead Earth "to become like Venus, with a temperature of two hundred and fifty degrees, and raining sulphuric acid".
Appearances in popular media
In 1988, Hawking, Arthur C. Clarke and Carl Sagan were interviewed in God, the Universe and Everything Else.
They discussed the Big Bang theory, God and the possibility of extraterrestrial life.
At the release party for the home video version of the A Brief History of Time, Leonard Nimoy, who had played Spock on Star Trek, learned that Hawking was interested in appearing on the show.
Nimoy made the necessary contact, and Hawking played a holographic simulation of himself in an episode of Star Trek: The Next Generation in 1993.
The same year, his synthesiser voice was recorded for the Pink Floyd song "Keep Talking", and in 1999 for an appearance on The Simpsons.
Hawking appeared in documentaries titled The Real Stephen Hawking (2001), Stephen Hawking: Profile (2002) and Hawking (2013), and the documentary series Stephen Hawking, Master of the Universe (2008).
in the biographical 2014 film The Theory of Everything, in which he was portrayed by Eddie Redmayne in an Academy Award-winning role.
Hawking was featured at the Monty Python Live (Mostly) in 2014.
He was shown to sing an extended version of the “Galaxy Song”, after running down Brian Cox with his wheelchair, in a pre-recorded video.
Hawking used his fame to advertise products, including a wheelchair, National Savings,
Broadcast in March 2018 just a week or two before his death, Hawking was the voice of The Book Mark II on The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy radio series, and he was the guest of Neil deGrasse Tyson on StarTalk.
Awards and honours
Hawking received numerous awards and honours.
Already early in the list, in 1974 he was elected a Fellow of the Royal Society (FRS).
At that time, his nomination read:
QTEMPLATE |Hawking has made major contributions to the field of general relativity.
These derive from a deep understanding of what is relevant to physics and astronomy, and especially from a mastery of wholly new mathematical techniques.
Following the pioneering work of Penrose he established, partly alone and partly in collaboration with Penrose, a series of successively stronger theorems establishing the fundamental result that all realistic cosmological models must possess singularities.
Using similar techniques, Hawking has proved the basic theorems on the laws governing black holes: that stationary solutions of Einstein's equations with smooth event horizons must necessarily be axisymmetric; and that in the evolution and interaction of black holes, the total surface area of the event horizons must increase.
In collaboration with G. Ellis, Hawking is the author of an impressive and original treatise on "Space-time in the Large".
The citation continues, "Other important work by Hawking relates to the interpretation of cosmological observations and to the design of gravitational wave detectors."
Medal for Science Communication
Hawking was a member of the Advisory Board of the Starmus Festival, and had a major role in acknowledging and promoting science communication.
The Stephen Hawking Medal for Science Communication is an annual award initiated in 2016 to honour members of the arts community for contributions that help build awareness of science.
Recipients receive a medal bearing a portrait of Hawking by Alexei Leonov, and the other side represents an image of Leonov himself performing the first spacewalk along with an image of the "Red Special", the guitar of Queen musician and astrophysicist Brian May (with music being another major component of the Starmus Festival).
The Starmus III Festival in 2016 was a tribute to Stephen Hawking and the book of all Starmus III lectures, "Beyond the Horizon", was also dedicated to him.
The first recipients of the medals, which were awarded at the festival, were chosen by Hawking himself.
They were composer Hans Zimmer, physicist Jim Al-Khalili, and the science documentary Particle Fever.
Publications
Popular books
Co-authored
The Nature of Space and Time (with Roger Penrose) (1996)
The Large, the Small and the Human Mind (1997)
The Future of Spacetime (with Kip Thorne, Igor Novikov, Timothy Ferris and introduction by Alan Lightman, Richard H. Price) (2002)
A Briefer History of Time (with Leonard Mlodinow) (2005)
The Grand Design (with Leonard Mlodinow) (2010)
Forewords
* Black Holes & Time Warps: Einstein's Outrageous Legacy (Kip Thorne, and introduction by Frederick Seitz) (1994)
Children's fiction
Co-written with his daughter Lucy.
* George's Secret Key to the Universe (2007)
* George's Cosmic Treasure Hunt (2009)
* George and the Big Bang (2011)
Films and series
* A Brief History of Time (1992)
* Stephen Hawking's Universe (1997)
* Hawking - BBC television film (2004) starring Benedict Cumberbatch
* Horizon: The Hawking Paradox (2005)
* Masters of Science Fiction (2007)
* Stephen Hawking and the Theory of Everything (2007)
* Stephen Hawking: Master of the Universe (2008)
* Into the Universe with Stephen Hawking (2010)
* Brave New World with Stephen Hawking (2011)
* Stephen Hawking's Grand Design (2012)
* Stephen Hawking: A Brief History of Mine (2013)
The Theory of Everything - Feature film (2014) starring Eddie Redmayne
Selected academic works
;Citations
Sources
