The Scottish Parliament (; Scots: Scots Pairlament) is the unicameral legislature of Scotland.
Located in the Holyrood area of the capital city, Edinburgh, it is frequently referred to by the metonym Holyrood.
The Parliament is a democratically elected body comprising 129 members known as Members of the Scottish Parliament (MSPs), elected for four-year terms under the additional member system: 73 MSPs represent individual geographical constituencies elected by the plurality (‘first-past-the-post’) system, while a further 56 are returned from eight additional member regions, each electing seven MSPs.
The most recent general election to the Parliament was held on 5 May 2016, with the Scottish National Party winning a plurality.
The original Parliament of Scotland was the national legislature of the independent Kingdom of Scotland, and existed from the early 13th century until the Kingdom of Scotland merged with the Kingdom of England under the Acts of Union 1707 to form the Kingdom of Great Britain.
As a consequence, both the Parliament of Scotland and the Parliament of England ceased to exist, and the Parliament of Great Britain, which sat at Westminster in London The British Parliament retains the ability to amend the terms of reference of the Scottish Parliament, and can extend or reduce the areas in which it can make laws.
The first meeting of the new Parliament took place on 12 May 1999.
The competence of the Scottish Parliament has been amended numerous times since then, most notably by the Scotland Act 2012 and Scotland Act 2016, with some of the most significant changes being the expansion of the Parliament's powers, especially over taxation and welfare.
History of the Scottish Parliament
Before the Treaty of Union 1707 united the Kingdom of Scotland and the Kingdom of England into a new state called "Great Britain", Scotland had an independent parliament known as the Parliament of Scotland.
Initial Scottish proposals in the negotiation over the Union suggested a devolved Parliament be retained in Scotland, but this was not accepted by the English negotiators.
For the next three hundred years, Scotland was directly governed by the Parliament of Great Britain and the subsequent Parliament of the United Kingdom, both seated at Westminster, and the lack of a Parliament of Scotland remained an important element in Scottish national identity.
Suggestions for a 'devolved' Parliament were made before 1914, but were shelved due to the outbreak of the First World War.
During this time, the discovery of oil in the North Sea and the following "It's Scotland's oil" campaign of the Scottish National Party (SNP) resulted in rising support for Scottish independence, as well as the SNP.
The party argued that the revenues from the oil were not benefitting Scotland as much as they should.
Throughout the 1980s and 1990s, demand for a Scottish Parliament grew, in part because the government of the United Kingdom was controlled by the Conservative Party, while Scotland itself elected relatively few Conservative MPs.
Devolution continued to be part of the platform of the Labour Party which, in May 1997, took power under Tony Blair.
An election was held on 6 May 1999, and on 1 July of that year power was transferred from Westminster to the new Parliament.
Building and grounds
Since September 2004, the official home of the Scottish Parliament has been a new Scottish Parliament Building, in the Holyrood area of Edinburgh.
The Scottish Parliament building was designed by Spanish architect Enric Miralles in partnership with local Edinburgh Architecture firm RMJM which was led by Design Principal Tony Kettle.
Some of the principal features of the complex include leaf-shaped buildings, a grass-roofed branch merging into adjacent parkland and gabion walls formed from the stones of previous buildings.
Throughout the building there are many repeated motifs, such as shapes based on Raeburn's Skating Minister.
Crow-stepped gables and the upturned boat skylights of the Garden Lobby, complete the unique architecture.
Queen Elizabeth II opened the new building on 9 October 2004.
In March 2006, one of the Holyrood building's roof beams slipped out of its support and was left dangling above the back benches during a debate.
The debating chamber was subsequently closed, and MSPs moved to The Hub for one week, whilst inspections were carried out.
During repairs, all chamber business was conducted in the Parliament's committee room two.
Temporary accommodation 1999-2004
While the permanent building at Holyrood was being constructed, a temporary home for the Parliament was found in Edinburgh.
The General Assembly Hall of the Church of Scotland on the Royal Mile was chosen to host the Parliament.
Official photographs and television interviews were held in the courtyard adjoining the Assembly Hall, which is part of the School of Divinity of the University of Edinburgh.
This building was vacated twice to allow for the meeting of the Church's General Assembly.
In May 2000, the Parliament was temporarily relocated to the former Strathclyde Regional Council debating chamber in Glasgow, and to the University of Aberdeen in May 2002.
Officials
After each election to the Scottish Parliament, at the beginning of each parliamentary session, Parliament elects one MSP to serve as Presiding Officer, the equivalent of the speaker in other legislatures, and two MSPs to serve as deputies.
The Presiding Officer (currently Ken Macintosh) and deputies (currently Linda Fabiani and Christine Grahame) are elected by a secret ballot of the 129 MSPs, which is the only secret ballot conducted in the Scottish Parliament.
Principally, the role of the Presiding Officer is to chair chamber proceedings and the Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body.
When chairing meetings of the Parliament, the Presiding Officer and his/her deputies must be politically impartial.
During debates, the Presiding Officer (or the deputy) is assisted by the parliamentary clerks, who give advice on how to interpret the standing orders that govern the proceedings of meetings.
A vote clerk sits in front of the Presiding Officer and operates the electronic voting equipment and chamber clocks.
As a member of the Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body, the Presiding Officer is responsible for ensuring that the Parliament functions effectively and has the staff, property and resources it requires to operate.
Convening the Parliamentary Bureau, which allocates time and sets the work agenda in the chamber, is another of the roles of the Presiding Officer.
Under the Standing Orders of the Parliament the Bureau consists of the Presiding Officer and one representative from each political party with five or more seats in the Parliament.
Amongst the duties of the Bureau are to agree the timetable of business in the chamber, establish the number, remit and membership of parliamentary committees and regulate the passage of legislation (bills) through the Parliament.
The Presiding Officer also represents the Scottish Parliament at home and abroad in an official capacity.
There are 131 seats in the debating chamber.
Of the total 131 seats, 129 are occupied by the Parliament's elected MSPs and two are seats for the Scottish Law Officers-the Lord Advocate and the Solicitor General for Scotland, who are not elected members of the Parliament but are members of the Scottish Government.
As such, the Law Officers may attend and speak in the plenary meetings of the Parliament but, as they are not elected MSPs, cannot vote.
Members are able to sit anywhere in the debating chamber, but typically sit in their party groupings.
which is made from silver and inlaid with gold panned from Scottish rivers and inscribed with the words: Wisdom, Compassion, Justice and Integrity.
The words There shall be a Scottish Parliament, which are the first words of the Scotland Act, are inscribed around the head of the mace, which has a ceremonial role in the meetings of Parliament, representing the authority of the Parliament to make laws.
Plenary meetings in the debating chamber usually take place on Wednesday afternoons from 2 pm to 6 pm and on Thursdays from 9:15 am to 6 pm.
and on the BBC's parliamentary channel BBC Parliament.
Proceedings are also recorded in text form, in print and online, in the Official Report, which is the substantially verbatim transcript of parliamentary debates.
Since September 2012, the first item of business on Tuesday afternoons is usually Time for Reflection at which a speaker addresses members for up to four minutes, sharing a perspective on issues of faith.
This contrasts with the formal style of "Prayers", which is the first item of business in meetings of the House of Commons.
Speakers are drawn from across Scotland and are chosen to represent the balance of religious beliefs according to the Scottish census.
Members may call each other directly by name, rather than by constituency or cabinet position, and hand clapping is allowed.
Speeches to the chamber are normally delivered in English, but members may use Scots, Gaelic, or any other language with the agreement of the Presiding Officer.
The Scottish Parliament has conducted debates in the Gaelic language.
Each sitting day, normally at 5 pm, MSPs decide on all the motions and amendments that have been moved that day.
This "Decision Time" is heralded by the sounding of the division bell, which is heard throughout the Parliamentary campus and alerts MSPs who are not in the chamber to return and vote.
MSPs do not tend to vote against such instructions, since those who do are unlikely to reach higher political ranks in their parties.
Errant members can be deselected as official party candidates during future elections, and, in serious cases, may be expelled from their parties outright.
Thus, as with many Parliaments, the independence of Members of the Scottish Parliament tends to be low, and backbench rebellions by members who are discontent with their party's policies are rare.
Immediately after Decision Time a "Members Debate" is held, which lasts for 45 minutes.
and partly to compensate for the fact that there is no revising chamber.
The principal role of committees in the Scottish Parliament is to take evidence from witnesses, conduct inquiries and scrutinise legislation.
Committee meetings take place on Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday morning when Parliament is sitting.
Committees can also meet at other locations throughout Scotland.
Committees comprise a small number of MSPs, with membership reflecting the balance of parties across Parliament.
The current Mandatory Committees in the fourth Session of the Scottish Parliament are: Public Audit; Equal Opportunities; European and External Relations; Finance; Public Petitions; Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments; and Delegated Powers and Law Reform.
Private Bill Committees have been set up to consider legislation on issues such as the development of the Edinburgh Tram Network, the Glasgow Airport Rail Link, the Airdrie-Bathgate Rail Link and extensions to the National Gallery of Scotland.
Given the geographical distribution of population in Scotland, this results in constituencies of a smaller area in the Central Lowlands, where the bulk of Scotland's population live, and much larger constituency areas in the north and west of the country, which have a low population density.
The island archipelagos of Orkney, Shetland and the Western Isles comprise a much smaller number of electors, due to their dispersed population.
Each political party draws up a list of candidates standing in each electoral region, from which the List MSPs are elected.
When a List MSP resigns, the next person on the resigning MSPs' party's list takes the seat.
The total number of seats in the Parliament are allocated to parties proportionally to the number of votes received in the second vote of the ballot using the d'Hondt method.
For example, to determine who is awarded the first list seat, the number of list votes cast for each party is divided by one plus the number of seats the party won in the region (at this point just constituency seats).
The party with the highest quotient is awarded the seat, which is then added to its constituency seats in allocating the second seat.
This is repeated iteratively until all available list seats are allocated.
As in the House of Commons, a number of qualifications apply to being an MSP.
Such qualifications were introduced under the House of Commons Disqualification Act 1975 and the British Nationality Act 1981.
Specifically, members must be over the age of 18 and must be a citizen of the United Kingdom, the Republic of Ireland, one of the countries in the Commonwealth of Nations, a citizen of a British overseas territory, or a European Union citizen resident in the UK.
Members of the police and the armed forces are disqualified from sitting in the Scottish Parliament as elected MSPs, and similarly, civil servants and members of foreign legislatures are disqualified.
Under the Scotland Act 1998, an ordinary general election to the Scottish Parliament would normally have been held on the first Thursday in May four years after the 2016 election, i.e. in May 2020.
This would have clashed with the proposed date of the 2020 United Kingdom general election, but later became a moot point after the latter was brought forward to 2017.
In November 2015, the Scottish Government published a Scottish Elections (Dates) Bill, which proposed to extend the term of the Parliament to five years.
Unlike elections to the Westminster parliament, citizens of other non-Commonwealth EU member states who are resident in Scotland are entitled to vote in elections to the Scottish Parliament.
Overseas electors on Scottish electoral registers are not allowed to vote in Scottish Parliament elections.
From the 2016 election, the franchise for Scottish Parliament elections was expanded to include 16 and 17-year olds.
Current composition
Criticism
The resignation of Henry McLeish as First Minister, brought on by an office expenses scandal, generated controversy in the first years of the Scottish Parliament.
Various academics have written on how the Scottish Parliament can be improved as a governing institution.
West Lothian question
A procedural consequence of the establishment of the Scottish Parliament is that Scottish MPs sitting in the UK House of Commons have been able to vote on domestic legislation that applies only to England, Wales, and Northern Ireland - whilst English, Scottish, Welsh and Northern Irish Westminster MPs are unable to vote on the domestic legislation of the Scottish Parliament.
This phenomenon is known as the West Lothian question and has led to criticism.
Following the Conservative victory in the 2015 UK election, standing orders of the House of Commons were changed to give MPs representing English constituencies a new "veto" over laws only affecting England, known as English votes for English laws.
* Members of the Scottish Parliament: 1st; 2nd; 3rd; 4th;
5th
Bibliography
* Balfour, A. & McCrone, G. (2005): Creating a Scottish Parliament, http:/ StudioLR,
* Burrows, N. (1999): "Unfinished Business - The Scotland Act 1998", Modern Law Review, Vol. 62, No. 2 (March 1999), pp.
* Dardanelli, P. (2005): Between Two Unions: Europeanisation and Scottish Devolution, Manchester University Press,
* Hassan, Gerry (1999): A Guide to the Scottish Parliament: The Shape of Things to Come, The Stationery Office",
* Hassan, Gerry (2019): The Story of the Scottish Parliament:
The First Two Decades Explained, Edinburgh University Press,
* Kingdom, J. (1999): Government and Politics in Britain, An Introduction, Polity,
* MacLean, B. (2005): Getting It Together: Scottish Parliament, Luath Press Ltd,
* McFadden, J. & Lazarowicz, M. (2003): The Scottish Parliament: An Introduction, LexisNexis UK,
* Murkens, E.; Jones, P. & Keating, M. (2002): Scottish Independence: A Practical Guide, Edinburgh University Press,
* Taylor, Brian (1999): The Scottish Parliament, Polygon, Edinburgh,
* Taylor, Brian (2002): The Scottish Parliament: The Road to Devolution, Edinburgh University Press,
* Young, John R. (1996): The Scottish Parliament, 1639-1661: A Political and Constitutional, Edinburgh: John Donald Publishers
