The history of Afghanistan, ( , ) as a state began in 1747 with its establishment by Ahmad Shah Durrani.
The written recorded history of the land presently constituting Afghanistan can be traced back to around 500 BCE when the area was under the Achaemenid Empire, although evidence indicates that an advanced degree of urbanized culture has existed in the land since between 3000 and 2000 BCE.
Bactria dates back to 2500 BC.
The Indus Valley Civilisation stretched up to large parts of Afghanistan in the north.
Alexander the Great and his Macedonian army arrived at what is now Afghanistan in 330 BCE after the fall of the Achmaemenid Empire during the Battle of Gaugamela.
Since then, many empires have risen from Afghanistan, including the Greco-Bactrians, Kushans, Hephthalites, Saffarids, Samanids, Ghaznavids, Ghurids, Khaljis, Timurids, Mughals, Hotakis and Durranis.
Afghanistan (meaning "land of the Afghans") has been a strategically important location throughout history.
The land served as "a gateway to India, impinging on the ancient Silk Road, which carried trade from the Mediterranean to China".
Sitting on many trade and migration routes, Afghanistan may be called the 'Central Asian roundabout' since routes converge from the Middle East, from the Indus Valley through the passes over the Hindu Kush, from the Far East via the Tarim Basin, and from the adjacent Eurasian Steppe.
The Iranian languages were developed by one branch of these people; the Pashto language spoken today in Afghanistan is one of the Eastern Iranian languages.
Elena E. Kuz'mina argues that the tents of Iranian-speaking nomads of Afghanistan developed from the light surface houses of the Eurasian steppe belt in the Bronze Age.
The Arab invasions influenced the culture of Afghanistan, and its pre-Islamic period of Zoroastrian, Macedonian, Buddhist and Hindu past has long vanished.
Mirwais Hotak followed by Ahmad Shah Durrani
unified Afghan tribes and founded the last Afghan Empire in the early 18th century CE.
Farming communities in Afghanistan were among the earliest in the world.
Zoroastrianism predominated as the religion in the area; even the modern Afghan solar calendar shows the influence of Zoroastrianism in the names of the months.
Other religions such as Buddhism and Hinduism flourished later, leaving a major mark in the region.
Gandhara is the name of an ancient kingdom from the Vedic period and its capital city located between the Hindukush and Sulaiman Mountains (mountains of 1968, pp. 279, 293-94, 336-38, 345
Early inhabitants, around 3000 BCE were likely to have been connected through culture and trade to neighboring civilizations like Jiroft and Tappeh Sialk and the Indus Valley Civilization.
Urban civilization may have begun as early as 3000 BCE and it is possible that the early city of Mundigak (near Kandahar) was a colony of the nearby Indus Valley Civilization.
to 1500 BCE.
Indus Valley Civilization
The Indus Valley Civilization (IVC) was a Bronze Age civilization (3300-1300 BCE; mature period 2600-1900 BCE) extending from present-day northwest Pakistan to present-day northwest India and present-day northeast Afghanistan.
Apart from Shortughai, Mundigak is another known site.
There are several other smaller IVC sites to be found in Afghanistan as well.
Bactria-Margiana
The Bactria-Margiana Archaeological Complex became prominent in the southwest region between 2200 and 1700 BCE (approximately).
The city of Balkh (Bactra) was founded about this time (c. 2000-1500 BCE).
It is possible that the BMAC may have been an Indo-European culture, perhaps the Proto-Indo-Aryans.
Ancient history (700 BCE-565 CE)
Medes
There have been many different opinions about the extent of the Median kingdom.
For instance, according to Ernst Herzfeld, it was a powerful empire, which stretched from central Anatolia to Bactria, to around the borders of nowadays India.
On the other side, Heleen Sancisi-Weerdenburg insists that there is no real evidence about the very existence of the Median empire and that it was an unstable state formation.
Nevertheless, the region of nowadays Afghanistan came under Median rule for a short time.
Achaemenid Empire
Afghanistan fell to the Achaemenid Empire after it was conquered by Darius I of Persia.
The area was divided into several provinces called satrapies, which were each ruled by a governor, or satrap.
These ancient satrapies included: Aria (Herat); Arachosia (Kandahar, Lashkar Gah, and Quetta); Bactriana (Balkh); Sattagydia (Ghazni); and Gandhara (Kabul, Jalalabad, Peshawar).
Alexander and the Seleucids
Alexander the Great arrived in the area of Afghanistan in 330 BCE after defeating Darius III of Persia a year earlier at the Battle of Gaugamela.
His army faced very strong resistance in the Afghan tribal areas where he is said to have commented that Afghanistan is "easy to march into, hard to march out of."
Although his expedition through Afghanistan was brief, Alexander left behind a Hellenic cultural influence that lasted several centuries.
Several great cities were built in the region named "Alexandria," including: Alexandria-of-the-Arians (modern-day Herat); Alexandria-on-the-Tarnak (near Kandahar); Alexandria-ad-Caucasum (near Begram, at Bordj-i-Abdullah); and finally, Alexandria-Eschate (near Kojend), in the north.
After Alexander's death, his loosely connected empire was divided.
Seleucus, a Macedonian officer during Alexander's campaign, declared himself ruler of his own Seleucid Empire, which also included present-day Afghanistan.
Greco-Bactrian Kingdom
The Greco-Bactrian Kingdom was a Hellenistic kingdom, founded when Diodotus I, the satrap of Bactria (and probably the surrounding provinces) seceded from the Seleucid Empire around 250 BCE.
The Greco-Bactria Kingdom continued until c. 130 BCE, when Eucratides I's son, King Heliocles I, was defeated and driven out of Bactria by the Yuezhi tribes from the east.
The Yeuzhi now had complete occupation of Bactria.
It is thought that Eucratides' dynasty continued to rule in Kabul and Alexandria of the Caucasus until 70 BCE when King Hermaeus was also defeated by the Yuezhi.
Indo-Greek Kingdom
One of Demetrius I's successors, Menander I, brought the Indo-Greek Kingdom (now isolated from the rest of the Hellenistic world after the fall of Bactria) to its height between 165-130 BCE, expanding the kingdom in Afghanistan and Pakistan to even larger proportions than Demetrius.
After Menander's death, the Indo-Greeks steadily declined and the last Indo-Greek kings (Strato II and Strato III) were defeated in c. 10 CE.
The Indo-Greek Kingdom was succeeded by the Indo-Scythians.
Mauryan Empire
The territory fell to the Mauryan Empire, which was led by Chandragupta Maurya.
The Mauryas introduced Hinduism and Buddhism to the region, and were planning to capture more territory of Central Asia until they faced local Greco-Bactrian forces.
Seleucus is said to have reached a peace treaty with Chandragupta by giving control of the territory south of the Hindu Kush to the Mauryas upon intermarriage and 500 elephants.
QTEMPLATE |Alexander took these away from the Indo-Aryans and established settlements of his own, but Seleucus Nicator gave them to Sandrocottus (Chandragupta), upon terms of intermarriage and of receiving in exchange 500 elephants.|Strabo|64 BCE-24 CE
QTEMPLATE |Some time after, as he was going to war with the generals of Alexander, a wild elephant of great bulk presented itself before him of its own accord, and, as if tamed down to gentleness, took him on its back, and became his guide in the war, and conspicuous in fields of battle.
Sandrocottus, having thus acquired a throne, was in possession of India, when Seleucus was laying the foundations of his future greatness; who, after making a league with him, and settling his affairs in the east, proceeded to join in the war against Antigonus.
As soon as the forces, therefore, of all the confederates were united, a battle was fought, in which Antigonus was slain, and his son Demetrius put to flight.|Junianus Justinus
Having consolidated power in the northwest, Chandragupta pushed east towards the Nanda Empire.
Afghanistan's significant ancient tangible and intangible Buddhist heritage is recorded through wide-ranging archeological finds, including religious and artistic remnants.
Buddhist doctrines are reported to have reached as far as Balkh even during the life of the Buddha (563 BCE to 483 BCE), as recorded by Husang Tsang.
QTEMPLATE |In this context a legend recorded by Husang Tsang refers to the first two lay disciples of Buddha, Trapusa and Bhallika responsible for introducing Buddhism in that country.
Originally these two were merchants of the kingdom of Balhika, as the name Bhalluka or Bhallika probably suggests the association of one with that country.
They had gone to India for trade and had happened to be at Bodhgaya when the Buddha had just attained enlightenment.
Indo-Scythians
The Indo-Scythians were descended from the Sakas (Scythians) who migrated from southern Siberia to Pakistan and Arachosia from the middle of the 2nd century BCE to the 1st century BCE.
They displaced the Indo-Greeks and ruled a kingdom that stretched from Gandhara to Mathura.
The power of the Saka rulers started to decline in the 2nd century CE after the Scythians were defeated by the south Indian Emperor Gautamiputra Satakarni of the Satavahana dynasty.
Later the Saka kingdom was completely destroyed by Chandragupta II of the Gupta Empire from eastern India in the 4th century.
Indo-Parthians
The Indo-Parthian Kingdom was ruled by the Gondopharid dynasty, named after its eponymous first ruler Gondophares.
They ruled parts of present-day Afghanistan, Pakistan, and northwestern India, during or slightly before the 1st century AD.
For most of their history, the leading Gondopharid kings held Taxila (in the present Punjab province of Pakistan) as their residence, but during their last few years of existence the capital shifted between Kabul and Peshawar.
These kings have traditionally been referred to as Indo-Parthians, as their coinage was often inspired by the Arsacid dynasty, but they probably belonged to a wider groups of Iranic tribes who lived east of Parthia proper, and there is no evidence that all the kings who assumed the title Gondophares, which means ”Holder of Glory”, were even related.
Christian writings claim that the Apostle Saint Thomas - an architect and skilled carpenter - had a long sojourn in the court of king Gondophares, had built a palace for the king at Taxila and had also ordained leaders for the Church before leaving for Indus Valley in a chariot, for sailing out to eventually reach Malabar Coast.
Kushans
The Kushan Empire expanded out of bactria (Central Asia) into the northwest of the subcontinent under the leadership of their first emperor, Kujula Kadphises, about the middle of the 1st century CE.
They came of an Indo-European language speaking Central Asian tribe called the Yuezhi, a branch of which was known as the Kushans.
By the time of his grandson, Kanishka the Great, the empire spread to encompass much of (Benares).
Emperor Kanishka was a great patron of Buddhism; however, as Kushans expanded southward, the deities of their later coinage came to reflect its new Hindu majority.
They played an important role in the establishment of Buddhism in India and its spread to Central Asia and China.
Historian Vincent Smith said about Kanishka:
QTEMPLATE |He played the part of a second Ashoka in the history of Buddhism.
The empire linked the Indian Ocean maritime trade with the commerce of the Silk Road through the Indus valley, encouraging long-distance trade, particularly between China and Rome.
The Kushans brought new trends to the budding and blossoming Gandhara Art, which reached its peak during Kushan Rule.
H.G. Rowlinson commented:
QTEMPLATE |The Kushan period is a fitting prelude to the Age of the Guptas.
By the 3rd century, their empire in India was disintegrating and their last known great emperor was Vasudeva I.
Sassanian Empire
After the Kushan Empire's rule was ended by Sassanids, much of modern-day Afghanistan was part of the Persian Sasanian Empire, since Shapur I extended his authority eastwards into Afghanistan and the previously autonomous Kushans were obliged to accept his suzerainty.
From around 370, however, towards the end of the reign of Shapur II, the Sassanids lost the control of Bactria to invaders from the north.
These were the Kidarites, the Hephthalites, the Alchon Huns, and the Nezaks: The four Huna tribes to rule Afghanistan.
These invaders initially issued coins based on Sasanian designs.
Huna
The Hunas were peoples who were of a group of Central Asian tribes.
Four of the Huna tribe conquered and ruled Afghanistan - the Kidarites, Hepthalites, Alchon Huns and the Nezaks.
Kidarites
The Kidarites were a nomadic clan, the first of the four Huna people in Afghanistan.
They are supposed to have originated in Western China and arrived in Bactria with the great migrations of the second half of the 4th century.
Alchon Huns
The Alchons are one of the four Huna people that ruled in Afghanistan.
The White Huns
The Hephthalites (or Ephthalites), also known as the White Huns and one of the four Huna people in Afghanistan, were a nomadic confederation in Central Asia during the late antiquity period.
The White Huns established themselves in modern-day Afghanistan by the first half of the 5th century.
Led by the Hun military leader Toramana, they overran the northern region of Pakistan and North India.
Toramana's son Mihirakula, a Saivite Hindu, moved up to near Pataliputra to the east and Gwalior to the central India.
Hiuen Tsiang narrates Mihirakula's merciless persecution of Buddhists and destruction of monasteries, though the description is disputed as far as the authenticity is concerned.
The Huns were defeated by the Indian kings Yasodharman of Malwa and Narasimhagupta in the 6th century.
Some of them were driven out of India and others were assimilated in the Indian society.
Nezak Huns
The Nezaks are one of the four Huna people that ruled in Afghanistan.
Middle Ages (565-1504 CE)
From the Middle Ages to around 1750 Afghanistan was known as Khorasan.
Two of the four main capitals of Khorasan (Balkh and Herat) are now located in Afghanistan.
The countries of Kandahar, Ghazni and Kabul formed the frontier region between Khorasan and Hindustan.
This land, inhabited by the Afghan tribes (i.e. ancestors of Pashtuns), was called Afghanistan, which loosely covered a wide area between the Hindu Kush and the Indus River, principally around the Sulaiman Mountains.
The earliest record of the name "Afghan" ("Abgân") being mentioned is by Shapur I of the Sassanid Empire during the 3rd century CE which is later recorded in the form of "Avagānā" by the Indian astronomer Varāha Mihira in his 6th century CE Brihat-samhita.
It was used to refer to a common legendary ancestor known as "Afghana", grandson of King Saul of Israel.
Hiven Tsiang, a Chinese pilgrim, visiting the Afghanistan area several times between 630 and 644 CE also speaks about them.
Among these were the Khalaj people which are known today as Ghilzai.
Kabul Shahi
The Kabul Shahi dynasties ruled the Kabul Valley and Gandhara from the decline of the Kushan Empire in the 3rd century to the early 9th century.
The Shahis are generally split up into two eras: the Buddhist Shahis and the Hindu Shahis, with the change-over thought to have occurred sometime around 870.
The kingdom was known as the Kabul Shahan or Ratbelshahan from 565-670, when the capitals were located in Kapisa and Kabul, and later Udabhandapura, also known as Hund for its new capital.
The Hindu Shahis under Rajput ruler Jayapala, is known for his struggles in defending his kingdom against the Ghaznavids in the modern-day eastern Afghanistan and Pakistan region.
Jayapala saw a danger in the consolidation of the Ghaznavids and invaded their capital city of Ghazni both in the reign of Sebuktigin and in that of his son Mahmud, which initiated the Muslim Ghaznavid and Hindu Shahi struggles.
Sebuktigin, however, defeated him, and he was forced to pay an indemnity.
Before his struggle began Jaipal had raised a large army of Punjabi Hindus.
When Jaipal went to the Punjab region, his army was raised to 100,000 horsemen and an innumerable host of foot soldiers.
According to ascended a hill to view the forces of Jeipal, which appeared in extent like the boundless ocean, and in number like the ants or the locusts of the wilderness.
But Subooktugeen considered himself as a wolf about to attack a flock of sheep: calling, therefore, his chiefs together, he encouraged them to glory, and issued to each his commands.
His soldiers, though few in number, were divided into squadrons of five hundred men each, which were directed to attack successively, one particular point of the Hindoo line, so that it might continually have to encounter fresh troops.
"|Nancy
Hatch Dupree|1971
The Shahi or Shahiya dynasties ruled portions of the Kabul Valley (in eastern Afghanistan) and the old province of Gandhara (northern Pakistan and Kashmir) from the decline of the Kushan Empire up to the early 9th century CE.
The Shahis continued to rule eastern Afghanistan until the late 9th century until the Ghaznavid invasions.
QTEMPLATE |During the eighth and ninth centuries CE the eastern parts of modern Afghanistan were still in the hands of non-muslim rulers.
Ghaznavids
The Ghaznavid dynasty ruled from the city of Ghazni in eastern Afghanistan.
From 997 to his death in 1030, Mahmud of Ghazni turned the former provincial city of Ghazni into the wealthy capital of an extensive empire which covered most of today's Afghanistan, eastern Iran, and Pakistan.
Mahmud consolidated the conquests of his predecessors and the city of Ghazni became a great cultural centre as well as a base for frequent forays into the Indian subcontinent.
The Nasher Khans became princes of the Kharoti until the Soviet invasion.
They did not regain their once vast power until about 500 years later when the Ghilzai Hotakis rose to power.
Various princes and Seljuk rulers attempted to rule parts of the country until the Shah Muhammad II of the Khwarezmid Empire conquered all of Persia in 1205 CE.
By 1219, the empire had fallen to the Mongols, led by Genghis Khan.
Mongol invasion
The Mongol invasion resulted in massive destruction of several cities, including Bamiyan, Herat, and Balkh, and the despoliation of fertile agricultural areas.
Large numbers of the inhabitants were also slaughtered.
Most major cities north of the Hindu Kush became part of the Mongol Empire.
The Afghan tribal areas south of the Hindu Kush were usually either allied with the Khalji dynasty of northern India or independent.
Timurids
Timur (Tamerlane), incorporated much of the area into his own vast Timurid Empire.
The city of Herat became one of the capitals of his empire, and his grandson Pir Muhammad held the seat of Kandahar.
Timur rebuilt most of Afghanistan's infrastructure which was destroyed by his early ancestor.
The area was progressing under his rule.
Timurid rule began declining in the early 16th century with the rise of a new ruler in Kabul, Babur.
Timur, a descendant of Genghis Khan, created a vast new empire across Russia and Persia which he ruled from his capital in Samarkand in present-day Uzbekistan.
Timur captured Herat in 1381 and his son, Shah Rukh moved the capital of the Timurid empire to Herat in 1405.
The Timurids, a Turkic people, brought the Turkic nomadic culture of Central Asia within the orbit of Persian civilisation, establishing Herat as one of the most cultured and refined cities in the world.
This fusion of Central Asian and Persian culture was a major legacy for the future Afghanistan.
A century later, the emperor Babur, a descendant of Timur, visited Herat and wrote, "the whole habitable world had not such a town as Herat."
For the next 300 years the eastern Afghan tribes periodically invaded India creating vast Indo-Afghan empires.
In 1500 CE, Babur was driven out of his home in the Ferghana valley.
By the 16th century western Afghanistan again reverted to Persian rule under the Safavid dynasty.
Modern era (1504-1973)
Mughals, Uzbeks and Safavids
In 1504, Babur, a descendant of Timur, arrived from present-day Uzbekistan and moved to the city of Kabul.
He began exploring new territories in the region, with Kabul serving as his military headquarters.
Instead of looking towards the powerful Safavids towards the Persian west, Babur was more focused on the Indian subcontinent, which included the region known as Kabulistan.
In 1526, he left with his army to capture the seat of the Delhi Sultanate, which at that point was possessed by the Afghan Lodi dynasty of India.
After defeating Ibrahim Lodi and his army, Babur turned (Old) Delhi into the capital of his newly established Mughal Empire.
From the 16th century to the 17th century CE, Afghanistan was divided into three major areas.
The north was ruled by the Khanate of Bukhara, the west was under the rule of the Iranian Shia Safavids, and the eastern section was under the Sunni Mughals of northern India, who under Akbar established in Kabul one of the original twelve subahs (imperial top-level provinces), bordering Lahore, Multan and Kashmir (added to Kabul in 1596, later split-off) and short-lived Balkh Subah and Badakhshan Subah (only 1646-47).
The Kandahar region in the south served as a buffer zone between the Mughals (who shortly established a Qandahar subah 1638-1648) and Persia's Safavids, with the native Afghans often switching support from one side to the other.
Babur explored a number of cities in the region before his campaign into India.
In the city of Kandahar, his personal epigraphy can be found in the Chilzina rock mountain.
Like in the rest of the territories that used to make part of the Indian Mughal Empire, Afghanistan holds tombs, palaces, and forts built by the Mughals.
Hotaki dynasty
In 1704, the Safavid Shah Husayn appointed George XI (Gurgīn Khān), a ruthless Georgian subject, to govern their easternmost territories in the Greater Kandahar region.
One of Gurgīn's main objectives was to crush the rebellions started by native Afghans.
Under his rule the revolts were successfully suppressed and he ruled Kandahar with uncompromising severity.
He began imprisoning and executing the native Afghans, especially those suspected in having taken part in the rebellions.
One of those arrested and imprisoned was Mirwais Hotak who belonged to an influential family in Kandahar.
Mirwais was sent as a prisoner to the Persian court in Isfahan, but the charges against him were dismissed by the king, so he was sent back to his native land as a free man.
In April 1709, Mirwais along with his militia under Khan Nasher revolted.
The uprising began when George XI and his escort were killed after a banquet that had been prepared by Mirwais at his house outside the city.
Around four days later, an army of well-trained Georgian troops arrived in the city after hearing of Gurgīn's death, but Mirwais and his Afghan forces successfully held the city against the troops.
Between 1710 and 1713, the Afghan forces defeated several large Persian armies that were dispatched from Isfahan by the Safavids, which included Qizilbash and Georgian/Circassian troops.
QTEMPLATE |Several half-hearted attempts to subdue the rebellious city having failed, the Persian Government despatched Khusraw Khán, nephew of the late Gurgín Khán, with an army of 30,000 men to effect its subjugation, but in spite of an initial success, which led the Afghans to offer to surrender on terms, his uncompromising attitude impelled them to make a fresh desperate effort, resulting in the complete defeat of the Persian army (of whom only some 700 escaped) and the death of their general.
Two years later, in 1713, another Persian army commanded by Rustam Khán was also defeated by the rebels, who thus secured possession of the whole province of Qandahár.
|Edward G. Browne|1924
Southern Afghanistan was made into an independent local Pashtun kingdom.
Refusing the title of king, Mirwais was called "Prince of Qandahár and general of the national troops" by his Afghan countrymen.
He died of natural causes in November 1715 and was succeeded by his brother Abdul Aziz Hotak.
Aziz was killed about two years later by Mirwais' son Mahmud Hotaki, allegedly for planning to give Kandahar's sovereignty back to Persia.
Mahmud led an Afghan army into Persia in 1722 and defeated the Safavids at the Battle of Gulnabad.
The Afghans captured Isfahan (Safavid capital) and Mahmud briefly became the new Persian Shah.
He was known after that as Shah Mahmud.
Mahmud began a short-lived reign of terror against his Persian subjects who defied his rule from the very start, and he was eventually murdered in 1725 by his own cousin, Ashraf Hotaki.
Some sources say he died of madness.
Ashraf became the new Afghan Shah of Persia soon after Mahmud's death, while the home region of Afghanistan was ruled by Mahmud's younger brother Shah Hussain Hotaki.
Ashraf was able to secure peace with the Ottoman Empire in 1727 winning against a superior Ottoman army, but the Russian Empire took advantage of the continuing political unrest and civil strife to seize former Persian territories for themselves, limiting the amount of territory under Shah Mahmud's control.
The short lived Hotaki dynasty was a troubled and violent one from the very start as internecine conflict made it difficult for them to establish permanent control.
The dynasty lived under great turmoil due to bloody succession feuds that made their hold on power tenuous.
There was a massacre of thousands of civilians in Isfahan; including more than three thousand religious scholars, nobles, and members of the Safavid family.
The vast majority of the Persians rejected the Afghan regime which they considered was a usurping power from the very start.
Hotaki's rule continued in Afghanistan until 1738 when Shah Hussain was defeated and banished by Nader Shah of Persia.
The Hotakis were eventually removed from power in 1729, after a very short lived reign.
They were defeated in the October 1729 by the Iranian military commander Nader Shah, head of the Afsharids, at the Battle of Damghan.
He effectively reduced the Hotaki's power to only southern Afghanistan.
The last ruler of the Hotaki dynasty, Shah Hussain, ruled southern Afghanistan until 1738 when the Afsharids and the Abdali Pashtuns crushed him at Kandahar.
Ahmad Shah not only represented the Durranis but he also united all the Pashtun tribes.
By 1751, Ahmad Shah Durrani and his Afghan army conquered the entire present-day Afghanistan, Pakistan, and for a short time, the Khorasan and Kohistan provinces of Iran, along with Delhi in India.
He defeated the Maratha Empire in 1761 at the Battle of Panipat.
In October 1772, Ahmad Shah retired to his home in Kandahar where he died peacefully and was buried at a site that is now adjacent to the Shrine of the Cloak.
He was succeeded by his son, Timur Shah Durrani, who transferred the capital of their Afghan Empire from Kandahar to Kabul.
Timur died in 1793 and his son Zaman Shah Durrani took over the reign.
Zaman Shah and his brothers had a weak hold on the legacy left to them by their famous ancestor.
They sorted out their differences through a "round robin of expulsions, blindings and executions," which resulted in the deterioration of the Afghan hold over far-flung territories, such as Attock and Kashmir.
Durrani's other grandson, Shuja Shah Durrani, fled the wrath of his brother and sought refuge with the Sikhs.
Not only had Durrani invaded the Punjab region many times, but had destroyed the holiest shrine of the Sikhs - the Harmandir Sahib in Amritsar, defiling its sarowar with the blood of cows and decapitating Baba Deep Singh in 1757.
The Sikhs, under Ranjit Singh, eventually wrested a large part of the Kingdom of Kabul (present day Pakistan, but not including Sindh) from the Afghans.
In 1837, the Afghan army descended through the Khyber Pass on Sikh forces at Jamrud but could not capture it.
Barakzai dynasty and British influence
Dost Mohammed Khan gained control in Kabul.
Collision between the expanding British and Russian Empires significantly influenced Afghanistan during the 19th century in what was termed "The Great Game".
British concern over Russian advances in Central Asia and growing influence in West Asia and Persia in particular culminated in two Anglo-Afghan wars and "The Siege of Herat" 1837-1838, in which the Persians, trying to retake Afghanistan and throw out the British, sent armies into the country and fought the British mostly around and in the city of Herat.
The first Anglo-Afghan War (1839-1842) resulted in the destruction of a British army; it is remembered by first-hand account as an example of the ferocity of Afghan resistance to foreign rule.
The Second Anglo-Afghan War (1878-1880) was sparked by Amir Shir Ali's refusal to accept a British mission in Kabul.
This conflict brought Amir Abdur Rahman, known by some as the "Iron Amir", to the Afghan throne.
During his reign (1880-1901), the British and Russians officially established the boundaries of what would become modern Afghanistan.
The British retained effective control over Kabul's foreign affairs.
Abdur Rahman's reforms of the army, legal system and structure of government were able to give Afghanistan a degree of unity and stability which it had not before known.
This, however, came at the cost of strong centralisation, harsh punishments for crime and corruption, and a certain degree of international isolation.
Some of the reforms that were actually put in place, such as the abolition of the traditional Muslim veil for women and the opening of a number of co-educational schools, quickly alienated many tribal and religious leaders, which led to the revolt of the Shinwari in November 1928, marking the beginning of the Afghan Civil War (1928-1929).
Although the Shinwari revolt was quelled, a concurrent Saqqawist uprising in the north eventually managed to depose Amanullah, leading to Habibullāh Kalakāni taking control of Kabul.
Reigns of Nadir Khan and Zahir Khan
Prince Mohammed Nadir Khan, cousin of Amanullah Khan, in turn defeated, and executed Habibullah Kalakani in October and November 1929 respectively.
He was soon declared King Nadir Khan.
He began consolidating power and regenerating the country.
He abandoned the reforms of Amanullah Khan in favour of a more gradual approach to modernisation.
In 1933, however, he was assassinated in a revenge killing by a student from Kabul.
Mohammad Zahir Shah, Nadir Khan's 19-year-old son, succeeded to the throne and reigned from 1933 to 1973.
Until 1946 Zahir Shah ruled with the assistance of his uncle Sardar Mohammad Hashim Khan, who held the post of Prime Minister and continued the policies of Nadir Khan.
In 1946, another of Zahir Shah's uncles, Sardar Shah Mahmud Khan, became Prime Minister and began an experiment allowing greater political freedom, but reversed the policy when it went further than he expected.
In 1953, he was replaced as Prime Minister by Mohammed Daoud Khan, the king's cousin and brother-in-law.
Daoud looked for a closer relationship with the Soviet Union and a more distant one towards Pakistan.
However, disputes with Pakistan led to an economic crisis and he was asked to resign in 1963.
From 1963 until 1973, Zahir Shah took a more active role.
In 1964, King Zahir Shah promulgated a liberal constitution providing for a bicameral legislature to which the king appointed one-third of the deputies.
The people elected another third, and the remainder were selected indirectly by provincial assemblies.
Although Zahir's "experiment in democracy" produced few lasting reforms, it permitted the growth of unofficial extremist parties on both the left and the right.
This included the communist People's Democratic Party of Afghanistan (PDPA), which had close ideological ties to the Soviet Union.
In 1967, the PDPA split into two major rival factions: the Khalq (Masses) was headed by Nur Muhammad Taraki and Hafizullah Amin who were supported by elements within the military, and the Parcham (Banner) led by Babrak Karmal.
Contemporary era (1973-present)
Republic of Afghanistan and the end of monarchy
Amid charges of corruption and malfeasance against the royal family and poor economic conditions created by the severe 1971-72 drought, former Prime Minister Mohammad Sardar Daoud Khan seized power in a non-violent coup on July 17, 1973, while Zahir Shah was receiving treatment for eye problems and therapy for lumbago in Italy.
Daoud abolished the monarchy, abrogated the 1964 constitution, and declared Afghanistan a republic with himself as its first President and Prime Minister.
His attempts to carry out badly needed economic and social reforms met with little success, and the new constitution promulgated in February 1977 failed to quell chronic political instability.
As disillusionment set in, in 1978 a prominent member of the People's Democratic Party of Afghanistan (PDPA), Mir Akbar Khyber (or "Kaibar"), was killed by the government.
The leaders of PDPA apparently feared that Daoud was planning to exterminate them all, especially since most of them were arrested by the government shortly after.
Nonetheless, Hafizullah Amin and a number of military wing officers of the PDPA's Khalq faction managed to remain at large and organize a military coup.
Democratic Republic and Soviet war (1978-1989)
On 28 April 1978, the PDPA, led by Nur Mohammad Taraki, Babrak Karmal and Amin Taha overthrew the government of Mohammad Daoud, who was assassinated along with all his family members in a bloody military coup.
The coup became known as the Saur Revolution.
On 1 May, Taraki became President, Prime Minister and General Secretary of the PDPA.
The country was then renamed the Democratic Republic of Afghanistan (DRA), and the PDPA regime lasted, in some form or another, until April 1992.
In March 1979, Hafizullah Amin took over as prime minister, retaining the position of field marshal and becoming vice-president of the Supreme Defence Council.
Taraki remained President and in control of the Army.
On 14 September, Amin overthrew Taraki, who was killed.
Amin stated that "the Afghans recognize only crude force."
Afghanistan expert Amin Saikal writes: "As his powers grew, so apparently did his craving for personal dictatorship ... and his vision of the revolutionary process based on terror."
They also prohibited usury.
The PDPA invited the Soviet Union to assist in modernizing its economic infrastructure (predominantly its exploration and mining of rare minerals and natural gas).
The USSR also sent contractors to build roads, hospitals and schools and to drill water wells; they also trained and equipped the Afghan army.
Upon the PDPA's ascension to power, and the establishment of the DRA, the Soviet Union promised monetary aid amounting to at least $1.262 billion.
At the same time, the PDPA imprisoned, tortured or murdered thousands of members of the traditional elite, the religious establishment, and the intelligentsia.
The government launched a campaign of violent repression, killing some 10,000 to 27,000 people and imprisoning 14,000 to 20,000 more, mostly at Pul-e-Charkhi prison.
In December 1978 the PDPA leadership signed an agreement with the Soviet Union which would allow military support for the PDPA in Afghanistan if needed.
The majority of people in the cities including Kabul either welcomed or were ambivalent to these policies.
However, the Marxist-Leninist and secular nature of the government as well as its heavy dependence on the Soviet Union made it unpopular with a majority of the Afghan population.
Repressions plunged large parts of the country, especially the rural areas, into open revolt against the new Marxist-Leninist government.
By spring 1979 unrests had reached 24 out of 28 Afghan provinces including major urban areas.
Over half of the Afghan army would either desert or join the insurrection.
Most of the government's new policies clashed directly with the traditional Afghan understanding of Islam, making religion one of the only forces capable of unifying the tribally and ethnically divided population against the unpopular new government, and ushering in the advent of Islamist participation in Afghan politics.
To bolster the Parcham faction, the Soviet Union decided to intervene on December 24, 1979, when the Red Army invaded its southern neighbor.
Over 100,000 Soviet troops took part in the invasion, which was backed by another 100,000 Afghan military men and supporters of the Parcham faction.
In the meantime, Hafizullah Amin was killed and replaced by Babrak Karmal.
In response to the Soviet occupation of Afghanistan, the Carter administration and Reagan administration in the U.S. began arming the Mujahideen, thanks in large part to the efforts of Charlie Wilson and CIA officer Gust Avrakotos.
Early reports estimated that $6-20 billion had been spent by the U.S. and Saudi Arabia but more recent reports state that the U.S. and Saudi Arabia provided as much as up to $40 billion in cash and weapons, which included over two thousand FIM-92 Stinger surface-to-air missiles, for building up Islamic groups against the Soviet Union.
The U.S. handled most of its support through Pakistan's ISI.
Scholars such as W. Michael Reisman, Charles Norchi and Mohammed Kakar, believe that the Afghans were victims of genocide by the Soviet Union.
Soviet forces and their proxies killed between 562,000 and 2 million Afghans and Russian soldiers also engaged in abductions and rapes of Afghan women.
About 6 million fled as Afghan refugees to Pakistan and Iran, and from there over 38,000 made it to the United States and many more to the European Union.
The Afghan refugees in Iran and Pakistan brought with them verifiable stories of murder, collective rape, torture and depopulation of civilians by the Soviet forces.
Faced with mounting international pressure and great number of casualties on both sides, the Soviets withdrew in 1989.
Their withdrawal from Afghanistan was seen as an ideological victory in the United States, which had backed some Mujahideen factions through three U.S. presidential administrations to counter Soviet influence in the vicinity of the oil-rich Persian Gulf.
The USSR continued to support President Mohammad Najibullah (former head of the Afghan secret service, KHAD) until 1992.
Foreign interference and civil war (1989-1996)
Pakistan's spy agency Inter-Services Intelligence (ISI), headed by Hamid Gul at the time, was interested in a trans-national Islamic revolution which would cover Pakistan, Afghanistan and Central Asia.
For this purpose the ISI masterminded an attack on Jalalabad in March 1989, for the Mujahideen to establish their own government in Afghanistan, but this failed in three months.
With the crumbling of the Najibullah-regime early in 1992, Afghanistan fell into further disarray and civil war.
A U.N.-supported attempt to have the mujahideen parties and armies form a coalition government shattered.
Mujahideen did not abide by the mutual pledges and Ahmad Shah Masood forces because of his proximity to Kabul captured the capital before Mujahideen Govt was established.
So the elected prime minister and warlord Gulbuddin Hekmatyar, started war on his president and Massod force entrenched in Kabul.
This ignited civil war, because the other mujahideen parties wouldn't settle for Hekmatyar ruling alone or sharing actual power with him.
Within weeks, the still frail unity of the other mujahideen forces also evaporated, and six militias were fighting each other in and around Kabul.
Subghatullah Mujadady was elected as Afghanistan's elected interim president for two months and then professor Burhanuddin Rabani a well known Kabul university professor and the leader of Jamiat - e - Islami party of Mujahiddin who fought against Russians during the occupation was chosen by all of the Jahadi leaders except Golbuddin Hikmat Yar.
Professor Rabani reigned as the official and elected president of Afghanistan by Shurai Mujahiddin Peshawer (Peshawer Mujahiddin Council) from 1992 until 2001 when he officially handed over the presidency post to Hamid Karzai the next US appointed interim president.
During Rabbani's presidency some parts of the country including a few provinces in the north such as Mazar e - Sharif, Jawzjan, Faryab, Shuburghan and some parts of Baghlan provinces were ruled by general Abdul Rashid Dostom.
During Rabbani's first five years illegal term before the emergence of the Taliban, the eastern and western provinces and some of the northern provinces such as Badakhshan, Takhar, Kunduz, the main parts of Baghlan Province, and some parts of Kandahar and other southern provinces were under the control of the central government while the other parts of southern provinces did not obey him because of his Tajik ethnicity.
During the 9 year presidency of Burhanuddin Rabani, Gulbuddin Hekmatyar was directed, funded and supplied by the Pakistani army.
Afghanistan analyst Amin Saikal concludes in his book Modern Afghanistan: A History of Struggle and Survival:
There was no time for the interim government to create working government departments, police units or a system of justice and accountability.
Saudi Arabia and Iran also armed and directed Afghan militias.
Saudi Arabia was trying to strengthen the Wahhabite Abdul Rasul Sayyaf and his Ittihad-i Islami faction.
Again, Human Rights Watch writes:
The main forces involved during that period in Kabul, northern, central and eastern Afghanistan were the Hezb-i Islami of Gulbuddin Hekmatyar directed by Pakistan, the Hezb-i Wahdat of Abdul Ali Mazari directed by Iran, the Ittehad-i Islami of Abdul Rasul Sayyaf supported by Saudi Arabia, the Junbish-i Milli of Abdul Rashid Dostum backed by Uzbekisten, the Harakat-i Islami of Hussain Anwari and the Shura-i Nazar operating as the regular Islamic State forces (as agreed upon in the Peshawar Accords) under the Defence Ministry of Ahmad Shah Massoud.
Meanwhile, the southern city of Kandahar was a centre of lawlessness, crime and atrocities fuelled by complex Pashtun tribal rivalries.
In 1994, the Taliban (a movement originating from Jamiat Ulema-e-Islam-run religious schools for Afghan refugees in Pakistan) also developed in Afghanistan as a politico-religious force, reportedly in opposition to the tyranny of the local governor.
Many analysts like Amin Saikal describe the Taliban as developing into a proxy force for Pakistan's regional interests.
The Taliban declined.
Amnesty International, referring to the Taliban offensive, wrote in a 1995 report:
On September 26, 1996, as the Taliban, with military support by Pakistan and financial support by Saudi Arabia, prepared for another major offensive, Massoud ordered a full retreat from Kabul.
The Taliban seized Kabul on September 27, 1996, and established the Islamic Emirate of Afghanistan.
They imposed on the parts of Afghanistan under their control their political and judicial interpretation of Islam, issuing edicts forbidding women from working outside the home, attending school or leaving their homes unless accompanied by a male relative.
Physicians for Human Rights (PHR) said:
After the fall of Kabul to the Taliban on September 27, 1996, Ahmad Shah Massoud and Abdul Rashid Dostum, two former enemies, created the United Front (Northern Alliance) against the Taliban, who were preparing offensives against the remaining areas under the control of Massoud and Dostum.
The United Front included beside the dominantly Tajik forces of Massoud and the Uzbek forces of Dostum, Hazara factions and Pashtun forces under the leadership of commanders such as Abdul Haq, Haji Abdul Qadir, Qari Baba or diplomat Abdul Rahim Ghafoorzai.
From the Taliban conquest in 1996 until November 2001 the United Front controlled roughly 30% of Afghanistan's population in provinces such as Badakhshan, Kapisa, Takhar and parts of Parwan, Kunar, Nuristan, Laghman, Samangan, Kunduz, Ghōr and Bamyan.
According to a 55-page report by the United Nations, the Taliban, while trying to consolidate control over northern and western Afghanistan, committed systematic massacres against civilians.
UN officials stated that there had been "15 massacres" between 1996 and 2001.
Among those killed in Mazari Sharif were several Iranian diplomats.
Others were kidnapped by the Taliban, touching off a hostage crisis that nearly escalated to a full-scale war, with 150,000 Iranian soldiers massed on the Afghan border at one time.
It was later admitted that the diplomats were killed by the Taliban, and their bodies were returned to Iran.
The documents also reveal the role of Arab and Pakistani support troops in these killings.
The report by the United Nations quotes eyewitnesses in many villages describing Arab fighters carrying long knives used for slitting throats and skinning people.
In total there were believed to be 28,000 Pakistani nationals fighting inside Afghanistan.
Bin Laden sent Arab recruits to join the fight against the United Front.
Of roughly 45,000 Pakistani, Taliban and Al Qaeda soldiers fighting against the forces of Massoud only 14,000 were Afghan.
Dostum was defeated by the Taliban in 1998 with the fall of Mazar-i-Sharif.
Massoud remained the only leader of the United Front in Afghanistan.
In the areas under his control Ahmad Shah Massoud set up democratic institutions and signed the Women's Rights Charter.
Human Rights Watch cites no human rights crimes for the forces under direct control of Massoud for the period from October 1996 until the assassination of Massoud in September 2001.
National Geographic concluded in its documentary Inside the Taliban:
The Taliban repeatedly offered Massoud a position of power to make him stop his resistance.
Massoud declined for he did not fight to obtain a position of power.
He said in one interview:
and
Massoud wanted to convince the Taliban to join a political process leading towards democratic elections in a foreseeable future.
Resentment was increasingly gathering against Taliban rule from the bottom of Afghan society including the Pashtun areas.
He stated that the Taliban and Al Qaeda had introduced "a very wrong perception of Islam" and that without the support of Pakistan the Taliban would not be able to sustain their military campaign for up to a year.
At the same time the US-led forces were bombing Taliban and al-Qaeda targets everywhere inside Afghanistan with cruise missiles.
These actions led to the fall of Mazar-i-Sharif in the north followed by all the other cities, as the Taliban and al-Qaeda crossed over the porous Durand Line border into Pakistan.
In December 2001, after the Taliban government was toppled and the new Afghan government under Hamid Karzai was formed, the International Security Assistance Force (ISAF) was established by the UN Security Council to help assist the Karzai administration and provide basic security to the Afghan people.
The majority of Afghans supported the American invasion of their country.
While the Taliban began regrouping inside Pakistan, the rebuilding of war-torn Afghanistan kicked off in 2002 (see also War in Afghanistan (2001-present)).
The Afghan nation was able to build democratic structures over the years by the creation of an emergency loya jirga to set up the modern Afghan government, and some progress was made in key areas such as governance, economy, health, education, transport, and agriculture.
NATO is training the Afghan armed forces as well its national police.
ISAF and Afghan troops led many offensives against the Taliban but failed to fully defeat them.
By 2009, a Taliban-led shadow government began to form in many parts of the country complete with their own version of mediation court.
After U.S. President Barack Obama announced the deployment of another 30,000 soldiers in 2010 for a period of two years, Der Spiegel published images of the US soldiers who killed unarmed Afghan civilians.
In 2009, the United States resettled 328 refugees from Afghanistan.
Over five million Afghan refugees were repatriated in the last decade, including many who were forcefully deported from NATO countries.
This large return of Afghans may have helped the nation's economy but the country still remains one of the poorest in the world due to the decades of war, lack of foreign investment, ongoing government corruption and the Pakistani-backed Taliban insurgency.
The United States also accuses neighboring Iran of providing small level of support to the Taliban insurgents.
According to a report by the United Nations, the Taliban and other militants were responsible for 76% of civilian casualties in 2009, 75% in 2010 and 80% in 2011.
In October 2008 U.S. Defense Secretary Gates had asserted that a political settlement with the Taliban was the endgame for the Afghanistan war.
"There has to be ultimately - and I'll underscore ultimately - reconciliation as part of a political outcome to this," Gates stated.
By 2010 peace efforts began.
In early January, Taliban commanders held secret exploratory talks with a United Nations special envoy to discuss peace terms.
Regional commanders on the Taliban's leadership council, the Quetta Shura, sought a meeting with the UN special representative in Afghanistan, Kai Eide, and it took place in Dubai on January 8.
It was the first such meeting between the UN and senior members of the Taliban.
On 26 January 2010, at a major conference in London which brought together some 70 countries and organizations, Afghan President Hamid Karzai said he intends to reach out to the Taliban leadership (including Mullah Omar, Sirajuddin Haqqani and Gulbuddin Hekmatyar).
Supported by NATO, Karzai called on the group's leadership to take part in a loya jirga meeting to initiate peace talks.
These steps have resulted in an intensification of bombings, assassinations and ambushes.
Some Afghan groups (including the former intelligence chief Amrullah Saleh and opposition leader Dr. Abdullah Abdullah) believe that Karzai plans to appease the insurgents' senior leadership at the cost of the democratic constitution, the democratic process and progress in the field of human rights especially women's rights.
Dr. Abdullah stated:
QTEMPLATE |I should say that Taliban are not fighting in order to be accommodated.
They are fighting in order to bring the state down.
So it's a futile exercise, and it's just misleading.
There are groups that will fight to the death.
Whether we like to talk to them or we don't like to talk to them, they will continue to fight.
So, for them, I don't think that we have a way forward with talks or negotiations or contacts or anything as such.
Then we have to be prepared to tackle and deal with them militarily.
In terms of the Taliban on the ground, there are lots of possibilities and opportunities that with the help of the people in different parts of the country, we can attract them to the peace process; provided, we create a favorable environment on this side of the line.
At the moment, the people are leaving support for the government because of corruption.
So that expectation is also not realistic at this stage.
Afghan President Hamid Karzai told world leaders during the London conference that he intends to reach out to the top echelons of the Taliban within a few weeks with a peace initiative.
Karzai set the framework for dialogue with Taliban leaders when he called on the group's leadership to take part in a "loya jirga" - or large assembly of elders - to initiate peace talks.
Karzai also asked for creation of a new peacemaking organization, to be called the National Council for Peace, Reconciliation and Reintegration.
In March 2010, the Karzai government held preliminary talks with Hezb-i-Islami, who presented a plan which included the withdrawal of all foreign troops by the end of 2010.
The Taliban declined to participate, saying "The Islamic Emirate has a clear position.
We have said this many, many times.
There will be no talks when there are foreign troops on Afghanistan's soil killing innocent Afghans on daily basis."
In June 2010 the Afghan Peace Jirga 2010 took place.
In September 2010 General David Petraeus commented on the progress of peace talks to date, stating, "The prospect for reconciliation with senior Taliban leaders certainly looms out there...and there have been approaches at (a) very senior level that hold some promise."
After the May 2011 death of Osama bin Laden in Pakistan, many prominent Afghan figures began being assassinated, including Mohammed Daud Daud, Ahmad Wali Karzai, Jan Mohammad Khan, Ghulam Haider Hamidi, Burhanuddin Rabbani and others.
Also in the same year, the Pakistani-Afghan border skirmishes intensified and many large scale attacks by the Pakistani-based Haqqani network took place across Afghanistan.
This led to the United States warning Pakistan of a possible military action against the Haqqanis in the Federally Administered Tribal Areas.
The U.S. blamed Pakistan's government, mainly Pakistani Army and its ISI spy network as the masterminds behind all of this.|Admiral Mike Mullen|Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff U.S. Ambassador to Pakistan, Cameron Munter, told Radio Pakistan that "The attack that took place in Kabul a few days ago, that was the work of the Haqqani network.
There is evidence linking the Haqqani Network to the Pakistan government.
This is something that must stop."
Other top U.S. officials such as Hillary Clinton and Leon Panetta made similar statements.
On October 16, 2011, "Operation Knife Edge" was launched by NATO and Afghan forces against the Haqqani network in south-eastern Afghanistan.
Afghan Defense Minister, Abdul Rahim Wardak, explained that the operation will "help eliminate the insurgents before they struck in areas along the troubled frontier".
In November 2011, NATO forces attacked Pakistani soldiers in the Pakistan border region.
In 2014, Ashraf Ghani was elected to be the president of Afghanistan.
Further reading
* Adamec, Ludwig W. Historical dictionary of Afghanistan (Scarecrow Press, 2011).
* Adamec, Ludwig W. Historical dictionary of Afghan wars, revolutions, and insurgencies (Scarecrow Press, 2005).
* Adamec, Ludwig W. Afghanistan's foreign affairs to the mid-twentieth century: relations with the USSR, Germany, and Britain (University of Arizona Press, 1974).
* Banting, Erinn.
https:/ books?id
fl8cd15sc7wC&source
gbs_navlinks_s Afghanistan the People.
Crabtree Publishing Company, 2003. .
* Barfield, Thomas.
Afghanistan: A Cultural and Political History (Princeton U.P. 2010)
https:/ Afghanistan-Cultural-Political-Princeton-Politics 0691154414 books?id
qCh41lAvg8oC&source
gbs_navlinks_s Afghanistan: a bibliography.
BRILL, 2006. .
Caroe, Olaf (1958).
https:/ books?id
rZ0tAQAAIAAJ&source
gbs_navlinks_s The Pathans: 500 B.C.-A.D. 1957.
Oxford in Asia Historical Reprints.
Oxford University Press, 1983. .
* Clements, Frank.
https:/ books?id
bv4hzxpo424C&source
gbs_navlinks_s Conflict in Afghanistan: a historical encyclopedia.
ABC-CLIO, 2003. .
* Dupree, Louis.
https:/ books?id
gMzRQgAACAAJ&source
gbs_navlinks_s Afghanistan.
Princeton University Press, 1973. .
* Dupree, Nancy Hatch.
https:/ books?id
T__DHAAACAAJ&source
gbs_navlinks_s An Historical Guide to Afghanistan.
2nd Edition.
Revised and Enlarged.
Afghan Air Authority, Afghan Tourist Organization, 1977.
* Ewans, Martin.
Afghanistan-a new history (Routledge, 2013).
* Fowler, Corinne.
https:/ books?id
o4IrhX7n66YC&source
gbs_navlinks_s Chasing tales: travel writing, journalism and the history of British ideas about Afghanistan.
Rodopi, 2007.
Amsterdam and New York. .
* Griffiths, John C. (1981).
https:/ books?id
M7nMtaXdAS8C&source
gbs_navlinks_s Afghanistan: a history of conflict.
Carlton Books, 2001. .
* Gommans, Jos J. L. https:/ books?id
-2TH8UYeAaoC&source
gbs_navlinks_s The rise of the Indo-Afghan empire, c.1710-1780.
BRILL, 1995. .
* Gregorian, Vartan.
https:/ books?id
gphzQgAACAAJ&source
gbs_navlinks_s The emergence of modern Afghanistan: politics of reform and modernization, 1880-1946.
Stanford University Press, 1969.
Habibi, Abdul Hai.
https:/ books?id
jskHAAAACAAJ&source
gbs_navlinks_s Afghanistan: An Abridged History.
Fenestra Books, 2003. .
* Harmatta, János.
https:/ books?id
DguGWP0vGY8C&source
gbs_navlinks_s History of Civilizations of Central Asia: The development of sedentary and nomadic civilizations, 700 B.C. to A.D. 250.
Motilal Banarsidass Publ., 1999. .
Hiebert, Fredrik Talmage.
https:/ books?id
1D6wUrxqcRIC&source
gbs_navlinks_s Afghanistan: hidden treasures from the National Museum, Kabul.
National Geographic Society, 2008. .
* Hill, John E. 2003.
"Annotated Translation of the Chapter on the Western Regions according to the Hou Hanshu."
2nd Draft Edition.
* Holt, Frank.
https:/ books?id
AQhIyGUMwMMC&source
gbs_navlinks_s Into the Land of Bones: Alexander the Great in Afghanistan.
University of California Press, 2006. .
* Hopkins, B. D. 2008.
https:/ books?id
FOMUAQAAIAAJ&source
gbs_navlinks_s The Making of Modern Afghanistan.
Palgrave Macmillan, 2008. .
* Malleson, George Bruce (1878).
https:/ books?id
pqNGBEmHUd4C&source
gbs_navlinks_s History of Afghanistan, from the Earliest Period to the Outbreak of the War of 1878.
Elibron Classic Replica Edition.
Adamant Media Corporation, 2005. .
* Olson, Gillia M. https:/ books?id
0KhVWQeRGJsC&source
gbs_navlinks_s Afghanistan.
Capstone Press, 2005. .
* Omrani, Bijan & Leeming, Matthew https:/ books?id
VVu_NwAACAAJ&dq
editions:MLexHQAACAAJ&hl
en&ei
Bbk3TrLMF5K7hAfqwPibAg&sa
X&oi
book_result&ct
result&resnum
2&ved=0CC4Q6AEwAQ Afghanistan: A Companion and Guide.
Odyssey Publications, 2nd Edition, 2011. .
* Reddy, L. R. https:/ books?id
NubtDf2T3cAC&source
gbs_navlinks_s Inside Afghanistan: end of the Taliban era?.
APH Publishing, 2002. .
* Romano, Amy. https:/ books?id
TKUxyVCrYn0C&source
gbs_navlinks_s A Historical Atlas of Afghanistan.
The Rosen Publishing Group, 2003. .
* Runion, Meredith L. https:/ books?id
aZk9XzqCFGUC&source
gbs_navlinks_s The history of Afghanistan.
Greenwood Publishing Group, 2007. .
* Saikal, Amin, A.G. Ravan Farhadi, and Kirill Nourzhanov.
Modern Afghanistan: a history of struggle and survival (IB Tauris, 2012).
* Tanner, Stephen.
Afghanistan: a military history from Alexander the Great to the war against the Taliban (Da Capo Press, 2009).
* Wahab, Shaista; Barry Youngerman.
https:/ books?id
y20MTE0C9kwC&source
gbs_navlinks_s A brief history of Afghanistan.
Infobase Publishing, 2007.
* Vogelsang, Willem.
https:/ books?id
9kfJ6MlMsJQC&source
gbs_navlinks_s The Afghans.
Wiley-Blackwell, 2002.
Oxford, UK & Massachusetts, US. .
Primary sources
* "Durand’s Curse: A Line Across the Pathan Heart" by Rajiv Dogra, Publisher: Rupa Publications India
* Green, Nile, ed.
Afghan History Through Afghan Eyes (Oxford University Press, 2016) online edition for libraries:
* Elliot, Henry Miers.
https:/ books?id
4QeZTTYLoVgC&source
gbs_navlinks_s The history of India, as told by its own historians: The Muhammadan period. , 1952.
Volume 8.
* Elphinstone, Mountstuart. 1819.
https:/ books?id
RSEPAAAAYAAJ&source
gbs_navlinks_s An account of the kingdom of Caubul, and its dependencies in Persia, Tartary, and India:
Comprising a view of the Afghaun nation, and a history of the Dooraunee monarchy.
Printed for Longman, Hurst, Rees, Orme, and Brown, and J. Murry, 1819.
* Hill, John E. 2004.
The Peoples of the West from the Weilue 魏略 by Yu Huan 魚豢: A Third Century Chinese Account Composed between 239 and 265 CE.
Draft annotated English translation.
* Levi, Peter. 1972.
https:/ books?id
KakcAAAAMAAJ&source
gbs_navlinks_s The light garden of the angel king: journeys in Afghanistan.
Collins, 1972. .
* Wood, John (1872).
https:/ books?id
Ml0BAAAAQAAJ&source
gbs_navlinks_s A Journey to the Source of the River Oxus.
New Edition, edited by his son, with an essay on the "Geography of the Valley of the Oxus" by Henry Yule.
John Murray, London.
Gregg Division McGraw-Hill, 1971, .
