Ćevapi (, ) or ćevapčići (formal diminutive; , ) is a grilled dish of minced meat, a type of kebab, found traditionally in the countries of southeastern Europe (the Balkans).
They are considered a national dish in Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia and Serbia and are also common in Montenegro, Albania, Slovenia, North Macedonia, Bulgaria and Austria.
Ćevapi has its origins in the Balkans during the Ottoman period, and represents a regional speciality similar to the köfte kebab.
They are usually served in groups of five to ten pieces on a plate or in a flatbread (lepinje or somun), often with chopped onions, sour cream, kajmak, ajvar, feta cheese, minced red pepper and salt.
Bosnian ćevapi are made from two types of minced beef meat, hand-mixed and formed with a funnel, while formed ćevapi are grilled.
Serb ćevapčići are made of either beef, lamb or pork or mixed.
Name and etymology
The word ćevap comes from Turkish kebab, sometimes with the South Slavic diminutive ending -čići .
The word ćevapi is plural; the singular form ćevap is rarely used, as a typical serving consists of several ćevapi.
History
During the Ottoman administration, hajduks (rebels, outlaws) made the hajdučki ćevap ("hajduk ćevap"), which was easy to make, out of pieces of meat and smoked lard on a skewer roasted over fire.
In Bosnia and Herzegovina, Ćevapi, as they are known, have been a part of national cuisine for several centuries, however they were not widely commercialized before 1956, when the first ćevabdžinica was opened by a football player at that time, Asim Ferhatović.
Bosnian version of Ćevapi is strictly made of veal, beef and lamb, together with basic spices, in any combination or amount.
Most prominent Ćevapi in Bosnia and Herzegovina are from Sarajevo, Travnik and Banja Luka (originating from Bosanski Glamoč).
The recipe of the Leskovački ćevap ("Leskovac ćevap"), a local specialty of Serbia, was based on traditional pljeskavica (meat patty), formed as ćevap.
Leskovac has a long history of grill shops.
In Belgrade, ćevapčići first came from Leskovac in the 1860s, into the kafana "Rajić" at the Great Marketplace (today Studentski Trg), from where they quickly spread across the city, and subsequently, country.
The industry quickly multiplied, as ćevapčići was the drinking public's favourite.
A 1927-28 study in Belgrade told that people either ate in the restaurant or outside ("on the kaldrma"), often take-away.
In 1933, the first street food vendor appeared in Maribor, Slovenia, who came from Leskovac, and served grilled meat, including ćevapčići.
In 1940, ten pieces cost one Yugoslav dinar.
In the second half of the 20th century, ćevapčići and other Oriental dishes entered Croatian cuisine.
The Leskovac-styled grilled meat, including ćevapčići, have today become part of everyday-diet in Slovenia.
Today, ćevapčići are found outside former Yugoslavia in the diaspora communities.
Today, the grill shops are known as ćevabdžinica (pl. ćevabdžinice).
Leskovac organizes an annual grill festival, the Leskovac Grill Festival, as a showcase of ćevapi and other grilled meat.
Preparation
They are usually served of 5-10 pieces on a plate or in a flatbread (lepinje or somun), often with chopped onions, sour cream, kajmak, ajvar, cottage cheese, minced red pepper and salt.
Bosnian-type ćevapi (halal) are made from two types of minced beef meat, hand mixed and formed with a funnel, while formed ćevapi are grilled.
Serbian-type ćevapi (ćevapčići) are made of either beef, lamb or pork, or mixed.
In Austria, Czech Republic and Slovakia, čevapčiči is generally served with mustard mixed with finely chopped raw onions and potatoes or French fries, in a common fast food manner.
Varieties
*Sarajevski ćevap, from Sarajevo, Bosnia, meat mix of beef and sheepmeat traditionally served in a traditional flatbread from Sarajevo called .
Ajvar or anything else added is not part of a traditional dish.
*Travnički ćevapi, from Travnik, Bosnia, meat mix of beef, veal, mutton and lamb
*Banjalučki ćevapi, from Banja Luka, Bosnia, beef meat
*Tuzlanski ćevapi, from Tuzla, Bosnia, meat mix of beef, mutton and lamb
*Novopazarski ćevap, from Novi Pazar, Serbia, traditionally sheepmeat
There are variations in meat content and seasoning.
The dish is kept simple, and traditionally served with Flatbread with onions and/or kajmak and yogurt as appetizer.
