Angry Birds (later remarketed as Angry Birds Classic) is a 2009 casual puzzle video game developed by Rovio Entertainment.
Inspired primarily by a sketch of stylized wingless birds, the game was first released for iOS and Maemo devices in December 2009.
Since that time, over 12 million copies of the game have been purchased from the iOS App Store, After its release, the original game was called "one of the most mainstream games out in 2010", "one of the great runaway hits of 2010", and "the largest mobile app success the world has seen as of 2011".
Gameplay
In Angry Birds, the player controls a flock of multi-colored birds that are attempting to retrieve their eggs, which have been stolen by a group of hungry green pigs.
and stone resembling children's toy building blocks.
The objective of the game is to eliminate all the pigs on the level.
Using a slingshot, players launch a limited set of birds with the goal of either striking the enemy pigs directly or damaging their surrounding structures, causing the blocks to collapse and squash the pigs.
in the form of a simulated screenshot featuring some angry-looking birds with no visible legs or wings.
and the team elected to design a game around them.
In early 2009, physics games, such as Crush the Castle, were popular flash-based web games, so the Rovio team was inspired by these games.
During the development of Angry Birds, the staff realized the birds needed an enemy.
At the time, the "swine flu" epidemic was in the news, so the staff made the birds' enemies pigs.
The initial cost to develop Angry Birds was estimated to exceed €100,000, not including costs for the subsequent updates.
Chillingo claimed to have participated in final game polishing, such as adding visible trajectory lines, pinch to zoom, pigs' grunts, birds' somersaults on landing.
Since then Rovio has self-published almost all of the later ports of the game, with the exception of the PSP version, which was produced under license by Abstraction Games.
When Rovio began writing new versions of the game for other devices, new issues came to light.
As the team began working on a version for Android systems, they observed the large number of configurations of device types and versions of the Android software.
In early 2010, Rovio began developing a version of Angry Birds for Facebook.
The project became one of the company's largest, with development taking over a year.
Improvements for the game include the ability to synchronize the player's progress across multiple devices; for example, a player who completes a level on an Android phone can log into their copy of the game on an Android tablet and see the same statistics and level of progress.
Release
The initial iOS version of the game included a single episode entitled "Poached Eggs", which contained three themed chapters, each with 21 levels.
From time to time, Rovio has released free upgrades that include additional content, such as new levels, new in-game objects and even new birds.
As updates have been released, they have been incorporated into the game's full version offered for download from each platform's application store.
"The Big Setup" was later given two more chapters of 15 levels each.
A fifth episode, called "Ham 'Em High", launched on December 23, 2010, in celebration of the game's first year in the iOS App Store.
"Ham 'Em High" contained 15 American Old West-themed levels in a single chapter; updates on February 4, 2011 and March 18, 2011 each added one new 15-level chapter.
"Ham 'Em High" also introduced the Mighty Eagle, a new bird that may be used once per hour to clear any uncompleted levels.
In late 2011, Rovio also added the Mighty Eagle to the Chrome App version of the game.
Rovio has begun testing an Android update called the "Bad Piggy Bank" with the Elisa wireless service in Finland and T-Mobile, which allows users to charge in-app purchases, such as the Mighty Eagle, to their mobile phone bills.
An August 24, 2011 update expanded "Mine and Dine" with two more 15-level chapters.
The seventh update, "Birdday Party", was released on December 11, 2011 to commemorate the second anniversary of the first release of the iOS version into the iTunes App Store.
It included 15 new birthday cake-theme levels, as well as updated graphics and the addition of elements from the spin-off games, such as the scoring graphic seen in Angry Birds Rio and the introduction of the orange bird that first appeared in Angry Birds Seasons.
The update was later released for Android and Microsoft Windows.
The eighth update was released initially to iOS on March 20, 2012 in a lead-up to the release of Angry Birds Space.
The new update included an animated tutorial, enhanced gameplay, all new UI graphics, and the first 15 levels of "Surf and Turf," the Angry Birds Facebook-exclusive episode (see below), another 15 levels were added later, with the iOS version receiving the power-ups first seen in the Facebook version.
On October 9, 2012, the final chapter of "Surf and Turf" was released.
Along with that, a new episode called "Bad Piggies" was released.
This is to advertise the new Rovio game, Bad Piggies.
Another update was released on December 11, 2012, the 3rd anniversary of the game's release, with 15 new levels to "Birdday Party" and 15 new levels to "Bad Piggies".
The second set of 15 levels in "Birdday Party" introduced the Pink Bird to the game.
15 more levels were later released for the "Bad Piggies" episode on March 7, 2013.
On the same day these final 15 levels were released, Angry Birds became "Free App of the Week" on the Apple App Store until March 14, 2013. and became an instant hit on the Top Free App charts on the App Store until March 18, 2013, when the app returned to the normal price of $0.99.
On June 17, 2013, Rovio teased on its Facebook page that Red, the main protagonist of the game, would receive an ability in a new episode.
On June 26, 2013, Rovio released a YouTube video, uncovering three new facts: the episode would be called Red's Mighty Feathers, the update would come in July, and the Angry Birds app icon would receive a new design.
On July 3, 2013, the update was released, with fifteen levels of all-new game play.
Instead of knocking over the pigs' castles, the player's goal is to keep the pigs from stealing the egg and leaving the playing field with it.
The pigs arrive in waves of complicated vehicles, and the only available bird is Red, whose new ability is to target the nearest pig.
There is no score, and the three stars are awarded by completing three objectives in one try.
The first objective is to finish the level without getting the egg stolen.
The second is to pop all the pigs in the level.
The third is to use fewer than or equal to a certain number of birds to clear the level.
Because some people were skeptical about the new gameplay, Rovio later announced that they would add levels to the episode based on the original level style.
On September 16, 2013, Rovio added 15 levels to the episode using the original style and these levels include manual targeting for Red Bird.
On November 26, 2013, Rovio added a 30-level episode called Short Fuse that transforms the Bomb's explosions into highly-destructive electrical pulses, adds a powerup that transforms any Bird into a Bomb Bird and 3 different potions that can change the pigs.
On December 11, 2013, Rovio added 15 levels to episode Birdday Party (cake 4) to celebrate its fourth birthday.
On March 4, 2014, 15 levels were added to Short Fuse and the power-up icons were updated.
On July 22, 2014, a 15-level episode called "Flock Favorites" that is inspired by fans' favorite episodes (Poached Eggs, Danger Above, Mine and Dine, Bad Piggies, Red's Mighty Feathers, Short Fuse, Surf and Turf) was added.
On November 23, 2014, in partnership with (RED) and Apple Inc., an update to the app was released that was exclusive to iOS.
In this update, there was an added special (RED)-themed Golden Egg level and Red's power from the Red's Mighty Feathers episode as a stand-alone power-up, that when purchased, can be used indefinitely (1 use per level) and 100% of the money went to the Global Fund to end AIDS.
This purchase was only available until December 7, 2014.
On December 11, 2014, in honor of the Angry Birds' 5th birthday, an episode with 30 user-inspired levels was added.
On June 23, 2015, Flock Favorites was added with 15 levels inspired by previous episodes.
On December 11, 2015, in honor of Angry Birds 6th birthday, new 15 levels were added to Birdday Party.
On December 11, 2016, in honor of Angry Birds' seventh birthday 15 more levels were added to Birdday Party.
On May 16, 2017, a dual virtual currency system was added to the game, in which currency is earned throughout gameplay (or accrued through in-app purchases) and can be used to purchase power-ups and other in-game items.
Ports
Since its initial release for the Nokia N900 multimedia Internet device, and Apple's iPhone and iPod Touch mobile digital devices, Rovio has released versions of Angry Birds for additional devices.
An iPad-exclusive version, Angry Birds HD, was released with the iPad mobile digital device in April 2010.
In August 2010, Angry Birds was made available to the Palm Pre phone running Palm's webOS operating system through its App Catalog online store.
Symbian^3 phones received a version of the game in October 2010, which initially includes only the "Poached Eggs" and "Mighty Hoax" episodes.
Angry Birds works on Kindle Fire and Kindle Fire HD.
In May 2010, Rovio announced plans for a version for devices using Google's Android operating system, with a beta version being released through the Android Market (now Google Play) in September 2010.
The full Android version of the game was first released instead on GetJar in October 2010, though it was subsequently released on Android Market within days.
Rovio officials noted that GetJar had a more global reach than Android Market, and GetJar's availability on other smartphone platforms (including Symbian) would make cross-platform promotion of the game easier.
a Windows Phone version was ultimately released in June 2011.
Near the end of 2010, Rovio stated that it was developing new ports of the game, this time for devices outside of the mobile phone market.
In January 2011, three of those ports launched.
First, Sony announced the release of Angry Birds for its PlayStation Portable handheld system in the form of a PlayStation mini game that includes nearly 200 levels from the original game; the version is also playable on the PlayStation 3.
Next, Rovio announced the release of a Windows version of the game on January 4, 2011, available for sale exclusively from the Intel AppUp center, which included 195 levels at launch and plans for exclusive features not available on the smartphone versions.
One day after the Windows version was released, the Mac App Store launched, with one of the first offerings being its own version of Angry Birds.
Ports of Angry Birds have also been proposed for the Wii with the former becoming realized through Angry Birds Trilogy (see below).
A 3D-enhanced version of the game was proposed for release on the LG Optimus 3D in October 2011.
The popularity of Angry Birds has helped spread the game to other devices that were not initially designed as gaming machines.
Barnes & Noble announced that a future update for its Nook Color e-reader will let the Android-based device run applications, including a port of Angry Birds.
In June 2011, Rovio announced plans to partner with Roku to include a version of Angry Birds on a new model of its Internet-connected set-top box, the Roku 2 XS.
In May 2011, an in-browser HTML5 version of Angry Birds was released in beta form.
The game uses WebGL or Canvas and is distributed through the Chrome Web Store for use with Google's Chrome web browser.
It runs on any WebGL- or Canvas-enabled browser, and features exclusive content when played on Chrome, such as exclusive levels and the so-called "Chrome Bombs".
The version includes offline playability and features 60 FPS gameplay with a selection of graphics settings to accommodate a variety of hardware capabilities.
In October 2011, during Nokia World 2011, it was announced that Angry Birds would come preloaded in Nokia's Asha series of Series 40 touch handsets, aimed at emerging markets such as India, China and South Africa.
In December 2011, Rovio released Angry Birds HD, Angry Birds Seasons HD and Angry Birds Rio HD on the BlackBerry PlayBook tablet from Research In Motion.
In January 2012, Angry Birds was released for devices using Bada OS.
In February 2012, Angry Birds made its official debut on Facebook.
The version launched with two chapters from the original game, along with then exclusive "Surf and Turf" chapter.
The Facebook version adds a number of new power-up items, with a maximum of two in use per level.
There was a unique Green Day themed episode in the Facebook version of the game, however it was removed in December 2012.
At the 2012 Electronic Entertainment Expo in Los Angeles, California, Rovio and distribution partner Activision announced plans to bring Angry Birds and two of its spin-off games, Angry Birds Seasons and Angry Birds Rio to the PlayStation 3, Xbox 360 and Nintendo 3DS systems.
Bundled together as Angry Birds Trilogy, the games were built specifically for their respective consoles, taking advantage of their unique features, such as support for PlayStation Move, Kinect, high-definition displays and glasses-free 3D visuals.
A motion controlled version of the game has also been released as a Samsung Smart TV App.
Reception
In reviews, Angry Birds has been mostly acclaimed by critics.
Chris Holt of Macworld called the game "an addictive, clever, and challenging puzzler", and Pocket Gamer's Keith Andrew said Angry Birds is "a nugget of puzzling purity dished out with relish aplenty".
Jonathan Liu of Wired News wrote that "going for the maximum number of stars certainly adds a lot of replay value to a fairly extensive game".
Reviews for the first versions of the game that did not use a touch-screen, the PlayStation 3/PSP version and the Windows version, have also been positive, but with some disagreement over the different interfaces.
Will Greenwald of PC Magazine, in his review of the PlayStation Network version, said that the control scheme on these platforms is good, "but they're not nearly as satisfying as the touch-screen controls found on smartphone versions", and that the PlayStation 3 version appeared "blocky and unpleasant, like a smartphone screen blown up to HDTV size".
Conversely, Greg Miller of IGN preferred the analog control setup of the PSP version, saying it "offered me tiny variances in control that I don't feel like I get with my fat finger on a screen".
While giving the game a positive review, Miller concluded, "There's no denying that Angry Birds is fun, but it could use polish - such as sharper visuals, a better price and smoother action."
Angry Birds has also been described critically as impossible to understand the playing rules criteria by game critic Chris Schiller of , which has 'a contemptuous attitude towards its players, keeping them just frustrated enough not to switch off and play something else instead.'
Angry Birds became the top-selling paid application on Apple's UK App Store in February 2010, and reached the top spot on the US App Store a few weeks later, where it remained until October 2010.
and over 2 million downloads in its first weekend.
Rovio receives approximately US$1 million per month in revenue from the advertising that appears in the free Android version.
According to Rovio, players logged more than 5 million hours of game time each day across all platforms, with the series having 200 million monthly active users, as of May 2012.
In November 2010, Digital Trends stated that "with 36 million downloads, Angry Birds is one of the most mainstream games out right now".
The Christian Science Monitor has remarked, "Angry Birds has been one of the great runaway hits of 2010".
By January 2014, the Angry Birds series had reached 2 billion downloads, including Angry Birds, Angry Birds Seasons, Angry Birds Rio, Angry Birds Space, Angry Birds Star Wars I & II and Angry Birds Go!
In the history of the Apple App Store, Angry Birds holds the record for most days at the top of the Paid Apps chart, having spent a total of 275 days at the No.1 position; Angry Birds Rio has been No.1 for a total of 23 days, ranking ninth on the list.
In Apple's "iTunes Rewind" list of the most popular iTunes Store media for 2011, Angry Birds was the top-selling paid iPhone/iPod app on the App Store and its free version was the fourth-most downloaded.
The game's two special-edition versions, Angry Birds Seasons and Angry Birds Rio, were also ranked in the top 10 for paid iPhone/iPod apps, while its iPad-exclusive Angry Birds HD versions were the top-selling and top-downloaded iPad apps for the year.
In September 2010, IGN named Angry Birds as the fourth best iPhone game of all time.
In April 2011, Angry Birds won both the "Best Game App" and "App of the Year" at the UK Appy Awards.
At the 2011 Webby Awards, Angry Birds was awarded "Best Game for Handheld Devices".
The Angry Birds Movie
