Dame Ethel Mary Smyth, DBE (, to rhyme with Forsyth; 22 April 18588 May 1944) was an English composer and a member of the women's suffrage movement.
Her compositions include songs, works for piano, chamber music, orchestral works, choral works and operas.
Smyth tended to be marginalised as a ‘woman composer’, as though her work could not be accepted as mainstream, yet when she produced more delicate compositions, they were criticised for not measuring up to the standard of her male competitors.
She was the first female composer to be granted a damehood.
Family background
Ethel Smyth was the fourth of eight children.
The youngest was Robert ("Bob")
Napier Smyth (1868-1947), who rose to become a Brigadier in the British Army.
She was the aunt of Lieutenant General Sir Ralph Eastwood.
She was born in Sidcup, Kent, which is now in the London Borough of Bexley, as the fourth of a family of eight children.
While April 22 is the actual day of her birth, Smyth habitually stated it was April 23, the day that was celebrated by her family, as they enjoyed the coincidence with William Shakespeare's.
Her father, John Hall Smyth, who was a major general in the Royal Artillery, was very much opposed to her making a career in music.
She lived at Frimhurst, near Frimley Green for many years, before moving to Hook Heath on the outskirts of Woking.
Musical career
She first studied privately with Alexander Ewing when she was seventeen.
He introduced her to the music of Wagner and Berlioz.
After a major battle with her father about her plans to devote her life to music, Smyth was allowed to advance her musical education at the Leipzig Conservatory, where she studied composition with Carl Reinecke.
She left after a year, however, disillusioned with the low standard of teaching, and continued her music studies privately with Heinrich von Herzogenberg.
(until Kaija Saariaho's L'Amour de loin in December 2016).
On 28 May 1928 the nascent BBC broadcast two concerts of Smyth's music, marking her "musical jubilee", The first comprised chamber music,
QTEMPLATE |On her seventy-fifth birthday in 1934, under Beecham's direction, her work was celebrated in a festival, the final event of which was held at the Royal Albert Hall in the presence of the Queen.
Heartbreakingly, at this moment of long-overdue recognition, the composer was already completely deaf and could hear neither her own music nor the adulation of the crowds.
However, she found a new interest in literature and, between 1919 and 1940, she published ten highly successful, mostly autobiographical, books.
Eugene Gates notes:
Smyth's music was seldom evaluated as simply the work of a composer among composers, but as that of a "woman composer."
This worked to keep her on the margins of the profession, and, coupled with the double standard of sexual aesthetics, also placed her in a double bind.
On the one hand, when she composed powerful, rhythmically vital music, it was said that her work lacked feminine charm; on the other, when she produced delicate, melodious compositions, she was accused of not measuring up to the artistic standards of her male colleagues.
Other critics were more favourable: "The composer is a learned musician: it is learning which gives her the power to express her natural inborn sense of humour...
Dr. Smyth knows her Mozart and her Sullivan: she has learned how to write conversations in music...
The Boatswain's Mate is one of the merriest, most tuneful, and most delightful comic operas ever put on the stage."
Involvement with the suffrage movement
In 1910 Smyth joined the Women's Social and Political Union, a suffrage organization, giving up music for two years to devote herself to the cause, and to accompany its charismatic leader Mrs Pankhurst on many occasions.
Smyth stood half the bail for Helen Craggs, who had been caught on the way to carry out the arson of the leading politician's home.
When her proponent-friend Thomas Beecham went to visit her there, he found suffragettes marching in the quadrangle and singing, as Smyth leaned out a window conducting the song with a toothbrush.
In her writing Female Pipings in Eden Smyth said her experience was of being 'in good company' of united women 'old, young, rich, poor, strong, delicate' putting the idea they were imprisoned for before their personal needs.
Smyth had revealed that the prison was infested with cockroaches even in the hospital ward.
She was released early from prison due to a medical assessment as being mentally unstable and hysterical.
Smyth gave written evidence in the November trial of Mrs. Pankhurst and others for inciting violence to state that she, Smyth, had freely engaged in activism.
She continued to correspond with Mrs. Pankhurst and heard of her getting lost finding the safe house provided for her hiding from re-arrest in Scotland, prior to the Glasgow event in March 2014.
Smyth was at one time in love with the married suffragette Emmeline Pankhurst.
At age 71, she fell in love with writer Virginia Woolf - herself having worked in the women's suffrage movement - who, both alarmed and amused, said it was "like being caught by a giant crab", but the two became friends.
In recognition of her work as a composer and writer, Smyth was made a Dame Commander of the Order of the British Empire (DBE) in 1922, becoming the first female composer to be awarded a damehood.
Smyth received honorary doctorates in music from the Universities of Durham and Oxford.
She died in Woking in 1944 at the age of 86.
Representations
Ethel Smyth featured, under the name of Edith Staines, in E. F. Benson's Dodo books (1893-1921), decades before the quaint musical characters of his more famous Mapp and Lucia series.
She "gleefully acknowledged" the portrait, according to Prunella Scales.
She was later a model for the fictional Dame Hilda Tablet in the 1950s radio plays of Henry Reed.
She was portrayed by Maureen Pryor in the 1974 BBC television film Shoulder to Shoulder.
Judy Chicago's monumental work of feminist art, The Dinner Party, features a place setting for Ethel Smyth.
In 2018 and 2019 Lucy Stevens has been playing Ethel Smyth on stage at various venues in Britain.
Works
Writings
Recordings
The Boatswain's Mate.
Nadine Benjamin, Rebecca Louise Dale, Edward Lee, Ted Schmitz, Jeremy Huw Williams, Simon Wilding, Mark Nathan, Lontano Ensemble, c. Odaline de la Martinez.
Retrospect Opera RO001 (two CDs).
* Cello Sonata in C minor (1880): Friedemann Kupsa cello, Anna Silova piano; Lieder und Balladen, Opp. 3 & 4, Three Moods of the Sea (1913): Maarten Koningsberger baritone, Kelvin Grout piano.
TRO-CD 01417.
* String Quartet in E Minor and String Quintet op.
1 in E Major.
Mannheimer Streichquartett and Joachim Griesheimer.
CPO 999 352-2.
* Complete Piano Works.
Liana Șerbescu.
CPO 999 327-2.
* Concerto for Violin, Horn and Orchestra.
BBC Philharmonic, c. Odaline de la Martinez.
Chandos Chan 9449.
* Double Concerto in A for violin, horn and piano (1926): Renate Eggebrecht violin, Franz Draxinger horn, Céline Dutilly piano; Four Songs for mezzo-soprano and chamber ensemble (1907): Melinda Paulsen mezzo, Ethel Smyth ensemble; Three songs for mezzo-soprano and piano (1913): Melinda Paulsen mezzo, Angela Gassenhuber piano.
TRO-CD 01405.
* Mass in D, March of the Women, Scene from The Boatswain's Mate.
Eiddwen Harrhy, The Plymouth Music Series, Philip Brunelle.
Virgin Classics VC 7 91188-2.
* Violin Sonata in A minor, Op. 7, Cello Sonata in A minor, Op. 5, String Quintet in E major, Op.
1, String Quartet in E minor (1912): Renate Eggebrecht, violin, Friedemann Kupsa cello, Céline Dutilly piano, Fanny Mendelssohn Quartet.
TRO-CD 01403 (two CDs).
* The Wreckers.
Anne-Marie Owens, Justin Lavender, Peter Sidhom, David Wilson-Johnson, Judith Howarth, Anthony Roden, Brian Bannatyne-Scott, Annemarie Sand.
Huddersfield Choral Society, BBC Philharmonic, c. Odaline de la Martinez.
Conifer Classics.
Cited sources
*Benson, E.F. (1986), Dodo: An Omnibus.
London: Hogarth Press, 1986
* Collis, Louise.
Impetuous Heart: The Story of Ethel Smyth.
London: William Kimber, 1984.
*Fuller, Sophie.
Smyth, Dame Ethel (Mary).
Oxford Music Online.
Oxford University Press.
Web. 10 Aug. 2017. .
*Gates, Eugene (2006), "Damned If You Do and Damned If You Don't: Sexual Aesthetics and the Music of Dame Ethel Smyth", Kapralova Society Journal 4, no. 1, 2006: 1-5.
*Gates, Eugene (2013), "Dame Ethel Smyth: Pioneer of English Opera."
Kapralova Society Journal 11, no. 1 (2013): 1-9.
*Jebens, Dieter and R. Cansdale (2004), Guide to the Basingstoke Canal.
Basingstoke Canal Authority and the Surrey and Hampshire Canal Society, 2004.
* St. John, Christopher (1959), Ethel Smyth: A Biography.
London:
Longmans, Green & Co., 1959.
Further reading
*Anderson, Gwen, Ethel Smyth, London: Cecil Woolf, 1997.
* Bartsch, Cornelia, Rebecca Grotjahn, and Melanie Unseld.
Felsensprengerin, Brückenbauerin, Wegbereiterin: Die Komponistin Ethel Smyth.
Rock Blaster, Bridge Builder, Road Paver: The Composer Ethel Smyth.
Allitera (2010)
* Crichton, Ronald.
The Memoirs of Ethel Smyth.
London: Viking Press, 1987.
*Kertesz, Elizabeth Jane, http:/ view singleViewer.do?dvs
1362083053176~607&locale
en_US&VIEWER_URL
action/singleViewer.do?&DELIVERY_RULE_ID
7&search_terms
SYS%20
%20000029971&adjacency
N&application
DIGITOOL-3&frameId
1&usePid1
true&usePid2=true Issues in the critical reception of Ethel Smyth’s Mass and first four operas in England and Germany, PhD Dissertation, Melbourne: University of Melbourne on .au
*Stone, Caroline E.M.
Another Side of Ethel Smyth: Letters to her Great-Niece, Elizabeth Mary Williamson.
Kennedy & Boyd, 2018.
