Calgary () is a city in the western Canadian province of Alberta.
It is situated at the confluence of the Bow River and the Elbow River in the south of the province, in an area of foothills and prairie, about east of the front ranges of the Canadian Rockies and roughly 299 km (185 mi) south of the provincial capital of Edmonton.
The city anchors the south end of the Statistics Canada-defined urban area, the Calgary-Edmonton Corridor.
The city had a population of 1,285,711 in 2019, making it Alberta's largest city and Canada's third-largest municipality.
Also in 2016, Calgary had a metropolitan population of 1,392,609, making it the fourth-largest census metropolitan area (CMA) in Canada.
Calgary's economy includes activity in the energy, financial services, film and television, transportation and logistics, technology, manufacturing, aerospace, health and wellness, retail, and tourism sectors.
The Calgary CMA is home to Canada's second-highest number of corporate head offices among the country's 800 largest corporations.
In 2015 Calgary had the highest number of millionaires per capita of any major Canadian city.
In 1988 it became the first Canadian city to host the Winter Olympic Games.
Etymology
Calgary was named after Calgary on the Isle of Mull, Scotland, United Kingdom.
In turn, the name originates from a compound of kald and gart, similar Old Norse words, meaning "cold" and "garden", likely used when named by the Vikings who inhabited the Inner Hebrides.
Alternatively, the name might be Gaelic Cala ghearraidh, meaning "beach of the meadow (pasture)", or Gaelic for either "clear running water" or "bay farm".
has been the popular Indigenous term for the Calgary area.
In the Nakoda (Stoney) language, the area is known as Wincheesh-pah or Wenchi Ispase, both meaning "elbow".
In 2017, the Stoney Nakoda sent an application to the Government of Alberta, to rename Calgary as Wichispa Oyade meaning "elbow town", however this has been challenged by the Piikani Blackfoot.
History
Early history
The Calgary area was inhabited by pre-Clovis people whose presence has been traced back at least 11,000 years.
The area has been inhabited by the Niitsitapi (Blackfoot Confederacy; Siksika, Kainai, Piikani), îyârhe Nakoda, the Tsuut'ina First Nations peoples and Métis Nation, Region 3.
As Mayor Naheed Nenshi (A'paistootsiipsii; Iitiya) describes, "There have always been people here.
In Biblical times there were people here.
For generations beyond number, people have come here to this land, drawn here by the water.
They come here to hunt and fish; to trade; to live; to love; to have great victories; to taste bitter disappointment; but above all to engage in that very human act of building community."
In 1787, cartographer David Thompson spent the winter with a band of Peigan encamped along the Bow River.
He was a Hudson's Bay Company trader and the first recorded European to visit the area.
John Glenn was the first documented European settler in the Calgary area, in 1873.
In 1875, the site became a post of the North-West Mounted Police (now the Royal Canadian Mounted Police or RCMP).
The NWMP detachment was assigned to protect the western plains from US whisky traders, and to protect the fur trade.
Originally named Fort Brisebois, after NWMP officer Éphrem-A. Brisebois, it was renamed Fort Calgary in 1876 by Colonel James Macleod.
When the Canadian Pacific Railway reached the area in 1883, and a rail station was constructed, Calgary began to grow into an important commercial and agricultural centre.
Over a century later, the Canadian Pacific Railway headquarters moved to Calgary from Montreal in 1996.
Calgary was officially incorporated as a town in 1884, and elected its first mayor, George Murdoch.
In 1894, it was incorporated as "The City of Calgary" in what was then the North-West Territories.
The Calgary Police Service was established in 1885 and assumed municipal, local duties from the NWMP.
The Calgary Fire of 1886 occurred on November 7, 1886.
Fourteen buildings were destroyed with losses estimated at $103,200.
Although no one was killed or injured, city officials drafted a law requiring all large downtown buildings be built with Paskapoo sandstone, to prevent this from happening again.
After the arrival of the railway, the Dominion Government started leasing grazing land at minimal cost (up to for one cent per acre per year).
As a result of this policy, large ranching operations were established in the outlying country near Calgary.
Already a transportation and distribution hub, Calgary quickly became the centre of Canada's cattle marketing and meatpacking industries.
By late 19th century, the Hudson's Bay Company (HBC) expanded into the interior and established posts along rivers that later developed into the modern cities of Winnipeg, Calgary and Edmonton.
In 1884, the HBC established a sales shop in Calgary.
HBC also built the first of the grand "original six" department stores in Calgary in 1913; others that followed are Edmonton, Vancouver, Victoria, Saskatoon, and Winnipeg.
Modern history (1900-present)
Between 1896 and 1914 settlers from all over the world poured into the area in response to the offer of free "homestead" land.
Agriculture and ranching became key components of the local economy, shaping the future of Calgary for years to come.
The world-famous Calgary Stampede, still held annually in July, was started by four wealthy ranchers as a small agricultural show in 1912.
It is now known as the "greatest outdoor show on earth".
Calgary experienced Alberta's first oil boom when Calgary Petroleum Products Co found oil just southwest of the city at Turner Valley in 1914.
Western Canada's first commercial oilfield boomed again in 1924 and 1936 and by WWII the Turner Valley oilfield was producing more than 95 per cent of the oil in Canada.
As a result, major oil companies searched elsewhere in Alberta and in 1947 Imperial Oil discovered new reserves near Leduc, south of Edmonton.
But Calgary was already the centre of Alberta oil and the new discovery caused the city to boom again.
Calgary's economy grew when oil prices increased with the Arab Oil Embargo of 1973.
The population increased by 272,000 in the eighteen years between 1971 (403,000) and 1989 (675,000) and another 345,000 in the next eighteen years (to 1,020,000 in 2007).
During these boom years, skyscrapers were constructed and the relatively low-rise downtown quickly became dense with tall buildings.
Calgary's economy was so closely tied to the oil industry that the city's boom peaked with the average annual price of oil in 1981.
The subsequent drops in oil prices were cited by industry as reasons for a collapse in the oil industry and consequently the overall Calgary economy.
Low oil prices prevented a full recovery until the 1990s.
With the energy sector employing a huge number of Calgarians, the fallout from the economic slump of the early 1980s was significant, and the unemployment rate soared.
By the end of the decade, however, the economy was in recovery.
Calgary quickly realized that it could not afford to put so much emphasis on oil and gas, and the city has since become much more diverse, both economically and culturally.
The period during this recession marked Calgary's transition from a mid-sized and relatively nondescript prairie city into a thriving Canadian working centre.
This transition culminated in the city hosting Canada's first Winter Olympics in 1988.
The success of these Games essentially put the city on the world stage.
Thanks in part to escalating oil prices, the economy in Calgary and Alberta was booming until the end of 2009, and the region of nearly 1.1 million people was home to the fastest growing economy in the country.
While the oil and gas industry comprise an important part of the economy, the city has invested a great deal into other areas such as tourism and high-tech manufacturing.
Over 3.1 million people now visit the city annually for its many festivals and attractions, especially the Calgary Stampede.
The nearby mountain resort towns of Banff, Lake Louise, and Canmore are also becoming increasingly popular with tourists, and are bringing people into Calgary as a result.
Other modern industries include light manufacturing, high-tech, film, e-commerce, transportation, and services.
Widespread flooding throughout southern Alberta, including on the Bow and Elbow rivers, forced the evacuation of over 75,000 city residents on June 21, 2013, and left large areas of the city, including downtown, without power.
Geography
Calgary is located at the transition zone between the Canadian Rockies foothills and the Canadian Prairies.
The city lies within the foothills of the Parkland Natural Region and the Grasslands Natural Region.
Downtown Calgary is about above sea level, and the airport is .
In 2011, the city covered a land area of .
Two rivers run through the city and two creeks.
The Bow River is the larger and it flows from the west to the south.
The Elbow River flows northwards from the south until it converges with the Bow River at the historic site of Fort Calgary near downtown.
Nose creek flows into Calgary from the northwest then south to join the Bow River a couple of kilometers east of where the Elbow River joins the Bow River.
And the Fish Creek flows into Calgary from the southwest and converges with the Bow River near Sikome lake and near the Mckenzie district of Calgary.
Since the climate of the region is generally dry, dense vegetation occurs naturally only in the river valleys, on some north-facing slopes, and within Fish Creek Provincial Park.
The City of Calgary, in size, consists of an inner city surrounded by suburban communities of various density.
The city is immediately surrounded by two municipal districts - the Municipal District of Foothills No. 31 to the south and Rocky View County to the north, west and east.
Proximate urban communities beyond the city within the Calgary Metropolitan Region include: the City of Airdrie to the north; the City of Chestermere, the Town of Strathmore and the Hamlet of Langdon to the east; the towns of Okotoks and High River to the south; and the Town of Cochrane to the northwest.
Numerous rural subdivisions are located within the Elbow Valley, Springbank and Bearspaw areas to the west and northwest.
The Tsuu T'ina Nation Indian Reserve No. 145 borders Calgary to the southwest.
Flora and fauna
Numerous plant and animal species are found within and around Calgary.
The Rocky Mountain Douglas-fir (Pseudotsuga menziesii var.
glauca) comes near the northern limit of its range at Calgary.
Another conifer of widespread distribution found in the Calgary area is the White Spruce (Picea glauca).
Some notable animals that can be found in and around Calgary include: deer, coyote, moose, bat, rabbit, mink, weasel, black bear, raccoon, skunk, and cougar.
Neighbourhoods
The downtown region of the city consists of five neighbourhoods: Eau Claire (including the Festival District), the Downtown West End, the Downtown Commercial Core, Chinatown, and the Downtown East Village .
The commercial core is itself divided into a number of districts including the Stephen Avenue Retail Core, the Entertainment District, the Arts District and the Government District.
Distinct from downtown and south of 9th Avenue is Calgary's densest neighbourhood, the Beltline.
The area includes a number of communities such as Connaught, Victoria Crossing and a portion of the Rivers District.
The Beltline is the focus of major planning and rejuvenation initiatives on the part of the municipal government to increase the density and liveliness of Calgary's centre.
Adjacent to, or directly radiating from the downtown are the first of the inner-city communities.
These include Crescent Heights, Hounsfield Heights Sunnyside (including Kensington BRZ), Bridgeland, Renfrew, Mount Royal, Scarboro, Sunalta, Mission, Ramsay and Inglewood and Albert Park/Radisson Heights directly to the east.
The inner city is, in turn, surrounded by relatively dense and established neighbourhoods such as Rosedale and Mount Pleasant to the north; Bowness, Parkdale, Shaganappi and Glendale to the west; Park Hill, South Calgary (including Marda Loop), Bankview, Altadore, and Killarney to the south; and Forest Lawn/International Avenue to the east.
Lying beyond these, and usually separated from one another by highways, are suburban communities including Evergreen, Somerset, Auburn Bay Country Hills, Sundance, Riverbend, and McKenzie Towne.
In all, there are over 180 distinct neighbourhoods within the city limits.
Several of Calgary's neighbourhoods were initially separate municipalities that were annexed by the city as it grew.
These include Bowness, Montgomery, and Forest Lawn.
Climate
Calgary experiences a humid continental climate (Köppen climate classification Dwb), warm summers and cold, dry winters.
It falls into the NRC Plant Hardiness Zone 4a.
According to Environment Canada, average daily temperatures in Calgary range from in July to in December.
As well, Calgary's proximity to the Rocky Mountains affects winter temperature average mean temperature with a mixture of lows and highs, and tends to result in a mild winter for a city in the Prairie Provinces.
Temperatures are also affected by the wind chill factor; Calgary's average wind speed is , one of the highest in Canadian cities.
In summer, daytime temperatures range from to and sometimes exceed an average of 5.1 days anytime in June, July and August, and occasionally as late as September or as early as May, and in winter drop below or at 3.7 days of the year.
As a consequence of Calgary's high elevation and aridity, summer evenings tend to cool off, with monthly average low temperatures below throughout the summer months.
Calgary International Airport in the northeastern section of the city receives an average of of precipitation annually, with of that occurring in the form of rain, and as snow.
It last snowed in July on July 15, 1999.
Thunderstorms can be frequent and sometimes severe with most of them occurring in the summer months.
Calgary lies within Alberta's Hailstorm Alley and is prone to damaging hailstorms every few years.
A hailstorm that struck Calgary on September 7, 1991, was one of the most destructive natural disasters in Canadian history, with over $400 million in damage.
Being west of the dry line on most occasions, tornadoes are rare in the region.
The highest temperature ever recorded in Calgary was on August 10, 2018.
The coldest temperature ever recorded was on February 4, 1893.
In the 2016 Census of Population conducted by Statistics Canada, the City of Calgary recorded a population of 1,239,220 living in 466,725 of its 489,650 total private dwellings, a change of from its 2011 population of 1,096,833.
With a land area of , it had a population density of in 2016.
Calgary was ranked first among the three cities in Canada that saw their population grow by more than 100,000 people between 2011 and 2016.
During this time Calgary saw a population growth of 142,387 people, followed by Edmonton at 120,345 people and Toronto at 116,511 people.
In the 2011 Census, the City of Calgary had a population of 1,096,833 living in 423,417 of its 445,848 total dwellings, a change of 10.9% from its 2006 adjusted population of 988,812.
With a land area of , it had a population density of in 2011.
The Calgary census metropolitan area (CMA) is the fourth-largest CMA in Canada and largest in Alberta.
It had a population of 1,392,609 in the 2016 Census compared to its 2011 population of 1,214,839.
Its five-year population change of 14.6 percent was the highest among all CMAs in Canada between 2011 and 2016.
With a land area of , the Calgary CMA had a population density of in 2016.
Statistics Canada's latest estimate of the Calgary CMA population, as of July 1, 2017, is 1,488,841.
In 2015, the population within an hour commuting distance of the city is 1,511,755.
As a consequence of the large number of corporations, as well as the presence of the energy sector in Alberta, Calgary has a median family income of $104,530.
Christians make up 54.9% of the population, while 32.3% have no religious affiliation.
Other religions in the city are Muslims (5.2%), Sikhs (2.6%) and Buddhists (2.1%).
Ethnicity
According to the 2016 Census, 59.5% of Calgary's population was of European origin, 4% was of Aboriginal heritage, and 36.2% of the population belonged to a visible minority (that is, non-white, non-aboriginal) group.
Among those of European origin, the most frequently reported ethnic backgrounds were British, German, Irish, French, and Ukrainian.
Among visible minorities, South Asians (mainly from India or Pakistan) make up the largest group (9.5%), followed by Chinese (6.8%) and Filipinos (5.5%).
5.4% were of African or Caribbean origin, 3.5% was of West Asian or Middle Eastern origin, while 2.6% of the population was of Latin American origin.
Of the largest Canadian cities, Calgary ranked fourth in proportion of visible minorities, behind Toronto, Vancouver, and Winnipeg.
20.7% of the population identified as "Canadian" in ethnic origin.
Economy
Calgary is recognized as a leader in the Canadian oil and gas industry, and its economy expanded at a significantly higher rate than the overall Canadian economy (43% and 25%, respectively) over the ten-year period from 1999 to 2009.
Its high personal and family incomes, have all benefited from increased sales and prices due to a resource boom, Calgary is a distribution and transportation hub with high retail sales.
The larger oil and gas companies are BP Canada, Canadian Natural Resources Limited, Cenovus Energy, Encana, Imperial Oil, Suncor Energy, Shell Canada, Husky Energy, TransCanada, and Nexen, making the city home to 87% of Canada's oil and natural gas producers and 66% of coal producers.
As of November 2016, the city had a labour force of 901,700 and 10.3% unemployment rate.
In 2013, Calgary's four largest industries by employee count were "Trade" (with 112,800 employees), "Professional, Scientific and Technical Services" (100,800 employees), "Health Care and Social Assistance" (89,200 employees), and "Construction" (81,500 employees).
In 2006, the top three private sector employers in Calgary were Shaw Communications (7,500 employees), Nova Chemicals (4,945) and Telus (4,517).
Companies rounding out the top ten were Mark's Work Wearhouse, the Calgary Co-op, Nexen, Canadian Pacific Railway, CNRL, Shell Canada and Dow Chemical Canada.
CPR moved its head office from Montreal in 1996 and Imperial Oil moved from Toronto in 2005.
Encana's new 58-floor corporate headquarters, the Bow, became the tallest building in Canada outside of Toronto.
In 2001, the city became the corporate headquarters of the TSX Venture Exchange.
WestJet is headquartered close to the Calgary International Airport, and Enerjet has its headquarters on the airport grounds.
Prior to their dissolution, Canadian Airlines and Air Canada's subsidiary Zip were also headquartered near the city's airport.
Although its main office is now based in Yellowknife, Canadian North, purchased from Canadian Airlines in September 1998, still maintains operations and charter offices in Calgary.
According to a report by Alexi Olcheski of Avison Young published in August 2015, vacancy rates rose to 11.5 per cent in the second quarter of 2015 from 8.3 per cent in 2014.
Oil and gas company office spaces in downtown Calgary are subleasing 40 per cent of their overall vacancies.
H&R Real Estate Investment Trust, which owns the 58-storey, 158,000-square-metre Bow Tower, claims the building was fully leased.
Tenants such as Suncor "have been letting staff and contractors go in response to the downturn".
While many Calgarians continue to live in the city's suburbs, more central districts such as 17 Avenue, Kensington, Inglewood, Forest Lawn, Marda Loop and the Mission District have become more popular and density in those areas has increased.
The nightlife and the availability of cultural venues in these areas has gradually begun to evolve as a result.
The Calgary Public Library is the city's public library network, with 20 branches loaning books, e-books, CDs, DVDs, Blu-rays, audio books, and more.
Based on borrowing, the library is the second largest in Canada, and sixth-largest municipal library system in North America.
The new flagship branch, the Calgary Central Library in Downtown East Village, opened on November 1, 2018.
Calgary is the site of the Southern Alberta Jubilee Auditorium performing arts, culture and community facility.
The auditorium is one of two "twin" facilities in the province, the other located in Edmonton, each being locally known as the "Jube".
The 2,538-seat auditorium was opened in 1957 and has been host to hundreds of Broadway musical, theatrical, stage and local productions.
The Calgary Jube is the resident home of the Alberta Ballet Company, the Calgary Opera, the Kiwanis Music Festival, and the annual civic Remembrance Day ceremonies.
Both auditoriums operate 365 days a year, and are run by the provincial government.
Both received major renovations as part of the province's centennial in 2005.
The city is also home to a number of theatre companies; among them are One Yellow Rabbit, which shares the Arts Commons building with the Calgary Philharmonic Orchestra, as well as Theatre Calgary, Alberta Theatre Projects and Theatre Junction GRAND, culture house dedicated to the contemporary live arts.
Calgary was also the birthplace of the improvisational theatre games known as Theatresports.
The Calgary International Film Festival is also held annually, as well as the International Festival of Animated Objects.
Every three years, Calgary hosts the Honens International Piano Competition (formerly known as the Esther Honens International Piano Competition).
The finalists of the competition perform piano concerti with the Calgary Philharmonic Orchestra; the laureate is awarded a cash prize (currently $100,000.00 CDN, the largest cash award of any international piano competition), and a three-year career development program.
The Honens is an integral component of the classical music scene in Calgary.
Visual and conceptual artists like the art collective United Congress are active in the city.
There are a number of art galleries in the downtown along Stephen Avenue; the SoDo (South of Downtown) Design District; the 17 Avenue corridor; and the neighbourhood of Inglewood, including the Esker Foundation.
Calgary is also home to the Alberta College of Art and Design.
A number of marching bands are based in Calgary.
They include the Calgary Round-Up Band, the Calgary Stetson Show Band, the Bishop Grandin Marching Ghosts, and the six-time World Association for Marching Show Bands champions, the Calgary Stampede Showband, as well as military bands including the Band of HMCS Tecumseh, the King's Own Calgary Regiment Band, and the Regimental Pipes and Drums of The Calgary Highlanders.
There are many other civilian pipe bands in the city, notably the Calgary Police Service Pipe Band.
Calgary is also home to a choral music community, including a variety of amateur, community, and semi-professional groups.
Some of the mainstays include the Mount Royal Choirs from the Mount Royal University Conservatory, the Calgary Boys' Choir, the Calgary Girls Choir, the Youth Singers of Calgary, the Cantaré Children's Choir, and Spiritus Chamber Choir.
Calgary hosts a number of annual festivals and events.
These include the Calgary International Film Festival, the Calgary Folk Music Festival, FunnyFest Calgary Comedy Festival, Sled Island music festival, Beakerhead arts, science and engineering festival, the Folk Music Festival, the Greek festival, Carifest, Wordfest, the Lilac Festival, GlobalFest, Otafest, the Calgary Comic and Entertainment Expo, FallCon, the Calgary Fringe Festival, Summerstock, Expo Latino, Calgary Pride, Calgary International Spoken Word Festival, and many other cultural and ethnic festivals.
Calgary's best-known event is the Calgary Stampede, which has occurred each July since 1912.
It is one of the largest festivals in Canada, with a 2005 attendance of 1,242,928 at the 10-day rodeo and exhibition.
Several museums are located in the city.
The Glenbow Museum is the largest in western Canada and includes an art gallery and First Nations gallery.
Other major museums include the Chinese Cultural Centre (at , the largest stand-alone cultural centre in Canada), Canada's Sports Hall of Fame (at Canada Olympic Park), The Military Museums, the National Music Centre and The Hangar Flight Museum.
Numerous films have been shot in Calgary and the surrounding area.
Notable films shot in and around the city include: The Assassination of Jesse James, Brokeback Mountain, Dances with Wolves, Doctor Zhivago, Inception, Legends of the Fall, Unforgiven and The Revenant.
The Calgary Herald and the Calgary Sun are the main newspapers in Calgary.
Global, City, CTV and CBC television networks have local studios in the city.
Attractions
Downtown features an eclectic mix of restaurants and bars, cultural venues, public squares (including Olympic Plaza) and shopping.
Notable shopping areas include such as The Core Shopping Centre (formerly Calgary Eaton Centre/TD Square), Stephen Avenue and Eau Claire Market.
Downtown tourist attractions include the Calgary Zoo, the Telus Spark, the Telus Convention Centre, the Chinatown district, the Glenbow Museum, the Calgary Tower, the Art Gallery of Calgary (AGC), The Military Museums and Arts Commons.
At , the Devonian Gardens is one of the largest urban indoor gardens in the world, and it is located on the 4th floor of The Core Shopping Centre (above the shopping).
The downtown region is also home to Prince's Island Park, an urban park located just north of the Eau Claire district.
Directly to the south of downtown is Midtown and the Beltline.
This area is quickly becoming one of the city's densest and most active mixed use areas.
At the district's core is the popular 17 Avenue, known for its many bars and nightclubs, restaurants, and shopping venues.
During the Calgary Flames' Stanley Cup run in 2004, 17 Avenue was frequented by over 50,000 fans and supporters per game night.
The concentration of red jersey-wearing fans led to the street's playoff moniker, the "Red Mile".
Downtown is easily accessed using the city's C-Train light rail (LRT) transit system.
Attractions on the west side of the city include the Heritage Park Historical Village, depicting life in pre-1914 Alberta and featuring working historic vehicles such as a steam train, paddle steamer and electric streetcar.
The village itself comprises a mixture of replica buildings and historic structures relocated from southern Alberta.
Just west of the city limits is Calaway Park Western Canada's largest outdoor family amusement park, and just north of the park across the Trans Canada Highway is the Springbank/Calgary Airport where the Wings over Springbank Airshow is held every July 18 & 19th.
Other major city attractions include Canada Olympic Park, which features Canada's Sports Hall of Fame, and Spruce Meadows.
In addition to the many shopping areas in the city centre, there are a number of large suburban shopping complexes in the city.
Among the largest are Chinook Centre and Southcentre Mall in the south, Westhills and Signal Hill in the southwest, South Trail Crossing and Deerfoot Meadows in the southeast, Market Mall in the northwest, Sunridge Mall in the northeast, and the newly built CrossIron Mills and New Horizon Mall just north of the Calgary city limits, and south of the City of Airdrie.
Skyline
Downtown Calgary can be recognized by its numerous skyscrapers.
Some of these structures, such as the Calgary Tower and the Saddledome are unique to Calgary.
Office buildings tend to concentrate within the commercial core, while residential towers occur most frequently within the Downtown West End and the Beltline, south of downtown.
These buildings are iconographic of the city's booms and busts, and it is easy to recognize the various phases of development that have shaped the image of downtown.
The first skyscraper building boom occurred during the late 1950s and continued through to the 1970s.
After 1980, during the recession, many high-rise construction projects were immediately halted.
It was not until the late 1980s and through to the early 1990s that major construction began again, initiated by the 1988 Winter Olympics and stimulated by the growing economy.
In total, there are 14 office towers that are at least (usually around 40 floors) or higher.
The tallest of these is Brookfield Place, which is the tallest office tower in Canada outside Toronto.
The Bow, completed in 2012, is the second tallest building in Calgary.
The Telus Sky tower nearing completion in downtown core will be the third tallest tower when completed in 2020.
Calgary's Bankers Hall Towers are also the tallest twin towers in Canada.
Sports and recreation
Within Calgary there are approximately of parkland available for public usage and recreation.
These parks include Fish Creek Provincial Park, Inglewood Bird Sanctuary, Bowness Park, Edworthy Park, Confederation Park, Prince's Island Park, Nose Hill Park, and Central Memorial Park.
Nose Hill Park is one of the largest municipal parks in Canada at .
The park has been subject to a revitalization plan that began in 2006.
Its trail system is currently undergoing rehabilitation in accordance with this plan.
The oldest park in Calgary, Central Memorial Park, dates back to 1911.
Similar to Nose Hill Park, revitalization also took place in Central Memorial Park in 2008-2009 and reopened to the public in 2010 while still maintaining its Victorian style.
A pathway system connects these parks and various neighbourhoods.
Calgary also has multiple private sporting clubs including the Glencoe Club and the Calgary Winter Club.
In large part due to its proximity to the Rocky Mountains, Calgary has traditionally been a popular destination for winter sports.
Since hosting the 1988 Winter Olympics, the city has also been home to a number of major winter sporting facilities such as Canada Olympic Park (bobsleigh, luge, cross-country skiing, ski jumping, downhill skiing, snowboarding, and some summer sports) and the Olympic Oval (speed skating and hockey).
These facilities serve as the primary training venues for a number of competitive athletes.
Also, Canada Olympic Park serves as a mountain biking trail in the summer months.
In the summer, the Bow River is very popular among river rafters and fly-fishermen.
Golfing is also an extremely popular activity for Calgarians and the region has a large number of courses.
The Century Downs Racetrack and Casino is a 5 1/2 furlong horse track located just north of the city.
Calgary hosted the 2009 World Water Ski Championship Festival in August, at the Predator Bay Water Ski Club, approximately south of the city.
As part of the wider Battle of Alberta, the city's sports teams enjoy a popular rivalry with their Edmonton counterparts, most notably the rivalries between the National Hockey League's Calgary Flames and Edmonton Oilers, and the Canadian Football League's Calgary Stampeders and Edmonton Eskimos.
Calgary is the hometown of the Hart wrestling family and the location of the Hart family "Dungeon", where the patriarch of the Hart Family, Stu Hart, trained numerous professional wrestlers including Superstar Billy Graham, Brian Pillman, the British Bulldogs, Edge, Christian, Greg Valentine, Chris Jericho, Jushin Thunder Liger and many more.
Also among the trainees were the Hart family members themselves, including WWE Hall of Fame member and former WWE champion Bret Hart and his brother, the 1994 WWF King of the Ring, Owen Hart.
However, as Calgary's population has increased, so has the diversity of its politics.
Municipal politics
Calgary is governed in accordance with Alberta's Municipal Government Act (1995).
Calgarians elect 14 ward councillors and a mayor to Calgary City Council every four years.
Naheed Nenshi was first elected mayor in the 2010 municipal election.
He was re-elected in 2013 and 2017.
Three school boards operate independently of each other in Calgary, the public, the separate (catholic) and francophone systems.
Both the public and separate boards have 7 elected trustees each representing 2 of 14 wards.
The School Boards are considered part of municipal politics in Calgary as they are elected at the same time as City Council.
Provincial politics
As a result of the 2019 provincial election, Calgary is represented by twenty-six MLAs, including twenty three United Conservative Party and three New Democratic Party of Alberta.
Federal politics
On October 19, 2015, Calgary elected its first two Liberal federal MPs since 1968, Darshan Kang for Calgary Skyview and Kent Hehr for Calgary Centre.
The remaining MPs are members of the Conservative Party of Canada (CPC).
Before 2015, the Liberals had only elected three MPs from Calgary ridings in their entire history-- Manley Edwards (1940-1945), Harry Hays (1963-1965) and Pat Mahoney (1968-1972).
The federal riding of Calgary Heritage was held by former Prime Minister and CPC leader Stephen Harper.
That seat was also held by Preston Manning, the leader of the Reform Party of Canada; it was known as Calgary Southwest at the time.
Harper is the second Prime Minister to represent a Calgary riding; the first was R. B. Bennett from Calgary West, who held that position from 1930 to 1935.
Joe Clark, former Prime Minister and former leader of the Progressive Conservative Party of Canada (also a predecessor of the CPC), held the riding of Calgary Centre during his second stint in Parliament from 2000 to 2004.
The Green Party of Canada has also made inroads in Calgary, exemplified by results of the 2011 federal election where they achieved 7.7% of the vote across the city, ranging from 4.7% in Calgary Northeast to 13.1% in Calgary Centre-North.
Crime
The Calgary census metropolitan area (CMA) had a crime severity index of 60.4 in 2013, which is lower than the national average of 68.7.
A slight majority of the other CMAs in Canada had crime severity indexes greater than Calgary's 60.4.
The airport serves as the primary gateway into Banff National Park, located 90 minutes west, and the entire Canadian Rocky Mountain Parks system.
Non-stop destinations include cities throughout Canada, the United States, Europe, Central America, and Asia.
Calgary/Springbank Airport, Canada's eleventh busiest, serves as a reliever for the Calgary International taking the general aviation traffic and is also a base for aerial firefighting aircraft.
Roads and Highways
Calgary's presence along the heavily trafficked Alberta Highway 2 and Trans-Canada Highway make it an important hub for cargo trucks shipping goods across Canada and south into the United States.
Alberta Highway 201 forms a ring road around the city.
Much of Calgary's street network is on a grid where roads are numbered with avenues running east-west and streets running north-south.
Until 1904 the streets were named; after that date, all streets were given numbers radiating outwards from the city centre.
Roads in predominantly residential areas as well as freeways and expressways do not generally conform to the grid and are usually not numbered as a result.
However, it is a developer and city convention in Calgary that non-numbered streets within a new community have the same name prefix as the community itself so that streets can more easily be located within the city.
Rail
Calgary's presence along the Canadian Pacific Railway (CPR) mainline (which includes the CPR Alyth Yard makes the city an important hub of freight rail throughout the province.
Between 1955 and 1978, CPR operated a transcontinental passenger rail service called the Canadian, running between Toronto and Vancouver via CPR's right-of-way through Calgary.
In 1978, VIA Rail assumed responsibility over CPR's Canadian rail service.
In the aftermath of another round of deep budget cuts made to Via Rail on January 15, 1990, VIA permanently discontinued the Super Continental and rerouted the Canadian along the Super Continental's CN route, bypassing Regina and Calgary in favour of Saskatoon and Edmonton.
Since then, there has been no intercity rail service to or from Calgary.
But two new rail-tour lines have opened along the now open CPR right-of-way: Rocky Mountaineer and Royal Canadian Pacific.
The latter still operates rail-tour services to Calgary, while the former has terminated its westbound services at Banff, two hours to the west.
Public Transit
Calgary Transit provides public transportation services throughout the city with buses and light rail.
Calgary's light rail system, known as the C-Train, was one of the first such systems in North America (behind Edmonton LRT).
It consists of four lines (two routes) and 44 stations on of track.
The Calgary LRT is one of the continent's busiest carrying 270,000 passengers per weekday and approximately half of Calgary downtown workers take the transit to work.
The C-Train is also North America's first and only LRT to run on 100% renewable energy.
Pedestrian/Bicycle
As an alternative to the over of shared bikeways on streets, the city has a network of multi-use (bicycle, walking, rollerblading, etc.) paths spanning over .
In the 1960s, Calgary started to develop a series of pedestrian bridges, connecting many downtown buildings.
To connect many of the downtown office buildings, the city also boasts the world's most extensive skyway network (elevated indoor pedestrian bridges), officially called the +15.
The name derives from the fact that the bridges are usually above ground.
Health care
;Medical centres and hospitals
Calgary has four major adult acute care hospitals and one major pediatric acute care site: the Alberta Children's Hospital, the Foothills Medical Centre, the Peter Lougheed Centre, the Rockyview General Hospital and the South Health Campus.
They are all overseen by the Calgary Zone of the Alberta Health Services, formerly the Calgary Health Region.
Calgary is also home to the Tom Baker Cancer Centre (located at the Foothills Medical Centre), the Grace Women's Health Centre, which provides a variety of care, and the Libin Cardiovascular Institute.
In addition, the Sheldon M. Chumir Centre (a large 24-hour assessment clinic), and the Richmond Road Diagnostic and Treatment Centre (RRDTC), as well as hundreds of smaller medical and dental clinics operate in Calgary.
The Faculty of Medicine of the University of Calgary also operates in partnership with Alberta Health Services, by researching cancer, cardiovascular, diabetes, joint injury, arthritis and genetics.
The Alberta children's hospital, built in 2006, replaced the old Children's Hospital.
The four largest Calgary hospitals have a combined total of more than 2,100 beds, and employ over 11,500 people.
Education
Primary and secondary
In the 2011-2012 school year, 100,632 K-12 students enrolled in 221 schools in the English language public school system run by the Calgary Board of Education.
Another 43,000 attend about 95 schools in the separate English language Calgary Catholic School District board.
The much smaller Francophone community has their own French language school boards (public and Catholic), which are both based in Calgary, but serve a larger regional district.
There are also several public charter schools in the city.
Calgary has a number of unique schools, including the country's first high school exclusively designed for Olympic-calibre athletes, the National Sport School.
Calgary is also home to many private schools including Mountain View Academy, Rundle College, Rundle Academy, Clear Water Academy, Calgary French and International School, Chinook Winds Adventist Academy, Webber Academy, Delta West Academy, Masters Academy, Calgary Islamic School, Menno Simons Christian School, West Island College, Edge School, Calgary Christian School, Heritage Christian Academy, Bearspaw Christian School.
Calgary is also home to what was Western Canada's largest public high school, Lord Beaverbrook High School, with 2,241 students enrolled in the 2005-2006 school year.
Currently the student population of Lord Beaverbrook is 1,812 students (September 2012) and several other schools are equally as large; Western Canada High School with 2,035 students (2009) and Sir Winston Churchill High School with 1,983 students (2009).
Post-secondary
The publicly funded University of Calgary (U of C) is Calgary's largest degree-granting facility with an enrolment of 28,464 students in 2011.
Mount Royal University, with 13,000 students, grants degrees in a number of fields.
SAIT Polytechnic, with over 14,000 students, provides polytechnic and apprentice education, granting certificates, diplomas and applied degrees.
Athabasca University provides distance education programs.
Other publicly funded post-secondary institutions based in Calgary include the Alberta College of Art and Design, Ambrose University College (associated with the Christian and Missionary Alliance and the Church of the Nazarene), Bow Valley College, St. Mary's University and the U of C.
The publicly funded Athabasca University, Northern Alberta Institute of Technology (NAIT), and the University of Lethbridge
Several independent private institutions are located in the city.
This includes Reeves College, MaKami College, Robertson College, Columbia College, Alberta Bible College, and CDI College.
Media
Calgary's daily newspapers include the Calgary Herald, Calgary Sun and StarMetro.
Calgary is the sixth largest television market in Canada.
Broadcasts stations serving Calgary include CICT 2 (Global), CFCN 4 (CTV), CKAL 5 (City), CBRT 9 (CBC), CKCS 32 (YesTV), and CJCO 38 (Omni).
Network affiliate programming from the United States originates from Spokane, Washington.
There are a wide range of radio stations, including a station for First Nations and the Asian Canadian community.
Notable people
Sister cities
The City of Calgary maintains trade development programs, cultural and educational partnerships in twinning agreements with six cities:
Calgary is one of nine Canadian cities, out of the total of 98 cities internationally, that is in the New York City Global Partners, Inc. organization, which was formed in 2006 from the former Sister City program of the City of New York, Inc.
Further reading
