In common language, Infinity (symbol: \infty) describes something endless or something larger than any number.
Since the time of the ancient Greeks, and for centuries, the nature of infinity was the subject of many discussions among philosophers (see Infinity (philosophy)).
In the 17th century, with the introduction of the infinitesimal calculus, mathematicians began to work with what some mathematicians (including l'Hôpital and Bernoulli), and was not an object of mathematical studies.
At the end of 19th century AD, Georg Cantor initiated the mathematical study of infinity by studying infinite sets and infinite numbers and showing that they can be of various sizes.
For example, in modern mathematics, a line is commonly viewed as the set of all of its points, and their infinite number (the cardinality of the line) is larger than the number of integers.
This makes infinity a mathematical concept, and infinite mathematical objects can be studied, manipulated and used in the same way as any other mathematical object.
Thus the mathematical concept of infinity refines and extends the old philosophical concept, in particular by introducing infinitely many different sizes of infinite sets.
The existence of infinite sets is one of the axioms of Zermelo-Fraenkel set theory on which most of modern mathematics can be developed.
The mathematical concept of infinity and the manipulation of infinite sets are used everywhere in mathematics, even in areas such as combinatorics that may seem to have nothing to do with them.
For example, Wiles's proof of Fermat's Last Theorem implicitly relies on the existence of very large infinite sets for solving a long standing problem that is stated in terms of elementary arithmetic.
In physics and cosmology, whether the Universe is finite is an open question; see .
History
Ancient cultures had various ideas about the nature of infinity.
The ancient Indians and Greeks did not define infinity in precise formalism as does modern mathematics, and instead approached infinity as a philosophical concept.
Early Greek
The earliest recorded idea of infinity may be that of Anaximander (c. 610 - c. 546 BC) a pre-Socratic Greek philosopher.
He used the word apeiron, which means "unbounded" and perhaps can be translated "infinite".
In accordance with the traditional view of Aristotle, the Hellenistic Greeks had a "horror of the infinite" and generally preferred to distinguish the potential infinity from the actual infinity; for example, instead of saying that there are an infinity of primes, Euclid said that there are more prime numbers than contained in any given collection of prime numbers.
Zeno:
Achilles and the tortoise
Zeno of Elea (c. 495 - c. 430 BC) did not advance any views concerning the infinite.
Nevertheless his paradoxes, especially "Achilles and the Tortoise", were important contributions in that they made clear the inadequacy of popular conceptions.
The paradoxes were described by Bertrand Russell as "immeasurably subtle and profound".
Achilles races a tortoise, giving the latter a head start.
:Step #1: Achilles runs to the tortoise's starting point while the tortoise walks forward.
:Step #2: Achilles advances to where the tortoise was at the end of Step #1 while the tortoise goes yet further.
:Step #3: Achilles advances to where the tortoise was at the end of Step #2 while the tortoise goes yet further.
:Step #4: Achilles advances to where the tortoise was at the end of Step #3 while the tortoise goes yet further.
Etc.
Apparently Achilles never overtakes the tortoise since, however many steps he completes, the tortoise remains ahead of him.
Zeno was not attempting to make a point about infinity.
A member of the Eleatic school which regarded motion as an illusion, he saw it as a mistake to suppose that Achilles could run at all.
Subsequent thinkers, finding this solution unacceptable, struggled for over two millenia to find other weaknesses in the argument.
Finally, in 1821, Augustin-Louis Cauchy provided both a satisfactory definition of a limit and a proof that, for 0 ℵ0), the cardinality of the set of natural numbers.
This modern mathematical conception of the quantitative infinite developed in the late nineteenth century from work by Cantor, Gottlob Frege, Richard Dedekind and others, using the idea of collections, or sets.
Dedekind's approach was essentially to adopt the idea of one-to-one correspondence as a standard for comparing the size of sets, and to reject the view of Galileo (which derived from Euclid) that the whole cannot be the same size as the part (however, see Galileo's paradox where he concludes that positive integers which are squares and all positive integers are the same size).
An infinite set can simply be defined as one having the same size as at least one of its proper parts; this notion of infinity is called Dedekind infinite.
The diagram gives an example: viewing lines as infinite sets of points, the left half of the lower blue line can be mapped in a one-to-one manner (green correspondences) to the higher blue line, and, in turn, to the whole lower blue line (red correspondences); therefore the whole lower blue line and its left half have the same cardinality, i.e. "size".
Cantor defined two kinds of infinite numbers: ordinal numbers and cardinal numbers.
Ordinal numbers may be identified with well-ordered sets, or counting carried on to any stopping point, including points after an infinite number have already been counted.
Generalizing finite and the ordinary infinite sequences which are maps from the positive integers leads to mappings from ordinal numbers, and transfinite sequences.
Cardinal numbers define the size of sets, meaning how many members they contain, and can be standardized by choosing the first ordinal number of a certain size to represent the cardinal number of that size.
The smallest ordinal infinity is that of the positive integers, and any set which has the cardinality of the integers is countably infinite.
If a set is too large to be put in one-to-one correspondence with the positive integers, it is called uncountable.
Cantor's views prevailed and modern mathematics accepts actual infinity.
Certain extended number systems, such as the hyperreal numbers, incorporate the ordinary (finite) numbers and infinite numbers of different sizes.
Cardinality of the continuum
One of Cantor's most important results was that the cardinality of the continuum \mathbf c is greater than that of the natural numbers ; that is, there are more real numbers R than natural numbers N. Namely, Cantor showed that \mathbf = 2^ > (see Cantor's diagonal argument or Cantor's first uncountability proof).
The continuum hypothesis states that there is no cardinal number between the cardinality of the reals and the cardinality of the natural numbers, that is, \mathbf
\aleph_1
\beth_1 (see Beth one).
This hypothesis can neither be proved nor disproved within the widely accepted Zermelo-Fraenkel set theory, even assuming the Axiom of Choice.
Cardinal arithmetic can be used to show not only that the number of points in a real number line is equal to the number of points in any segment of that line, but also that this is equal to the number of points on a plane and, indeed, in any finite-dimensional space.
The first of these results is apparent by considering, for instance, the tangent function, which provides a one-to-one correspondence between the interval and R (see also Hilbert's paradox of the Grand Hotel).
The second result was proved by Cantor in 1878, but only became intuitively apparent in 1890, when Giuseppe Peano introduced the space-filling curves, curved lines that twist and turn enough to fill the whole of any square, or cube, or hypercube, or finite-dimensional space.
These curves can be used to define a one-to-one correspondence between the points on one side of a square and the points in the square.
Geometry and topology
Infinite-dimensional spaces are widely used in geometry and topology, particularly as classifying spaces, such as Eilenberg−MacLane spaces.
Common examples are the infinite-dimensional complex projective space K (Z,2) and the infinite-dimensional real projective space K (Z/2Z,1).
Fractals
The structure of a fractal object is reiterated in its magnifications.
Fractals can be magnified indefinitely without losing their structure and becoming "smooth"; they have infinite perimeters-some with infinite, and others with finite surface areas.
One such fractal curve with an infinite perimeter and finite surface area is the Koch snowflake.
Mathematics without infinity
Leopold Kronecker was skeptical of the notion of infinity and how his fellow mathematicians were using it in the 1870s and 1880s.
This skepticism was developed in the philosophy of mathematics called finitism, an extreme form of mathematical philosophy in the general philosophical and mathematical schools of constructivism and intuitionism.
Physics
In physics, approximations of real numbers are used for continuous measurements and natural numbers are used for discrete measurements (i.e. counting).
It is therefore assumed by physicists that no measurable quantity could have an infinite value, for instance by taking an infinite value in an extended real number system, or by requiring the counting of an infinite number of events.
It is, for example, presumed impossible for any type of body to have infinite mass or infinite energy.
Concepts of infinite things such as an infinite plane wave exist, but there are no experimental means to generate them.
Cosmology
The first published proposal that the universe is infinite came from Thomas Digges in 1576.
Eight years later, in 1584, the Italian philosopher and astronomer Giordano Bruno proposed an unbounded universe in On the Infinite Universe and Worlds: "Innumerable suns exist; innumerable earths revolve around these suns in a manner similar to the way the seven planets revolve around our sun.
Living beings inhabit these worlds."
Cosmologists have long sought to discover whether infinity exists in our physical .
If so, one might eventually return to one's starting point after travelling in a straight line through the universe for long enough.
The curvature of the universe can be measured through multipole moments in the spectrum of the cosmic background radiation.
As to date, analysis of the radiation patterns recorded by the WMAP spacecraft hints that the universe has a flat topology.
This would be consistent with an infinite physical universe.
However, the universe could be finite, even if its curvature is flat.
An easy way to understand this is to consider two-dimensional examples, such as video games where items that leave one edge of the screen reappear on the other.
The topology of such games is toroidal and the geometry is flat.
Many possible bounded, flat possibilities also exist for three-dimensional space.
The concept of infinity also extends to the multiverse hypothesis, which, when explained by astrophysicists such as Michio Kaku, posits that there are an infinite number and variety of universes.
Logic
In logic an infinite regress argument is "a distinctively philosophical kind of argument purporting to show that a thesis is defective because it generates an infinite series when either (form A) no such series exists or (form B) were it to exist, the thesis would lack the role (e.g., of justification) that it is supposed to play."
Computing
The IEEE floating-point standard (IEEE 754) specifies the positive and negative infinity values (and also indefinite values).
These are defined as the result of arithmetic overflow, division by zero, and other exceptional operations.
Some programming languages, such as Java and J, allow the programmer an explicit access to the positive and negative infinity values as language constants.
These can be used as greatest and least elements, as they compare (respectively) greater than or less than all other values.
They have uses as sentinel values in algorithms involving sorting, searching, or windowing.
In languages that do not have greatest and least elements, but do allow overloading of relational operators, it is possible for a programmer to create the greatest and least elements.
In languages that do not provide explicit access to such values from the initial state of the program, but do implement the floating-point data type, the infinity values may still be accessible and usable as the result of certain operations.
In programming, an infinite loop is a loop whose exit condition is never satisfied, thus theoretically executing indefinitely.
Infinite sequences can be represented in the finite memory of a computer as a composite data structure consisting of a few first members of the sequence, and a recursive routine for computing the th element from the preceding ones.
Several techniques can be used for avoiding computing several times the same element of the sequence.
One is lazy evaluation.
Another one, available in Maple, consists of having routines with a remember option.
This option consists of keeping in memory the results of the function that have been computed, and, at each call of the routine, looking if this particular result has been computed, for avoiding to compute it again.
For example, the standard definition of the Fibonacci sequence is
:Fib (n)
if n
1 or n = 2 then 1 else Fib (n - 1) + Fib (n - 2).
With a standard implementation, an exponential number of function calls is needed for computing Fib (n), while, with the remember option, only function calls are needed.
Arts, games, and cognitive sciences
Perspective artwork utilizes the concept of vanishing points, roughly corresponding to mathematical points at infinity, located at an infinite distance from the observer.
This allows artists to create paintings that realistically render space, distances, and forms.
Artist M.C. Escher is specifically known for employing the concept of infinity in his work in this and other ways.
Variations of chess played on an unbounded board are called infinite chess.
Cognitive scientist George Lakoff considers the concept of infinity in mathematics and the sciences as a metaphor.
This perspective is based on the basic metaphor of infinity (BMI), defined as the ever-increasing sequence .
The symbol is often used romantically to represent eternal love.
Several types of jewelry are fashioned into the infinity shape for this purpose.
Notes
Sources
* D.P. Agrawal (2000).
http:/ mandala t_es_agraw_jaina.htm Ancient Jaina Mathematics: an Introduction, Infinity Foundation.
* Bell, J.L.: Continuity and infinitesimals.
Stanford Encyclopedia of philosophy.
Revised 2009.
* Jain, L.C. (1973).
"Set theory in the Jaina school of mathematics", Indian Journal of History of Science.
* H. Jerome Keisler: Elementary Calculus: An Approach Using Infinitesimals.
First edition 1976; 2nd edition 1986.
This book is now out of print.
The publisher has reverted the copyright to the author, who has made available the 2nd edition in .pdf format available for downloading at http:/ ~keisler ~history Cantor.html 'Georg Ferdinand Ludwig Philipp Cantor', MacTutor History of Mathematics archive.
* O'Connor, John J. and Edmund F. Robertson (2000).
http:/ ~history Jaina_mathematics.html 'Jaina mathematics', MacTutor History of Mathematics archive.
* Pearce, Ian. (2002).
http:/ history Pearce Ch5.html 'Jainism', MacTutor History of Mathematics archive.
