The International Organization for Standardization (ISO; ) is an international standard-setting body composed of representatives from various national standards organizations.
Founded on 23 February 1947, the organization promotes worldwide proprietary, industrial and commercial standards.
It is headquartered in Geneva, Switzerland, and works in 164 countries.
Name and abbreviations
The name of the organization in French is , and in Russian, ().
ISO is not an acronym.
The organization adopted ISO as its abbreviated name in reference to the Greek word (, meaning "equal"), as its name in the three official languages would have different acronyms.
During the founding meetings of the new organization, the Greek word explanation was not invoked, so this meaning may have been made public later.
ISO gives this explanation of the name: "Because 'International Organization for Standardization' would have different acronyms in different languages (IOS in English, OIN in French), our founders decided to give it the short form ISO.
ISO is derived from the Greek , meaning equal.
Whatever the country, whatever the language, the short form of our name is always ISO."
Both the name ISO and the ISO logo are registered trademarks, and their use is restricted.
History
The organization today known as ISO began in 1928 as the International Federation of the National Standardizing Associations (ISA).
It was suspended in 1942 during World War II, but after the war ISA was approached by the recently formed United Nations Standards Coordinating Committee (UNSCC) with a proposal to form a new global standards body.
In October 1946, ISA and UNSCC delegates from 25 countries met in London and agreed to join forces to create the new International Organization for Standardization; the new organization officially began operations in February 1947.
Structure
ISO is a voluntary organization whose members are recognized authorities on standards, each one representing one country.
Members meet annually at a General Assembly to discuss ISO's strategic objectives.
The organization is coordinated by a Central Secretariat based in Geneva.
A Council with a rotating membership of 20 member bodies provides guidance and governance, including setting the Central Secretariat's annual budget.
The Technical Management Board is responsible for over 250 technical committees, who develop the ISO standards.
IEC joint committees
ISO has formed two joint committees with the International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC) to develop standards and terminology in the areas of electrical and electronic related technologies.
ISO IEC Joint Technical Committee 1 (JTC 1) was created in 1987 to "develop, maintain, promote and facilitate IT standards", where IT refers to information technology.
ISO IEC Joint Technical Committee 2 (JTC 2) was created in 2009 for the purpose of "standardization in the field of energy efficiency and renewable energy sources".
Membership
ISO has 163 national members.
* Organizations that manage the specific projects or loan experts to participate in the technical work.
* Subscriptions from member bodies.
These subscriptions are in proportion to each country's gross national product and trade figures.
International Standards and other publications
ISO's main products are international standards.
ISO also publishes technical reports, technical specifications, publicly available specifications, technical corrigenda, and guides.
International standards
: These are designated using the format ISO ASTM IS nnnnn-p:yyyy Title, where nnnnn is the number of the standard, p is an optional part number, yyyy is the year published, and Title describes the subject.
IEC for International Electrotechnical Commission is included if the standard results from the work of ISO IEC Joint Technical Committee).
ASTM (American Society for Testing and Materials) is used for standards developed in cooperation with ASTM International.
yyyy and IS are not used for an incomplete or unpublished standard and may under some circumstances be left off the title of a published work.
Technical reports
: These are issued when a technical committee or subcommittee has collected data of a different kind from that normally published as an International Standard,
Standardization process
A standard published by ISO/IEC is the last stage of a long process that commonly starts with the proposal of new work within a committee.
Here are some abbreviations used for marking a standard with its status:
* NP or NWIP - New Proposal / New Work Item Proposal
* FCD - Final Committee Draft
* FDIS - Final Draft International Standard
* IS - International Standard
* DTR - Draft Technical Report
* DTS - Draft Technical Specification
* IWA - International Workshop Agreement (e.g., IWA 1:2005)
* Cor - Technical Corrigendum
* Guide - a guidance to technical committees for the preparation of standards
International Standards are developed by ISO technical committees (TC) and subcommittees (SC) by a process with six steps:
The TC/SC may set up working groups (WG) of experts for the preparation of a working drafts.
Subcommittees may have several working groups, which can have several Sub Groups (SG).
It is possible to omit certain stages, if there is a document with a certain degree of maturity at the start of a standardization project, for example a standard developed by another organization.
ISO/IEC directives allow also the so-called "Fast-track procedure".
In this procedure a document is submitted directly for approval as a draft International Standard (DIS) to the ISO member bodies or as a final draft International Standard (FDIS) if the document was developed by an international standardizing body recognized by the ISO Council.
which has been seen by some as too expensive for small open source projects.
The ISO/IEC JTC1 fast-track procedures ("Fast-track" as used by OOXML and "PAS" as used by OpenDocument) have garnered criticism in relation to the standardization of Office Open XML (ISO IEC JTC1/SC34 WG1, is quoted as saying:
I would recommend my successor that it is perhaps time to pass WG1’s outstanding standards over to OASIS, where they can get approval in less than a year and then do a PAS submission to ISO, which will get a lot more attention and be approved much faster than standards currently can be within WG1.
The disparity of rules for PAS, Fast-Track and ISO committee generated standards is fast making ISO a laughing stock in IT circles.
The days of open standards development are fast disappearing.
Instead we are getting "standardization by corporation".
The computer security entrepreneur and Ubuntu founder Mark Shuttleworth commented on the Standardization of Office Open XML process by saying: "I think it de-values the confidence people have in the standards setting process", and alleged that ISO did not carry out its responsibility.
He also noted that Microsoft had intensely lobbied many countries that traditionally had not participated in ISO and stacked technical committees with Microsoft employees, solution providers and resellers sympathetic to Office Open XML:
When you have a process built on trust and when that trust is abused, ISO should halt the process...
ISO is an engineering old boys club and these things are boring so you have to have a lot of passion … then suddenly you have an investment of a lot of money and lobbying and you get artificial results.
The process is not set up to deal with intensive corporate lobbying and so you end up with something being a standard that is not clear.
* for sustainability information and linking up with reporting on their 17#GlobalGoals indicators
* , a set of technical standards maintained by the Euro-Asian Council for Standardization, Metrology, and Certification
* , the Interface Marketing Supplier Integration Institute
** "Terminology and other language and content resources", a fundamental ISO standardization committee
Further reading
* http:/ iandeseminar/index2006.html MIT Innovations and Entrepreneurship Seminar Series.
