Triceratops is a genus of herbivorous ceratopsid dinosaur that first appeared during the late Maastrichtian stage of the late Cretaceous period, about 68 million years ago (mya) in what is now North America.
It is one of the last known non-avian dinosaur genera, and became extinct in the Cretaceous-Paleogene extinction event 66 million years ago.
The name Triceratops, which literally means "three-horned face", is derived from the Ancient Greek words τρί- (tri-) meaning "three", (ōps) meaning "face".
Triceratops has been documented by numerous remains collected since the genus was first described in 1889 by Othniel Charles Marsh.
Specimens representing life stages from hatchling to adult have been found.
As the archetypal ceratopsid, Triceratops is one of the most popular dinosaurs, and has been featured in film, postal stamps, and many other types of media.
Bearing a large bony frill and three horns on the skull, and its large four-legged body possessing similarities with the modern rhinoceros, Triceratops is one of the most recognizable of all dinosaurs and the best known ceratopsid.
It was also one of the largest, up to nine metres long and twelve tonnes in weight.
It shared the landscape with and was probably preyed upon by Tyrannosaurus, though it is less certain that the two did battle in the manner often depicted in museum displays and popular images.
The functions of the frills and three distinctive facial horns on its head have long inspired debate.
Traditionally, these have been viewed as defensive weapons against predators.
More recent interpretations find it probable that these features were primarily used in species identification, courtship and dominance display, much like the antlers and horns of modern species.
Triceratops was traditionally placed within the "short-frilled" ceratopsids but modern cladistic studies show it to be a member of the Chasmosaurinae which usually have long frills.
Two species, T. horridus and T. prorsus, are considered valid today, from the seventeen species that have ever been named.
Research published in 2010 concluded that the contemporaneous Torosaurus, a ceratopsid long regarded as a separate genus, represents Triceratops in its mature form.
This view was immediately disputed with examination of more fossil evidence needed to settle the debate.
Description
Size
Individual Triceratops are estimated to have reached about 7.9 to 9.0 m (25.9-29.5 ft) in length, in height, and 6.1-12.0 tonnes (13,000-26,000 lb) in weight.
The most distinctive feature is their large skull, among the largest of all land animals.
The largest known skull (specimen MWC 7584, formerly BYU 12183) is estimated to have been in length when complete, and could reach almost a third of the length of the entire animal.
A specimen of T. horridus named Kelsey measured long with a skull, stood about tall, and was estimated by the Black Hills institute to weight nearly .
A Triceratops long has been estimated by Gregory S. Paul to have massed .
The jugal bones pointed to below at the rear sides of the skull and were capped by separate epijugals.
With Triceratops these were not particularly large and sometimes touched the quadratojugals.
The bones of the skull roof were fused.
By a folding of the frontal bones, a "double" skull roof was created.
unless the genus Torosaurus represents mature Triceratops individuals.
Under the frill, at the rear of the skull, a huge occipital condyle, up to 106 millimetres in diameter, connected the head to the neck.
Postcranial skeleton
Chasmosaurines showed little variation in their postcranial skeleton.
The vertebral column consisted of ten neck, twelve back, ten sacral and about forty-five tail vertebrae.
The front neck vertebrae were fused into a syncervical.
Traditionally, this was assumed to have incorporated the first three vertebrae which would imply that the frontmost atlas was very large and sported a neural spine.
Later interpretations revived an old hypothesis by John Bell Hatcher that at the very front a vestige of the real atlas can be observed, the syncervical then consisting of four vertebrae.
The vertebral count mentioned, is adjusted to this view.
In Triceratops the neural spines of the neck are constant in height, instead of gradually sloping upwards.
Another peculiarity is that the neck ribs only begin to lengthen with the ninth cervical vertebra.
This stance can be seen in paintings by Charles Knight and Rudolph Zallinger.
Ichnological evidence in the form of trackways from horned dinosaurs and recent reconstructions of skeletons (both physical and digital) seem to show that Triceratops and other ceratopsids maintained an upright stance during normal locomotion, with the elbows flexed to behind and slightly bowed out, in an intermediate state between fully upright and fully sprawling, comparable to the modern rhinoceros.
The hands and forearms of Triceratops retained a fairly primitive structure compared to other quadrupedal dinosaurs such as thyreophorans and many sauropods.
In those two groups, the forelimbs of quadrupedal species were usually rotated so that the hands faced forward with palms backward ("pronated") as the animals walked.
Triceratops, like other ceratopsians and the related quadrupedal ornithopods, together forming the Cerapoda, walked with most of their fingers pointing out and away from the body, the original condition for dinosaurs, also retained by bipedal forms like the theropods.
In Triceratops, the weight of the body was carried by only the first three fingers of the hand, while digits 4 and 5 were vestigial and lacked claws or hooves.
Triceratops had a large pelvis with a long ilium.
The ischium was curved downwards.
The foot was short with four functional toes.
The phalangeal formula of the foot is 2-3-4-5-0.
This specimen was sent to American paleontologist Othniel Charles Marsh, who believed that the formation from which it came dated from the Pliocene, and that the bones belonged to a particularly large and unusual bison, which he named Bison alticornis.
He realized that there were horned dinosaurs by the next year, which saw his publication of the genus Ceratops from fragmentary remains, but he still believed B. alticornis to be a Pliocene mammal.
It took a third and much more complete skull to change his mind.
The specimen, collected in 1888 by John Bell Hatcher from the Lance Formation of Wyoming, was initially described as another species of Ceratops.
Cowboy Edmund B. Wilson had been startled by the sight of a monstrous skull poking out of the side of a ravine.
He tried to recover it by throwing a lasso around one of the horns.
When it broke off, the skull tumbling to the bottom of the cleft, Wilson brought the horn to his boss, the rancher and avid fossil collector Charles Arthur Guernsey, who happened to show it to Hatcher.
Marsh subsequently ordered Hatcher to locate and salvage the skull.
Marsh, 1889 (originally Ceratops) (type species)
Synonyms and doubtful species
Some of the following species are synonyms, as indicated in parentheses ("
T. horridus" or "
T. prorsus").
All the others are considered nomina dubia ("dubious names") because they are based on remains too poor or incomplete to be distinguished from pre-existing Triceratops species.
* T. alticornis (Marsh 1887)
Hatcher, Marsh, and Lull, 1907 originally Bison alticornis, Marsh 1887, and Ceratops alticornis, Marsh 1888
* T. flabellatus Marsh, 1889 (
Sterrholophus Marsh, 1891) (
T. horridus)
* T. hatcheri (Hatcher & Lull 1905) Lull, 1933 (contentious; see Nedoceratops below)
* T. mortuarius (Cope, 1874)
Kuhn, 1936 (nomen dubium; originally Polyonax mortuarius)
* T. sylvestris (Cope, 1872)
Olshevsky, 2000 (nomen dubium; originally Agathaumas sylvestris)
Classification
Triceratops is the best known genus of the Ceratopsidae, a family of large, mostly North American horned dinosaurs.
The exact location of Triceratops among the ceratopsids has been debated over the years.
Confusion stemmed mainly from the combination of a short, solid frill (similar to that of Centrosaurinae), with long brow horns (more akin to Chasmosaurinae).
In the first overview of horned dinosaurs, R. S. Lull hypothesized the existence of two lineages, one of Monoclonius and Centrosaurus leading to Triceratops, the other with Ceratops and Torosaurus, making Triceratops a centrosaurine as the group is understood today.
Later revisions supported this view, Lawrence Lambe in 1915 formally describing the first, short-frilled group as the Centrosaurinae (including Triceratops), and the second, long-frilled group as the Chasmosaurinae.
In 1949, Charles M. Sternberg was the first to question this position, proposing instead that Triceratops was more closely related to Arrhinoceratops and Chasmosaurus based on skull and horn features, making Triceratops a chasmosaurine ("ceratopsine" in his usage) genus.
He was largely ignored, with John Ostrom, and later David Norman placing Triceratops within the Centrosaurinae.
Subsequent discoveries and analyses however, proved the correctness of Sternberg's view on the position of Triceratops, with Thomas Lehman defining both subfamilies in 1990 and diagnosing Triceratops as "ceratopsine" on the basis of several morphological features.
Apart from the one feature of a shortened frill, Triceratops shares no derived traits with centrosaurines.
Further research by Peter Dodson, including a 1990 cladistic analysis and a 1993 study using RFTRA (resistant-fit theta-rho analysis), a morphometric technique which systematically measures similarities in skull shape, reinforces Triceratops placement in the chasmosaurines.
The cladogram below follows Longrich (2014), who named a new species of Pentaceratops, and included nearly all species of chasmosaurine.
For many years after its discovery, the deeper evolutionary origins of Triceratops and its close relatives remained largely obscure.
In 1922, the newly discovered Protoceratops was seen as its ancestor by Henry Fairfield Osborn, As Triceratops is increasingly shown to be a member of the long-frilled Chasmosaurinae, a likely ancestor may have resembled Chasmosaurus, which thrived some five million years earlier.
In phylogenetic taxonomy, the genus Triceratops has been used as a reference point in the definition of Dinosauria; dinosaurs have been designated as all descendants of the most recent common ancestor of Triceratops and Neornithes (i.e. modern birds).
Furthermore, the bird-hipped dinosaurs, Ornithischia, have been defined as those dinosaurs more closely related to Triceratops than to modern birds.
Paleobiology
Although Triceratops are commonly portrayed as herding animals, there is currently little evidence that they lived in herds.
While several other genera of horned dinosaurs are known from bonebeds preserving bones from two to hundreds or thousands of individuals, to date there is only one documented bonebed dominated by Triceratops bones: a site in southeastern Montana with the remains of three juveniles.
It may be significant that only juveniles were present.
In 2012, a group of three Triceratops in relatively complete condition, each of varying sizes from a full-grown adult to a small juvenile, were found in Wyoming, near Newcastle.
The remains are currently under excavation by paleontologist Peter Larson and a team from the Black Hills Institute.
It is believed that the animals were traveling as a family unit, but it remains unknown if the group consists of a mated pair and their offspring, or two females and a juvenile they were caring for.
The remains also show signs of predation or scavenging from Tyrannosaurus, particularly on the largest specimen, with the bones of the front limbs showing breakage and puncture wounds from Tyrannosaurus teeth.
For many years, Triceratops finds were known only from solitary individuals.
Similarly, Barnum Brown claimed to have seen over 500 skulls in the field.
Unlike most animals, skull fossils are far more common than postcranial bones for Triceratops, suggesting that the skull had an unusually high preservation potential.
Dentition and diet
Triceratops were herbivorous, and because of their low head, their primary food was probably low growth, although they may have been able to knock down taller plants with their horns, beak, and bulk.
The jaws were tipped with a deep, narrow beak, believed to have been better at grasping and plucking than biting.
and others suggesting ferns, which then grew in prairies.
Functions of the horns and frill
There has been much speculation over the functions of Triceratops head adornments.
The two main theories have revolved around use in combat and in courtship display, with the latter now thought to be the most likely primary function.
This has been put forward by other authors over the years, but later studies do not find evidence of large muscle attachments on the frill bones.
Triceratops were long thought to have used their horns and frills in combat with predators such as Tyrannosaurus, the idea being discussed first by Charles H. Sternberg in 1917 and 70 years later by Robert Bakker.
There is evidence that Tyrannosaurus did have aggressive head-on encounters with Triceratops, based on partially healed tyrannosaur tooth marks on a Triceratops brow horn and squamosal; the bitten horn is also broken, with new bone growth after the break.
Which animal was the aggressor is not known.
Since the Triceratops wounds healed, it is most likely that the Triceratops survived the encounter.
Tyrannosaurus is also known to have fed on Triceratops, as shown by a heavily tooth-scored Triceratops ilium and sacrum.
In addition to combat with predators using horns, Triceratops are popularly shown engaging each other in combat with horns locked.
While studies show that such activity would be feasible, if unlike that of present-day horned animals, there is disagreement about whether they did so.
Although pitting, holes, lesions, and other damage on Triceratops skulls (and the skulls of other ceratopsids) are often attributed to horn damage in combat, a 2006 study finds no evidence for horn thrust injuries causing these forms of damage (for example, there is no evidence of infection or healing).
Instead, non-pathological bone resorption, or unknown bone diseases, are suggested as causes.
A newer study compared incidence rates of skull lesions and periosteal reaction in Triceratops and Centrosaurus and showed that these were consistent with Triceratops using its horns in combat and the frill being adapted as a protective structure, while lower pathology rates in Centrosaurus may indicate visual rather than physical use of cranial ornamentation, or a form of combat focused on the body rather than the head.
The frequency of injury was found to be 14% in Triceratops.
The researchers also concluded that the damage found on the specimens in the study was often too localized to be caused by bone disease.
Histological examination reveals that the frill of Triceratops is composed of fibrolamellar bone which contains fibroblasts that play a critical role in wound healing, and are capable of rapidly depositing bone during remodeling.
One skull was found with a hole in the jugal bone, apparently a puncture wound sustained while the animal was alive, as indicated by signs of healing.
The hole has a diameter close to that of the distal end of a Triceratops horn.
This, and other apparent healed wounds in the skulls of ceratopsians, has been cited as evidence of non-fatal intraspecific competition in these dinosaurs.
The large frill also may have helped to increase body area to regulate body temperature.
A similar theory has been proposed regarding the plates of Stegosaurus, although this use alone would not account for the bizarre and extravagant variation seen in different members of the Ceratopsidae, which would rather support the sexual display theory.
Evidence that visual display was important, either in courtship or other social behavior, can be seen in the horned dinosaurs differing markedly in their adornments, making each species highly distinctive.
Also, modern living creatures with such displays of horns and adornments use them similarly.
A 2006 study of the smallest Triceratops skull, ascertained to be a juvenile, shows the frill and horns developed at a very early age, predating sexual development and thus probably important for visual communication and species recognition in general.
The use of the exaggerated structures to enable dinosaurs to recognize their own species has been questioned, as no such function exists for such structures in modern species.
Growth and ontogeny
In 2006, the first extensive ontogenetic study of Triceratops was published in the journal Proceedings of the Royal Society.
The study, by John R. Horner and Mark Goodwin, found that individuals of Triceratops could be divided into four general ontogenetic groups, babies, juveniles, subadults, and adults.
With a total number of 28 skulls studied, the youngest was only long.
10 of the 28 skulls could be placed in order in a growth series with one representing each age.
Each of the four growth stages were found to have identifying features.
Multiple ontogenetic trends were discovered, including the size reduction of the epoccipitals, development and reorientation of postorbital horns, and hollowing out of the horns.
Torosaurus as growth stage of Triceratops
Torosaurus is a ceratopsid genus first identified from a pair of skulls in 1891, two years after the identification of Triceratops.
The genus Torosaurus resembles Triceratops in geological age, distribution, anatomy and size and it has been recognised as a close relative.
Its distinguishing features are an elongated skull and the presence of two fenestrae, or holes, in the frill.
Paleontologists investigating dinosaur ontogeny (growth and development of individuals over the life span) in the Hell Creek Formation, Montana, US, have recently presented evidence that the two represent a single genus.
John Scannella, in a paper presented in Bristol, UK at the conference of the Society of Vertebrate Paleontology (25 September 2009) reclassified Torosaurus as especially mature Triceratops individuals, perhaps representing a single sex.
Jack Horner, Scannella's mentor at Bozeman Campus, Montana State University, noted that ceratopsian skulls consist of metaplastic bone.
A characteristic of metaplastic bone is that it lengthens and shortens over time, extending and resorbing to form new shapes.
Significant variety is seen even in those skulls already identified as Triceratops, Horner said, "where the horn orientation is backwards in juveniles and forward in adults".
Approximately 50% of all subadult Triceratops skulls have two thin areas in the frill that correspond with the placement of "holes" in Torosaurus skulls, suggesting that holes developed to offset the weight that would otherwise have been added as maturing Triceratops individuals grew longer frills.
A paper describing these findings in detail was published in July 2010 by Scannella and Horner.
It formally argues that Torosaurus and the similar contemporary Nedoceratops are synonymous with Triceratops.
Other genera as growth stages of Triceratops
Opinion has varied on the validity of a separate genus for Nedoceratops.
John Scannella and Jack Horner regarded it as an intermediate growth stage between Triceratops and Torosaurus.
Andrew Farke, in his 2011 redescription of the only known skull, concluded that it was an aged individual of its own valid taxon, Nedoceratops hatcheri.
Nicholas Longrich and Daniel Fields also did not consider it a transition between Torosaurus and Triceratops, suggesting that the frill holes were pathological.
Paleoecology
Triceratops lived during the Late Cretaceous of North America, its fossils coming from the Evanston Formation, Scollard Formation, Laramie Formation, Lance Formation, Denver Formation, and Hell Creek Formation.
Many animals and plants have been found in these formations, but mostly from the Lance Formation and Hell Creek Formation.
avialans, caenagnathids, and dromaeosaurids.
Acheroraptor and Dakotaraptor are dromaeosaurids from the Hell Creek Formation.
Indeterminate dromaeosaurs are known from other fossil formations.
Common teeth previously referred to Dromaeosaurus and Saurornitholestes later were considered to be Acheroraptor.
The tyrannosaurids from the formation are Nanotyrannus and Tyrannosaurus, although the former might be a junior synonym of the latter.
Among ornithomimids are the genera Struthiomimus as well as Ornithomimus; Troodontids are only represented by Pectinodon and Paronychodon in the Hell Creek Formation; with a possible species of Troodon from the Lance Formation.
One species of coelurosaur is known from Hell Creek and similar formations by a single species, Richardoestesia.
Only three oviraptorosaurs are from the Hell Creek Formation, Anzu, Leptorhynchos The avialans known from the formation are Avisaurus, and several other species of hesperornithoforms, as well as several species of true birds including Cimolopteryx.
Ornithopods are common in the Hell Creek Formation, and are known from several species of the ornithopod Thescelosaurus and the hadrosaurids Edmontosaurus, and a possible species of Parasaurolophus.
Several pachycephalosaurians have been found in the Hell Creek Formation and in similar formations.
Among them are the derived pachycephalosaurids Stygimoloch, Pachycephalosaurus, the cimolomyids Paressonodon, Meniscoessus, Essonodon, Cimolomys, Cimolodon, and Cimexomys; and the neoplagiaulacids Mesodma, and Neoplagiaulax.
The alphadontids Alphadon, Protalphodon, and Turgidodon, pediomyids Pediomys, the stagodontid Didelphodon, and the official state dinosaur of Wyoming.
In 1942, Charles R. Knight painted a mural incorporating a confrontation between the two dinosaurs in the Field Museum of Natural History for the National Geographic Society, establishing them as enemies in the popular imagination.
