American Cookery, by Amelia Simmons, is the first known cookbook written by an American, published in Hartford, Connecticut in 1796.
Until then, the cookbooks printed and used in the Thirteen Colonies were British.
Its full title is: American Cookery, or the art of dressing viands, fish, poultry, and vegetables, and the best modes of making pastes, puffs, pies, tarts, puddings, custards, and preserves, and all kinds of cakes, from the imperial plum to plain cake: Adapted to this country, and all grades of life.
Simmons' American Cookery used terms known to Americans, and ingredients that were readily available to American cooks.
It is considered by the Library of Congress to be one of the “Books That Shaped America.”
QTEMPLATE box |quote
The importance of this work cannot be overestimated.
Its initial publication was, in its own way, a second Declaration of American Independence ...|source
-Feeding America: The Historic American Cookbook Project
About the author
The only biographical information known about the author is from the cover and title pages of her cookbook that list her as "Amelia Simmons, An American Orphan"; all else is by inference.
American Cookery is her only known published work.
The preface reads:
QTEMPLATE |The candor of the American Ladies is solicitously intreated by the Authoress, as she is circumscribed in her knowledge, this being original work in this country.
This indicates that she probably lacked formal education.
Based on other quotes from her preface, she was most likely a domestic laborer.
She wrote of "those females who have parents, or brothers, or riches," and how female orphans may be "reduced to the necessity of going into families in the line of domestics."
Karen Hess also referred to Miss Simmons as a "good plain cook", noting the generous use and variety of herbs and the use of wine in her recipes.
Simmons also showed the use of English "extraordinarily fine roasting techniques" in her recipes.
American Cookery has also been reprinted in several editions and formats in the 20th Century, including Oxford University Press in 1958 and Dover reprints beginning in 1984.
First Edition: Hartford, CT, 1796
The first edition was published in 1796 by Hudson & Goodwin of Hartford, CT.
The words "For the Author" on the title page likely indicate that Simmons paid the printing costs herself.
The book was issued without hard covers: the title page also served as the front cover; the last page (page 48) was blank.
Second Edition: Albany, NY, 1796
The second edition was also published in 1796, but by Charles R. and George Webster of Albany, NY.
The second edition (also issued without hard covers) consists of 64 pages.
Other editions
In 1808, Lucy Emerson plagiarized Simmons's book (from the Troy, NY 1808 edition) by renaming part of the title and copying verbatim most of the rest of it.
She changed the words "American Cookery" to "The New-England Cookery", but the title is otherwise almost the same.
Published in Montpelier, VT in 1808.
In 1957, Mary Tolford Wilson wrote "The First American Cookbook," an essay that served as the introduction to the facsimile of the first edition of American Cookery .
This edition was originally published by Oxford University Press in 1958, and then reissued by Dover Publications in 1984.
In 1982, Gail Weesner edited and annotated a typographically reset edition with an introduction and an extensive number of individual annotations for recipes in which usage or content needed clarification.
The type is easier to read, since the old-fashioned long cursive-like form of the letter "s" (called a long s) that looks like an "ƒ" has been rendered as a modern typographical short "s".
Published by Rowan Tree Press (1982).
In 1996, culinary historian Karen Hess encouraged the publishing of the facsimile edition of the American Cookerys second edition (Albany, 1796) by Applewood Books, and wrote the introduction and historical notes for it.
This was the edition of American Cookery, published in 1996.
Jan Longone continues by saying "Perhaps the most far-reaching innovation was the introduction of pearlash, a well-known staple in the colonial American household, as a chemical leavening in doughs.
This practice eventually led to the compounding of modern baking powders."
She ends with: "Thus, twenty years after the political upheaval of the American Revolution of 1776, a second revolution - a culinary revolution - occurred with the publication of a cookbook by an American for Americans."
Notes
Works cited
*Historic American Cookbook Project of Michigan State University: Feeding America.
Simmons, Amelia Retrieved from http:/ projects html author_simmons.html on 2007-05-29.
*Simmons, Amelia.
American Cookery.
Oxford University Press, 1958.
*Simmons, Amelia.
American Cookery 2nd ed.
Applewood Books, 1996.
