Roy Rogers (born Leonard Franklin Slye, November 5, 1911 - July 6, 1998) was an American singer and actor.
He was one of the most popular Western stars of his era.
Known as the "King of the Cowboys", he appeared in over 100 films and numerous radio and television episodes of The Roy Rogers Show.
In many of his films and television episodes, he appeared with his wife, Dale Evans; his golden palomino, Trigger; and his German shepherd, Bullet.
His show was broadcast on radio for nine years and then on television from 1951 through 1957.
His productions usually featured a sidekick, often Pat Brady, Andy Devine, George "Gabby" Hayes, or Smiley Burnette.
In his later years, Rogers lent his name to the franchise chain of Roy Rogers Restaurants.
Life and career
Early life
Roy was born Leonard Slye, the son of Mattie (née Womack) and Andrew "Andy" Slye in Cincinnati, Ohio.
The family lived in a tenement on 2nd Street, where Riverfront Stadium would later be constructed (Rogers later joked that he was born at second base).
In the spring of 1931, after the construction company went bankrupt, Len traveled to Tulare, California, where he found work picking peaches for Del Monte.
By September 1931, Slye hired the Canadian-born Bob Nolan, who answered the group's classified ad in the Los Angeles Herald-Examiner that read, "Yodeler for old-time act, to travel.
Tenor preferred."
Nolan stayed with the group only a short time, but
Len and he stayed in touch.
Nolan was replaced by Tim Spencer.
In the spring of 1932, Slye, Spencer, and another singer, Slumber Nichols, left the Rocky Mountaineers to form a trio, which soon failed.
Throughout that year, Slye and Spencer moved through a series of short-lived groups, including the International Cowboys and the O-Bar-O Cowboys.
When Spencer left the O-Bar-O Cowboys to take a break from music, Slye joined Jack LeFevre and His Texas Outlaws, who were a popular act on a local Los Angeles radio station.
In early 1933, Slye, Nolan, and Spencer formed the Pioneers Trio, with Slye on guitar, Nolan on string bass, and Spencer as lead vocalist.
The three rehearsed for weeks refining their vocal harmonies.
During this time, Slye continued to work with his radio singing group, while Spencer and Nolan began writing songs for the trio.
Film career
From his first film appearance in 1935, Slye worked steadily in Western films, including a large supporting role as a singing cowboy while still billed as Leonard Slye in a Gene Autry movie.
In 1938, Autry demanded more money for his work, and there was a competition for a new singing cowboy.
Many singers sought the job, including Willie Phelps of the Phelps brothers, who appeared in early Western movies.
Slye ended up winning the contest and was given the stage name Roy Rogers by Republic Pictures, suggesting the western-sounding name Roy and combining it with the surname of the popular western comic entertainer Will Rogers.
He was assigned the leading role in Under Western Stars.
Rogers became a matinee idol, a competitor with Autry as the nation's favorite singing cowboy.
In addition to his own movies, Rogers played a supporting role in the John Wayne classic Dark Command (1940), which also featured one of Rogers' future sidekicks, George "Gabby" Hayes.
Rogers became a major box-office attraction.
Unlike other stars, the vast majority of his leading roles allowed him to play a character with his own name, in the manner of Gene Autry.
In the Motion Picture Herald Top Ten Money-Making Western Stars poll, Rogers was listed for 16 consecutive years, from 1939 to 1954, holding first place from 1943 to 1954 until the poll ceased.
He appeared in the similar BoxOffice poll from 1938 to 1955, holding first place from 1943 to 1952.
In the final three years of that poll, he was second only to Randolph Scott.
These two polls are only an indication of the popularity of series stars, but Rogers also appeared in the Top Ten Money Making Stars Poll of all films in 1945 and 1946.
Rogers was an idol for many children through his films and television shows.
Most of his postwar films were in Trucolor during an era when almost all other B westerns were black and white.
Some of his movies would segue into animal adventures, in which Rogers's horse, Trigger, would go off on his own for a while with the camera following him.
With money from Rogers's films and from his public appearances going to Republic Pictures, Rogers brought a clause into a 1940 contract with the studio where he would have the right to his likeness, voice, and name for merchandising.
There were Roy Rogers action figures, cowboy adventure novels, and playsets, as well as a comic strip, a long-lived Dell Comics comic book series (Roy Rogers Comics) written by Gaylord Du Bois, and a variety of marketing successes.
Rogers was second only to Walt Disney in the number of items featuring his name.
The Sons of the Pioneers continued their popularity and have not stopped performing from the time Rogers started the group, replacing members as they retired or died (all original members are dead).
Although Rogers was no longer an active member, they often appeared as his backup group in films, radio, and television, and he would occasionally appear with them in performances up until his death.
Rogers met Dale Evans in 1944 when they were cast in a film together.
Rogers and Evans were well known as advocates for adoption and as founders and operators of children's charities.
They adopted several children.
Both were outspoken Christians after their marriage.
Beginning in 1949, they were part of the Hollywood Christian Group, founded by their friend Louis Evans, Jr., the organizing pastor of Bel Air Church.
The group met in Henrietta Mears's home and later in the home of Evans and Colleen Townsend, after their marriage.
Billy Graham and Jane Russell were also part of this group.
In 1956, the Hollywood Christian Group became Bel Air Church.
In Apple Valley, California, where they made their home, streets, highways, and civic buildings have been named after them in recognition of their efforts on behalf of homeless and handicapped children.
Rogers was also an active Freemason and a Shriner and was noted for his support of their charities.
Rogers and Evans's famous theme song, "Happy Trails", was written by Evans; they sang it as a duet to sign off their television show.
In the fall of 1962, the couple co-hosted a comedy-Western-variety program, The Roy Rogers and Dale Evans Show, aired on ABC.
It was cancelled after three months, losing in the ratings to The Jackie Gleason Show on CBS.
He also made numerous cameo or guest appearances on other popular television shows, starring as himself or other cowboy-type characters, such as in an episode of Wonder Woman called "The Bushwackers".
Rogers owned a Hollywood production company, which produced his own series.
It also filmed other undertakings, including the 1955-1956 CBS Western series Brave Eagle, starring Keith Larsen as a young, peaceful Cheyenne chief, Kim Winona as Morning Star, his romantic interest, and the Hopi Indian Anthony Numkena as Keena, Brave Eagle's foster son.
In 1968, Rogers licensed his name to the Marriott corporation, which converted its Hot Shoppes restaurants into Roy Rogers Restaurants, with which Rogers otherwise had no involvement.
Rogers owned a thoroughbred racehorse named Triggairo, that won 13 career races, including the 1975 El Encino Stakes at Santa Anita Park.
Rogers returned to Lubbock in 1970 to headline the Texas Tech University Intercollegiate Rodeo with his wife and co-star Dale Evans.
In 1975, his last motion picture, Macintosh and T.J. was filmed at the 6666 Ranch in King County, 90 miles east of Lubbock and near the O-
Bar-O Ranch in Kent County.
Rogers then went on tour with the O-Bar-O Cowboys and in June 1933 met Grace Arline Wilkins at a Roswell, New Mexico, radio station.
They were married in Roswell on June 11, 1936, after having corresponded since their first meeting.
In 1955, Rogers and Evans purchased a 168-acre (68 ha) ranch near Chatsworth, California, complete with a hilltop ranch house, expanding it to 300 acres (121 ha).
After their adopted daughter Debbie was killed in a church bus accident in 1964, they moved to the 67-acre (27 ha) Double R Bar Ranch in Apple Valley, California, living in the nearby town.
Rogers was a Freemason and a member of Hollywood (California) Lodge No. 355, the Scottish Rite Valley of Los Angeles, and Al Malaikah Shrine Temple.
He was also a pilot and the owner of a Cessna Bobcat.
Death
Rogers died of congestive heart failure on July 6, 1998 in Apple Valley, California.
Rogers was buried at Sunset Hills Memorial Park in Apple Valley, as was his wife Dale Evans three years later.
Honors and awards
On February 8, 1960, Roy Rogers was honored with three stars on the Hollywood Walk of Fame: for Motion Pictures at 1752 Vine Street, for Television at 1620 Vine Street, and for Radio at 1733 Vine Street.
In 1983 he was awarded the Golden Boot Award,
and in 1996 he received the Golden Boot Founder's Award.
Rogers received recognition from the State of Arkansas, appointed by the governor of that state with an Arkansas Traveler certificate.
Rogers was also twice elected to the Country Music Hall of Fame, first as a member of the Sons of the Pioneers in 1980, and again as a soloist in 1988.
As of July 2013, he was the only person elected to the Country Music Hall of Fame twice.
In 2001, a Golden Palm Star on the Palm Springs, California, Walk of Stars was dedicated to him and Dale Evans.
Rogers' cultural influence is reflected in numerous songs, including "If I Had a Boat" by Lyle Lovett, "Roy Rogers" by Elton John on his 1973 album Goodbye Yellow Brick Road, and "Should've Been a Cowboy" by Toby Keith.
Rogers himself makes an appearance in the music video for the song "Heroes and Friends" by Randy Travis.
Rogers is referenced in numerous films, including Die Hard (1988) in which the Bruce Willis character John McClane used the pseudonym "Roy" and remarks, "I was always kinda partial to Roy Rogers actually."
In the television series American Dad!, the character Roger uses "Roy Rogers" as a pseudonym in the episode "Roy Rogers McFreely".
In the movie "City Slickers", the Jack Palance character Curly, sings the song "Tumbling Tumbleweeds" while the Billy Crystal character Mitch is playing the harmonica.
Filmography
Slightly Static (1935) as member of Sons of the Pioneers
The Old Homestead (1935) as Len, member of Sons of the Pioneers
* Gallant Defender (1935) as guitar-playing Nester
* Song of the Saddle (1936) as guitarist with Sons of the Pioneers
* Rhythm on the Range (1936) as Leonard with Sons of the Pioneers
The Big Show (1936) as guitarist with Sons of the Pioneers
The Old Wyoming Trail (1937) as guitar player, singer, cowhand Len
* Billy the Kid Returns (1938) as Roy Rogers and Billy the Kid
* A Feud There Was (1938) as Elmer Fudd, peacemaker (Egghead)
* Frontier Pony Express (1939) as Roy Rogers, Pony Express rider
The Ranger and the Lady (1940) as Texas Ranger Captain Roy Colt
* The Border Legion (1940) as Dr. Stephen Kellogg, aka Steve Kells
* Bad Man of Deadwood (1941) as Brett Starr aka Bill Brady
* Jesse James at Bay (1941) as Jesse James and Clint Burns
* Sunset on the Desert (1942) as Roy Rogers and Bill Sloan
* Heldorado (1946) as Nevada State Ranger Roy Rogers
* Melody Time (1948) as himself; cartoon voice only
* Twilight in the Sierras (1950) as State Parole Officer Roy Rogers
* Pals of the Golden West (1951) as Border Patrolman Roy Rogers
* Alias Jesse James (1959) as himself (uncredited)
Box office ranking
For a number of years exhibitors voted Rogers among the most popular stars in the country:
*1942 - 2nd most popular Western star (following Gene Autry)
*1944 - 24th most popular star in the U.S.; most popular Western star
*1945 - most popular Western star; 10th most popular star
*1946 - 10th most popular star in the US; most popular Western star
*1947 - 12th most popular star in the US; most popular Western star
*1948 - 17th most popular star in the US; most popular Western star
*1949 - 18th most popular star in the US; most popular Western star
*1952 - most popular Western star (for the 10th year in a row)
Discography
Charted albums
Charted singles
* A"Hoppy, Gene and Me" also peaked at number 65 on the Billboard Hot 100 and number 38 on the RPM Adult Contemporary Tracks chart in Canada.
Music videos
Popular songs recorded by Rogers
