The jaguar (Panthera onca) is a large felid species and the only extant member of the genus Panthera native to the Americas.
The jaguar's present range extends from Southwestern United States and Mexico in North America, across much of Central America, and south to Paraguay and northern Argentina in South America.
Though there are single cats now living within the Western United States, the species has largely been extirpated from the United States since the early 20th century.
It is listed as Near Threatened on the IUCN Red List; and its numbers are declining.
Threats include loss and fragmentation of habitat.
Overall, the jaguar is the largest native cat species of the New World and the third largest in the world.
This spotted cat closely resembles the leopard, but is usually larger and sturdier.
It ranges across a variety of forested and open terrains, but its preferred habitat is tropical and subtropical moist broadleaf forest, swamps and wooded regions.
The jaguar enjoys swimming and is largely a solitary, opportunistic, stalk-and-ambush predator at the top of the food chain.
As a keystone species it plays an important role in stabilizing ecosystems and regulating prey populations.
While international trade in jaguars or their body parts is prohibited, the cat is still frequently killed, particularly in conflicts with ranchers and farmers in South America.
Although reduced, its range remains large.
Given its historical distribution, the jaguar has featured prominently in the mythology of numerous indigenous American cultures, including those of the Maya and Aztec.
Etymology
The word 'jaguar' is thought to derive from the Tupian word yaguara, meaning "beast of prey".
The word entered English presumably via the Amazonian trade language Tupinambá, via Portuguese jaguar.
In Mexican Spanish, its nickname is el tigre: 16th century Spaniards had no native word in their language for the jaguar, which is smaller than a lion, but bigger than a leopard, nor had ever encountered it in the Old World, and so named it after the tiger, since its ferocity would have been known to them through Roman writings and popular literature during the Renaissance.
Onca is the Portuguese l'once).
In the 19th and 20th centuries, several jaguar type specimens formed the basis for descriptions of subspecies.
In 1939, Reginald Innes Pocock recognized eight subspecies based on geographic origins and skull morphology of these specimens.
Pocock did not have access to sufficient zoological specimens to critically evaluate their subspecific status, but expressed doubt about the status of several.
Later consideration of his work suggested only three subspecies should be recognized.
The description of P. o. palustris was based on a fossil skull.
The author of Mammal Species of the World listed nine subspecies and both P. o. palustris or P. o. paraguensis separately.
A subsequent, more detailed study confirmed the predicted population structure within jaguar populations in Colombia.
The following table is based on the former classification of the species provided in Mammal Species of the World.
The jaguar is thought to have diverged from a common ancestor of the Panthera at least 1.5 million years ago and to have entered the American continent in the Early Pleistocene via Beringia, the land bridge that once spanned the Bering Strait.
Results of jaguar mitochondrial DNA analysis indicate that the species' lineage evolved between 280,000 and 510,000 years ago.
Its immediate ancestor was Panthera onca augusta, which was larger than the contemporary jaguar.
Fossils of extinct Panthera species, such as the European jaguar (P. gombaszoegensis) and the American lion (P. atrox), show characteristics of both the jaguar and the lion (P. leo).
Its coat is generally a tawny yellow, but ranges to reddish-brown, for most of the body.
The ventral areas are white.
This allows it to pierce the shells of armored reptiles and turtles.
A comparative study of bite force adjusted for body size ranked it as the top field, alongside the clouded leopard and ahead of the tiger and lion.
In Mexico's Sierra Madre Occidental, the first black jaguar was recorded in 2004.
Some evidence indicates that the melanistic allele is dominant, and being supported by natural selection.
Extremely rare albino individuals, sometimes called white panthers, also occur among jaguars, as with the other big cats.
New Mexico and Texas.
There are rock drawings made by the Hopi, Anasazi, and Pueblo all over the desert and chaparral regions.
There are records of the beast being sold for its pelt in the vicinity of San Antonio, Texas for $18 apiece in the mid 19th century and there are records from well before California was a state that fit the description of this cat.
In the early 20th century, the jaguar's range extended as far north as the Grand Canyon and possibly Colorado, and as far west as Monterey in Northern California.
The jaguar is a protected species in the United States under the Endangered Species Act, which has stopped the shooting of the animal for its pelt.
Jaguar skins are also treated as illegal contraband by the US government and otherwise by and large Americans have stopped wearing fur coats made of the pelts of spotted cats as citizens are aware of the international plight of big cats.
Unfortunately the cessation of hunting came too late to save the jaguar population from crashing and no kittens have been known to have been born on the other side of the Mexican-American border in generations.
In 1996 and from 2004 on, hunting guides and wildlife officials in Arizona photographed and documented jaguars in the southern part of the state.
Between 2004 and 2007, two or three jaguars have been reported by researchers around Buenos Aires National Wildlife Refuge in southern Arizona.
One of them, called 'Macho B', had been previously photographed in 1996 in the area.
Ecology and behavior
Ecological role
The adult jaguar is an apex predator, meaning it exists at the top of its food chain and is not preyed on in the wild.
The jaguar has also been termed a keystone species, as it is assumed, through controlling the population levels of prey such as herbivorous and granivorous mammals, apex felids maintain the structural integrity of forest systems.
Reproduction and life cycle
Jaguar females reach sexual maturity at about two years of age, and males at three or four.
The cat probably mates throughout the year in the wild, with births increasing when prey is plentiful.
Female estrus is 6-17 days out of a full 37-day cycle, and females will advertise fertility with urinary scent marks and increased vocalization.
Like the other big cats, the jaguar is capable of roaring Reportedly, while hunting horses, a jaguar may leap onto their back, place one paw on the muzzle and another on the nape and then twist, dislocating the neck.
Local people have anecdotally reported that when hunting a pair of horses bound together, the jaguar will kill one horse and then drag it while the other horse, still living, is dragged in their wake.
The jaguar is a stalk-and-ambush rather than a chase predator.
The cat will walk slowly down forest paths, listening for and stalking prey before rushing or ambushing.
The jaguar attacks from cover and usually from a target's blind spot with a quick pounce; the species' ambushing abilities are considered nearly peerless in the animal kingdom by both indigenous people and field researchers, and are probably a product of its role as an apex predator in several different environments.
The ambush may include leaping into water after prey, as a jaguar is quite capable of carrying a large kill while swimming; its strength is such that carcasses as large as a heifer can be hauled up a tree to avoid flood levels.
Attacks on humans
Jaguars very rarely attack humans.
However, such behavior appears to be more frequent where humans enter jaguar habitat and decrease prey.
Threats
Jaguar populations are rapidly declining.
The species is listed as Near Threatened on the IUCN Red List.
The loss of parts of its range, including its virtual elimination from its historic northern areas and the increasing fragmentation of the remaining range, have contributed to this status.
The major risks to the jaguar include deforestation across its habitat, increasing competition for food with human beings, especially in dry and unproductive habitat, poaching, hurricanes in northern parts of its range, and the behavior of ranchers who will often kill the cat where it preys on livestock.
When adapted to the prey, the jaguar has been shown to take cattle as a large portion of its diet; while land clearance for grazing is a problem for the species, the jaguar population may have increased when cattle were first introduced to South America, as the animals took advantage of the new prey base.
This willingness to take livestock has induced ranch owners to hire full-time jaguar hunters.
Conservation
The jaguar is listed on CITES Appendix I, which means that all international trade in jaguars or their body parts is prohibited.
Hunting jaguars is prohibited in Argentina, Brazil, Colombia, French Guiana, Honduras, Nicaragua, Panama, Paraguay, Suriname, the United States, and Venezuela.
Hunting jaguars is restricted in Guatemala and Peru.
Jaguar Conservation Units
Jaguar conservation is complicated because of the species' large range spanning 18 countries with different policies and regulations.
Specific areas of high importance for jaguar conservation, so-called "Jaguar Conservation Units" (JCU) were determined in 2000.
These are large areas inhabited by at least 50 jaguars.
Each unit was assessed and evaluated on the basis of size, connectivity, habitat quality for both jaguar and prey, and jaguar population status.
That way, 51 Jaguar Conservation Units were determined in 36 geographic regions as priority areas for jaguar conservation including:
Given the inaccessibility of much of the species' range, particularly the central Amazon, estimating jaguar numbers is difficult.
Researchers typically focus on particular bioregions, thus species-wide analysis is scant.
In 1991, 600-1,000 (the highest total) were estimated to be living in Belize.
A year earlier, 125-180 jaguars were estimated to be living in Mexico's 4,000-km2 (2400-mi2) Calakmul Biosphere Reserve, with another 350 in the state of Chiapas.
The adjoining Maya Biosphere Reserve in Guatemala, with an area measuring 15,000 km2 (9,000 mi2), may have 465-550 animals.
Jaguars are still occasionally sighted in Arizona and New Mexico, such as El Jefe, prompting actions for its conservation by authorities.
In mythology and culture
Pre-Columbian Americas
In pre-Columbian Central and South America, the jaguar was a symbol of power and strength.
Among the Andean cultures, a jaguar cult disseminated by the early Chavín culture became accepted over most of what is today Peru by 900 BC.
The later Moche culture of northern Peru used the jaguar as a symbol of power in many of their ceramics.
In the spirit of the ancient Mayan culture, the 1968 Olympics in Mexico City adopted a red jaguar as the first official Olympic mascot.
Bibliography
Further reading
* Brown, David, and Carlos A. López González (2001).
Borderland Jaguars.
University of Utah Press. .
