Sumer () is the earliest known civilization in the historical region of southern Mesopotamia, modern-day southern Iraq, during the Chalcolithic and Early Bronze ages, and one of the first civilizations in the world along with Ancient Egypt, Norte Chico and the Indus Valley.
Living along the valleys of the Tigris and Euphrates, Sumerian farmers were able to grow an abundance of grain and other crops, the surplus of which enabled them to settle in one place.
Prehistoric proto-writing dates back before 3000 BC.
The earliest texts come from the cities of Uruk and Jemdet Nasr and date to between roughly 3500 and 3000 BC.
Name
The term Sumerian is the common name given to the ancient non-Semitic-speaking inhabitants of Mesopotamia by the East Semitic-speaking Akkadians.
The Sumerians referred to themselves as ùĝ saĝ gíg ga (.
Hebrew Shinar, Egyptian Sngr, and Hittite Šanhar (a), all referring to southern Mesopotamia, could be western variants of Shumer.
It was not an inflected language, contrary to its Semitic neighbours.
Although not specifically discussing Sumerians, Lazaridis et al. 2016 have suggested a partial North African origin for some pre-Semitic cultures of the Middle East, particularly Natufians, after testing the genomes of Natufian and Pre-Pottery Neolithic culture-bearers.
Alternatively, recent genetic analysis of ancient Mesopotamian skeletal DNA tends to suggest an association of the Sumerians with India, possibly as a result of ancient Indus-Mesopotamia relations: Sumerians, or at least some of them, may have been related to the original Dravidian population of India.
These prehistoric people are now called "proto-Euphrateans" or "Ubaidians", and are theorized to have evolved from the Samarra culture of northern Mesopotamia.
The Ubaidians, though never mentioned by the Sumerians themselves, are assumed by modern-day scholars to have been the first civilizing force in Sumer.
They drained the marshes for agriculture, developed trade, and established industries, including weaving, leatherwork, metalwork, masonry, and pottery.
Reliable historical records begin much later; there are none in Sumer of any kind that have been dated before Enmebaragesi (c. 26th century BC).
Juris Zarins believes the Sumerians lived along the coast of Eastern Arabia, today's Persian Gulf region, before it was flooded at the end of the Ice Age.
Sumerian civilization took form in the Uruk period (4th millennium BC), continuing into the Jemdet Nasr and Early Dynastic periods.
During the 3rd millennium BC, a close cultural symbiosis developed between the Sumerians, who spoke a language isolate, and Akkadians, which gave rise to widespread bilingualism.
The influence of Sumerian on Akkadian (and vice versa) is evident in all areas, from lexical borrowing on a massive scale, to syntactic, morphological, and phonological convergence.
The Sumerian city of Eridu, on the coast of the Persian Gulf, is considered to have been one of the oldest cities, where three separate cultures may have fused: that of peasant Ubaidian farmers, living in mud-brick huts and practicing irrigation; that of mobile nomadic Semitic pastoralists living in black tents and following herds of sheep and goats; and that of fisher folk, living in reed huts in the marshlands, who may have been the ancestors of the Sumerians.
Uruk period
The archaeological transition from the Ubaid period to the Uruk period is marked by a gradual shift from painted pottery domestically produced on a slow wheel to a great variety of unpainted pottery mass-produced by specialists on fast wheels.
The Uruk period is a continuation and an outgrowth of Ubaid with pottery being the main visible change.
By the time of the Uruk period (c. 4100-2900 BC calibrated), the volume of trade goods transported along the canals and rivers of southern Mesopotamia facilitated the rise of many large, stratified, temple-centered cities (with populations of over 10,000 people) where centralized administrations employed specialized workers.
It is fairly certain that it was during the Uruk period that Sumerian cities began to make use of slave labor captured from the hill country, and there is ample evidence for captured slaves as workers in the earliest texts.
Artifacts, and even colonies of this Uruk civilization have been found over a wide area-from the Taurus Mountains in Turkey, to the Mediterranean Sea in the west, and as far east as central Iran.
The Uruk period civilization, exported by Sumerian traders and colonists (like that found at Tell Brak), had an effect on all surrounding peoples, who gradually evolved their own comparable, competing economies and cultures.
The cities of Sumer could not maintain remote, long-distance colonies by military force.
It is quite possible that the later Sumerian pantheon was modeled upon this political structure.
There was little evidence of organized warfare or professional soldiers during the Uruk period, and towns were generally unwalled.
During this period Uruk became the most urbanized city in the world, surpassing for the first time 50,000 inhabitants.
The ancient Sumerian king list includes the early dynasties of several prominent cities from this period.
The first set of names on the list is of kings said to have reigned before a major flood occurred.
These early names may be fictional, and include some legendary and mythological figures, such as Alulim and Dumizid.
Early Dynastic Period
The dynastic period begins c. 2900 BC and was associated with a shift from the temple establishment headed by council of elders led by a priestly "En" (a male figure when it was a temple for a goddess, or a female figure when headed by a male god) towards a more secular Lugal (Lu
man, Gal
great) and includes such legendary patriarchal figures as Enmerkar, Lugalbanda and Gilgamesh-who reigned shortly before the historic record opens c. 2700 BC, when the now deciphered syllabic writing started to develop from the early pictograms.
The center of Sumerian culture remained in southern Mesopotamia, even though rulers soon began expanding into neighboring areas, and neighboring Semitic groups adopted much of Sumerian culture for their own.
The earliest dynastic king on the Sumerian king list whose name is known from any other legendary source is Etana, 13th king of the first dynasty of Kish.
The earliest king authenticated through archaeological evidence is Enmebaragesi of Kish (c. 26th century BC), whose name is also mentioned in the Gilgamesh epic-leading to the suggestion that Gilgamesh himself might have been a historical king of Uruk.
As the Epic of Gilgamesh shows, this period was associated with increased war.
Cities became walled, and increased in size as undefended villages in southern Mesopotamia disappeared.
(Both Enmerkar and Gilgamesh are credited with having built the walls of Uruk).
1st Dynasty of Lagash
c. 2500-2270 BC
The dynasty of Lagash, though omitted from the king list, is well attested through several important monuments and many archaeological finds.
Although short-lived, one of the first empires known to history was that of Eannatum of Lagash, who annexed practically all of Sumer, including Kish, Uruk, Ur, and Larsa, and reduced to tribute the city-state of Umma, arch-rival of Lagash.
In addition, his realm extended to parts of Elam and along the Persian Gulf.
He seems to have used terror as a matter of policy.
Eannatum's Stele of the Vultures depicts vultures pecking at the severed heads and other body parts of his enemies.
His empire collapsed shortly after his death.
Later, Lugal-Zage-Si, the priest-king of Umma, overthrew the primacy of the Lagash dynasty in the area, then conquered Uruk, making it his capital, and claimed an empire extending from the Persian Gulf to the Mediterranean.
He was the last ethnically Sumerian king before Sargon of Akkad.
However, it is certain that Akkadian was also briefly imposed on neighboring parts of Elam that were previously conquered, by Sargon.
Gutian period
c. 2083-2050 BC (short chronology)
2nd Dynasty of Lagash
c. 2093-2046 BC (short chronology)
Following the downfall of the Akkadian Empire at the hands of Gutians, another native Sumerian ruler, Gudea of Lagash, rose to local prominence and continued the practices of the Sargonid kings' claims to divinity.
The previous Lagash dynasty, Gudea and his descendants also promoted artistic development and left a large number of archaeological artifacts.
Ur III period
c. 2047-1940 BC (short chronology)
Later, the 3rd dynasty of Ur under Ur-Nammu and Shulgi, whose power extended as far as southern Assyria, was the last great "Sumerian renaissance", but already the region was becoming more Semitic than Sumerian, with the resurgence of the Akkadian speaking Semites in Assyria and elsewhere, and the influx of waves of Semitic Martu (Amorites) who were to found several competing local powers in the south, including Isin, Larsa, Eshnunna and some time later Babylonia.
The last of these eventually came to briefly dominate the south of Mesopotamia as the Babylonian Empire, just as the Old Assyrian Empire had already done so in the north from the late 21st century BC.
The Sumerian language continued as a sacerdotal language taught in schools in Babylonia and Assyria, much as Latin was used in the Medieval period, for as long as cuneiform was utilized.
Fall and transmission
This period is generally taken to coincide with a major shift in population from southern Mesopotamia toward the north.
Ecologically, the agricultural productivity of the Sumerian lands was being compromised as a result of rising salinity.
Soil salinity in this region had been long recognized as a major problem.
Poorly drained irrigated soils, in an arid climate with high levels of evaporation, led to the buildup of dissolved salts in the soil, eventually reducing agricultural yields severely.
During the Akkadian and Ur III phases, there was a shift from the cultivation of wheat to the more salt-tolerant barley, but this was insufficient, and during the period from 2100 BC to 1700 BC, it is estimated that the population in this area declined by nearly three fifths.
This greatly upset the balance of power within the region, weakening the areas where Sumerian was spoken, and comparatively strengthening those where Akkadian was the major language.
Henceforth, Sumerian would remain only a literary and liturgical language, similar to the position occupied by Latin in medieval Europe.
Following an Elamite invasion and sack of Ur during the rule of Ibbi-Sin (c. 1940 BC), Sumer came under Amorite rule (taken to introduce the Middle Bronze Age).
The independent Amorite states of the 20th to 18th centuries are summarized as the "Dynasty of Isin" in the Sumerian king list, ending with the rise of Babylonia under Hammurabi c. 1700 BC.
Later rulers who dominated Assyria and Babylonia occasionally assumed the old Sargonic title "King of Sumer and Akkad", such as Tukulti-Ninurta I of Assyria after c. 1225 BC.
Population
Uruk, one of Sumer's largest cities, has been estimated to have had a population of 50,000-80,000 at its height; given the other cities in Sumer, and the large agricultural population, a rough estimate for Sumer's population might be 0.8 million to 1.5 million.
The world population at this time has been estimated at about 27 million.
The Sumerians spoke a language isolate, but a number of linguists have claimed to be able to detect a substrate language of unknown classification beneath Sumerian because names of some of Sumer's major cities are not Sumerian, revealing influences of earlier inhabitants.
However, the archaeological record shows clear uninterrupted cultural continuity from the time of the early Ubaid period (5300-4700 BC C-14) settlements in southern Mesopotamia.
The Sumerian people who settled here farmed the lands in this region that were made fertile by silt deposited by the Tigris and the Euphrates.
Some archaeologists have speculated that the original speakers of ancient Sumerian may have been farmers, who moved down from the north of Mesopotamia after perfecting irrigation agriculture there.
The Ubaid period pottery of southern Mesopotamia has been connected via Choga Mami transitional ware to the pottery of the Samarra period culture (c. 5700-4900 BC C-14) in the north, who were the first to practice a primitive form of irrigation agriculture along the middle Tigris River and its tributaries.
The connection is most clearly seen at Tell Awayli (Oueilli, Oueili) near Larsa, excavated by the French in the 1980s, where eight levels yielded pre-Ubaid pottery resembling Samarran ware.
According to this theory, farming peoples spread down into southern Mesopotamia because they had developed a temple-centered social organization for mobilizing labor and technology for water control, enabling them to survive and prosper in a difficult environment.
Others have suggested a continuity of Sumerians, from the indigenous hunter-fisherfolk traditions, associated with the bifacial assemblages found on the Arabian littoral.
Juris Zarins believes the Sumerians may have been the people living in the Persian Gulf region before it flooded at the end of the last Ice Age.
Culture
Social and family life
In the early Sumerian period, the primitive pictograms suggest
Inscriptions describing the reforms of king Urukagina of Lagash (c. 2300 BC) say that he abolished the former custom of polyandry in his country, prescribing that a woman who took multiple husbands be stoned with rocks upon which her crime had been written.
Sumerian culture was male-dominated and stratified.
The Code of Ur-Nammu, the oldest such codification yet discovered, dating to the Ur III, reveals a glimpse at societal structure in late Sumerian law.
Beneath the lu-gal ("great man" or king), all members of society belonged to one of two basic strata: The "lu" or free person, and the slave (male, arad; female geme).
The son of a lu was called a dumu-nita until he married.
A woman (munus) went from being a daughter (dumu-mi), to a wife (dam), then if she outlived her husband, a widow (numasu) and she could then remarry another man who was from the same tribe.
Marriages were usually arranged by the parents of the bride and groom;
The Sumerians generally seem to have discouraged premarital sex, but it was probably very commonly done in secret.
The Sumerians, as well as the later Akkadians, had no concept of virginity.
When describing a woman's sexual inexperience, instead of calling her a "virgin", Sumerian texts describe which sex acts she had not yet performed.
and their sexual mores were determined not by whether a sexual act was deemed immoral, but rather by whether or not it made a person ritually unclean.
During the 3rd millennium BC a cultural symbiosis developed between the Sumerians and the Akkadians, which included widespread bilingualism.
but Sumerian continued to be used as a sacred, ceremonial, literary, and scientific language in Babylonia and Assyria until the 1st century AD.
File:Early writing tablet recording the allocation of beer.jpg|Early writing tablet for recording the allocation of beer; 3100-3000 BC; height: 9.4 cm; width: 6.87 cm; from Iraq; British Museum (London)
Cuneiform tablet- administrative account with entries concerning malt and barley groats MET DP293245.jpg|Cuneiform tablet about administrative account with entries concerning malt and barley groats; 3100-2900 BC; clay; 6.8 x 4.5 x 1.6 cm; Metropolitan Museum of Art (New York City)
Bill of sale Louvre AO3766.jpg|Bill of sale of a field and house, from Shuruppak; circa 2600 BC; height: 8.5 cm, width: 8.5 cm, depth: 2 cm; Louvre
Stele of Vultures detail 02.jpg|Stele of the Vultures; circa 2450 BC; limestone; found in 1881 by Édouard de Sarzec in Girsu (now Tell Telloh, Iraq); Louvre
Religion
The Sumerians credited their divinities for all matters pertaining to them and exhibited humility in the face of cosmic forces, such as death and divine wrath.
He was the chief god of the Sumerian pantheon and the patron god of Nippur.
His consort was Ninlil, the goddess of the south wind.
* Inanna was the goddess of love, beauty, sexuality, prostitution, and war; the deification of Venus, the morning (eastern) and evening (western) star, at the temple (shared with An) at Uruk.
Deified kings may have re-enacted the marriage of Inanna and Dumuzid with priestesses.
The universe was divided into four quarters:
* To the north were the hill-dwelling Subartu, who were periodically raided for slaves, timber, and other raw materials.
* To the west were the tent-dwelling Martu, ancient Semitic-speaking peoples living as pastoral nomads tending herds of sheep and goats.
* To the south was the land of Dilmun, a trading state associated with the land of the dead and the place of creation.
To the east were the Elamites, a rival people with whom the Sumerians were frequently at war.
Their known world extended from The Upper Sea or Mediterranean coastline, to The Lower Sea, the Persian Gulf and the land of Meluhha (probably the Indus Valley) and Magan (Oman), famed for its copper ores.
Temple and temple organisation
Ziggurats (Sumerian temples) each had an individual name and consisted of a forecourt, with a central pond for purification.
The temple itself had a central nave with aisles along either side.
Flanking the aisles would be rooms for the priests.
At one end would stand the podium and a mudbrick table for animal and vegetable sacrifices.
Granaries and storehouses were usually located near the temples.
After a time the Sumerians began to place the temples on top of multi-layered square constructions built as a series of rising terraces, giving rise to the Ziggurat style.
Funerary practices
It was believed that when people died, they would be confined to a gloomy world of Ereshkigal, whose realm was guarded by gateways with various monsters designed to prevent people entering or leaving.
The dead were buried outside the city walls in graveyards where a small mound covered the corpse, along with offerings to monsters and a small amount of food.
Those who could afford it sought burial at Dilmun.
Human sacrifice was found in the death pits at the Ur royal cemetery where Queen Puabi was accompanied in death by her servants.
Agriculture and hunting
The Sumerians adopted an agricultural lifestyle perhaps as early as c. 5000 BC - 4500 BC.
The region demonstrated a number of core agricultural techniques, including organized irrigation, large-scale intensive cultivation of land, mono-cropping involving the use of plough agriculture, and the use of an agricultural specialized labour force under bureaucratic control.
The necessity to manage temple accounts with this organization led to the development of writing (c. 3500 BC).
In the early Sumerian Uruk period, the primitive pictograms suggest that sheep, goats, cattle, and pigs were domesticated.
They used oxen as their primary beasts of burden and donkeys or equids as their primary transport animal and "woollen clothing as well as rugs were made from the wool or hair of the animals. ...
By the side of the house was an enclosed garden planted with trees and other plants; wheat and probably other cereals were sown in the fields, and the shaduf was already employed for the purpose of irrigation.
Plants were also grown in pots or vases."
The Sumerians practiced similar irrigation techniques as those used in Egypt.
American anthropologist Robert McCormick Adams says that irrigation development was associated with urbanization, and that 89% of the population lived in the cities.
They grew barley, chickpeas, lentils, wheat, dates, onions, garlic, lettuce, leeks and mustard.
Sumerians caught many fish and hunted fowl and gazelle.
Sumerian agriculture depended heavily on irrigation.
The irrigation was accomplished by the use of shaduf, canals, channels, dykes, weirs, and reservoirs.
The frequent violent floods of the Tigris, and less so, of the Euphrates, meant that canals required frequent repair and continual removal of silt, and survey markers and boundary stones needed to be continually replaced.
The government required individuals to work on the canals in a corvee, although the rich were able to exempt themselves.
As is known from the "Sumerian Farmer's Almanac", after the flood season and after the Spring Equinox and the Akitu or New Year Festival, using the canals, farmers would flood their fields and then drain the water.
Next they made oxen stomp the ground and kill weeds.
They then dragged the fields with pickaxes.
After drying, they plowed, harrowed, and raked the ground three times, and pulverized it with a mattock, before planting seed.
Unfortunately, the high evaporation rate resulted in a gradual increase in the salinity of the fields.
By the Ur III period, farmers had switched from wheat to the more salt-tolerant barley as their principal crop.
Sumerians harvested during the spring in three-person teams consisting of a reaper, a binder, and a sheaf handler.
The farmers would use threshing wagons, driven by oxen, to separate the cereal heads from the stalks and then use threshing sleds to disengage the grain.
They then winnowed the grain/chaff mixture.
Art
The Sumerians were great creators, nothing proving this more than their art.
Sumerian artifacts show great detail and ornamentation, with fine semi-precious stones imported from other lands, such as lapis lazuli, marble, and diorite, and precious metals like hammered gold, incorporated into the design.
Since stone was rare it was reserved for sculpture.
The most widespread material in Sumer was clay, as a result many Sumerina objects are made of clay.
Metals such as gold, silver, copper, and bronze, along with shells and gemstones, were used for the finest sculpture and inlays.
Small stones of all kinds, including more precious stones such as lapis lazuli, alabaster, and serpentine, were used for cylinder seals.
Some of the most famous master pieces are the Lyres of Ur, which are considered to be the world's oldest surviving stringed instruments.
They have been discovered by Leonard Woolley when the Royal Cemetery of Ur has been excavated between from 1922 and 1934.
Cylinder seal and modern impression- ritual scene before a temple facade MET DP270679.jpg|Cylinder seal and impression in which appearsritual scene before a temple façade; 3500-3100 BC; bituminous limestone; height: 4.5 cm; Metropolitan Museum of Art (New York City)
Raminathicket2.jpg|Ram in a Thicket; 2600-2400 BC; gold, copper, shell, lapis lazuli and limestone; height: 45.7 cm; from the Royal Cemetery at Ur (Dhi Qar Governorate, Iraq); British Museum (London)
Denis Bourez - British Museum, London (8747049029)
(2).jpg|Standard of Ur; 2600-2400 BC; shell, red limestone and lapis lazuli on wood; length: 49.5 cm; from the Royal Cemetery at Ur; British Museum
Bull's head ornament for a lyre MET DP260070.jpg|Bull's head ornament from a lyre; 2600-2350 BC; bronze inlaid with shell and lapis lazuli; height: 13.3 cm, width: 10.5 cm; Metropolitan Museum of Art
Architecture
The Tigris-Euphrates plain lacked minerals and trees.
Sumerian structures were made of plano-convex mudbrick, not fixed with mortar or cement.
Mud-brick buildings eventually deteriorate, so they were periodically destroyed, leveled, and rebuilt on the same spot.
This constant rebuilding gradually raised the level of cities, which thus came to be elevated above the surrounding plain.
The resultant hills, known as tells, are found throughout the ancient Near East.
According to Archibald Sayce, the primitive pictograms of the early Sumerian (i.e. Uruk) era suggest that "Stone was scarce, but was already cut into blocks and seals.
Brick was the ordinary building material, and with it cities, forts, temples and houses were constructed.
The city was provided with towers and stood on an artificial platform; the house also had a tower-like appearance.
It was provided with a door which turned on a hinge, and could be opened with a sort of key; the city gate was on a larger scale, and seems to have been double.
The foundation stones-or rather bricks-of a house were consecrated by certain objects that were deposited under them."
The most impressive and famous of Sumerian buildings are the ziggurats, large layered platforms that supported temples.
Sumerian cylinder seals also depict houses built from reeds not unlike those built by the Marsh Arabs of Southern Iraq until as recently as 400 CE.
The Sumerians also developed the arch, which enabled them to develop a strong type of dome.
They built this by constructing and linking several arches.
Sumerian temples and palaces made use of more advanced materials and techniques, such as buttresses, recesses, half columns, and clay nails.
Mathematics
The Sumerians developed a complex system of metrology c. 4000 BC.
This advanced metrology resulted in the creation of arithmetic, geometry, and algebra.
From c. 2600 BC onwards, the Sumerians wrote multiplication tables on clay tablets and dealt with geometrical exercises and division problems.
The earliest traces of the Babylonian numerals also date back to this period.
The period c. 2700-2300 BC saw the first appearance of the abacus, and a table of successive columns which delimited the successive orders of magnitude of their sexagesimal number system.
The Sumerians were the first to use a place value numeral system.
There is also anecdotal evidence the Sumerians may have used a type of slide rule in astronomical calculations.
They were the first to find the area of a triangle and the volume of a cube.
Economy and trade
Discoveries of obsidian from far-away locations in Anatolia and lapis lazuli from Badakhshan in northeastern Afghanistan, beads from Dilmun (modern Bahrain), and several seals inscribed with the Indus Valley script suggest a remarkably wide-ranging network of ancient trade centered on the Persian Gulf.
For example, Imports to Ur came from many parts of the world.
In particular, the metals of all types had to be imported.
The Epic of Gilgamesh refers to trade with far lands for goods, such as wood, that were scarce in Mesopotamia.
In particular, cedar from Lebanon was prized.
The finding of resin in the tomb of Queen Puabi at Ur, indicates it was traded from as far away as Mozambique.
The Sumerians used slaves, although they were not a major part of the economy.
Slave women worked as weavers, pressers, millers, and porters.
Sumerian potters decorated pots with cedar oil paints.
The potters used a bow drill to produce the fire needed for baking the pottery.
Sumerian masons and jewelers knew and made use of alabaster (calcite), ivory, iron, gold, silver, carnelian, and lapis lazuli.
Trade with the Indus valley
Evidence for imports from the Indus to Ur can be found from around 2350 BCE.
Various objects made with shell species that are characteristic of the Indus coast, particularly Trubinella Pyrum and Fasciolaria Trapezium, have been found in the archaeological sites of Mesopotamia dating from around 2500-2000 BCE.
Carnelian beads from the Indus were found in the Sumerian tombs of Ur, the Royal Cemetery at Ur, dating to 2600-2450.
In particular, carnelian beads with an etched design in white were probably imported from the Indus Valley, and made according to a technique of acid-etching developed by the Harappans.
Lapis Lazuli was imported in great quantity by Egypt, and already used in many tombs of the Naqada II period (circa 3200 BCE).
Lapis Lazuli probably originated in northern Afghanistan, as no other sources are known, and had to be transported across the Iranian plateau to Mesopotamia, and then Egypt.
Several Indus seals with Harappan script have also been found in Mesopotamia, particularly in Ur, Babylon and Kish.
Gudea, the ruler of the Neo-Summerian Empire at Lagash, is recorded as having imported "translucent carnelian" from Meluhha, generally thought to be the Indus Valley area.
Money and credit
Large institutions kept their accounts in barley and silver, often with a fixed rate between them.
The obligations, loans and prices in general were usually denominated in one of them.
Many transactions involved debt, for example goods consigned to merchants by temple and beer advanced by "ale women".
Commercial credit and agricultural consumer loans were the main types of loans.
The trade credit was usually extended by temples in order to finance trade expeditions and was nominated in silver.
The interest rate was set at 1/60 a month (one shekel per mina) some time before 2000 BC and it remained at that level for about two thousand years.
They were denominated in barley or other crops and the interest rate was typically much higher than for commercial loans and could amount to 1 2 of the loan principal.
The first war recorded in any detail was between Lagash and Umma in c. 2525 BC on a stele called the Stele of the Vultures.
It shows the king of Lagash leading a Sumerian army consisting mostly of infantry.
The infantry carried spears, wore copper helmets, and carried rectangular shields.
The spearmen are shown arranged in what resembles the phalanx formation, which requires training and discipline; this implies that the Sumerians may have made use of professional soldiers.
The Sumerian military used carts harnessed to onagers.
These early chariots functioned less effectively in combat than did later designs, and some have suggested that these chariots served primarily as transports, though the crew carried battle-axes and lances.
The Sumerian chariot comprised a four or two-wheeled device manned by a crew of two and harnessed to four onagers.
The cart was composed of a woven basket and the wheels had a solid three-piece design.
Sumerian cities were surrounded by defensive walls.
The Sumerians engaged in siege warfare between their cities, but the mudbrick walls were able to deter some foes.
Technology
Examples of Sumerian technology include: the wheel, cuneiform script, arithmetic and geometry, irrigation systems, Sumerian boats, lunisolar calendar, bronze, leather, saws, chisels, hammers, braces, bits, nails, pins, rings, hoes, axes, knives, lancepoints, arrowheads, swords, glue, daggers, waterskins, bags, harnesses, armor, quivers, war chariots, scabbards, boots, sandals, harpoons and beer.
The Sumerians had three main types of boats:
* clinker-built sailboats stitched together with hair, featuring bitumen waterproofing
* skin boats constructed from animal skins and reeds
* wooden-oared ships, sometimes pulled upstream by people and animals walking along the nearby banks
Legacy
Evidence of wheeled vehicles appeared in the mid 4th millennium BC, near-simultaneously in Mesopotamia, the Northern Caucasus (Maykop culture) and Central Europe.
The wheel initially took the form of the potter's wheel.
The new concept quickly led to wheeled vehicles and mill wheels.
The Sumerians' cuneiform script is the oldest (or second oldest after the Egyptian hieroglyphs) which has been deciphered .
The Sumerians were among the first astronomers, mapping the stars into sets of constellations, many of which survived in the zodiac and were also recognized by the ancient Greeks.
They were also aware of the five planets that are easily visible to the naked eye.
They invented and developed arithmetic by using several different number systems including a mixed radix system with an alternating base 10 and base 6.
This sexagesimal system became the standard number system in Sumer and Babylonia.
They may have invented military formations and introduced the basic divisions between infantry, cavalry, and archers.
They developed the first known codified legal and administrative systems, complete with courts, jails, and government records.
The first true city-states arose in Sumer, roughly contemporaneously with similar entities in what are now Syria and Lebanon.
Several centuries after the invention of cuneiform, the use of writing expanded beyond debt/payment certificates and inventory lists to be applied for the first time, about 2600 BC, to messages and mail delivery, history, legend, mathematics, astronomical records, and other pursuits.
Conjointly with the spread of writing, the first formal schools were established, usually under the auspices of a city-state's primary temple.
Finally, the Sumerians ushered in domestication with intensive agriculture and irrigation.
Emmer wheat, barley, sheep , and cattle were foremost among the species cultivated and raised for the first time on a grand scale.
Notes
Further reading
* Ascalone, Enrico.
Mesopotamia:
Assyrians, Sumerians, Babylonians (Dictionaries of Civilizations; 1).
Berkeley: University of California Press.
(paperback).
* Bottéro, Jean, André Finet, Bertrand Lafont, and George Roux. 2001.
Everyday Life in Ancient Mesopotamia.
Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press, Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press.
* Crawford, Harriet E. W. 2004.
Sumer and the Sumerians.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
* Leick, Gwendolyn. 2002.
Mesopotamia:
Invention of the City.
London and New York: Penguin.
* Lloyd, Seton.
The Archaeology of Mesopotamia: From the Old Stone Age to the Persian Conquest.
London:
Thames and Hudson.
* Nemet-Nejat, Karen Rhea.
Daily Life in Ancient Mesopotamia.
London and Westport, Conn.:
Greenwood Press.
* Roux, Georges. 1992.
Ancient Iraq, 560 pages.
London:
Penguin (earlier printings may have different pagination: 1966, 480 pages, Pelican; 1964, 431 pages, London: Allen and Urwin).
* Schomp, Virginia.
Ancient Mesopotamia: The Sumerians, Babylonians, and Assyrians.
* Sumer: Cities of Eden (Timelife Lost Civilizations).
Alexandria, VA: Time-Life Books, 1993 (hardcover, ).
* Woolley, C. Leonard.
The Sumerians.
Oxford: Clarendon Press.
