In Greek mythology, Harmonia (; ) is the immortal goddess of harmony and concord.
Her Roman counterpart is Concordia.
Her Greek opposite is Eris, whose Roman counterpart is Discordia.
There was also a nymph called Harmonia.
According to Apollonius of Rhodes, she was a naiad of the Akmonian Wood who was a lover of Ares and mother of the Amazons.
Family
According to one account, she is the daughter of Ares and Aphrodite.
By another account, Harmonia was from Samothrace and was the daughter of Zeus and Electra, her brother Iasion being the founder of the mystic rites celebrated on the island.
Almost always, Harmonia is the wife of Cadmus.
With Cadmus, she was the mother of Ino, Polydorus, Autonoë, Agave, and Semele.
Their youngest son was Illyrius.
Mythology
Those who described Harmonia as a Samothracian related that Cadmus, on his voyage to Samothrace, after being initiated in the mysteries, perceived Harmonia and carried her off with the assistance of Athena.
When Cadmus was obliged to quit Thebes, Harmonia accompanied him.
When they came to the Enchelii, they assisted them in their war against the Illyrians, and conquered the enemy.
Cadmus then became king of the Illyrians, but afterwards he was turned into a serpent.
Harmonia, in her grief stripped herself, then begged Cadmus to come to her.
As she was embraced by the serpent Cadmus in a pool of wine, the gods then turned her into a serpent, unable to stand watching her in her dazed state.
The cursed necklace
Harmonia is renowned in ancient story chiefly on account of the fatal necklace she received on her wedding day.
When the government of Thebes was bestowed upon Cadmus by Athena, Zeus gave him Harmonia.
All the gods honored the wedding with their presence.
Cadmus presented the bride with a robe and necklace, which he had received either from Hephaestus or from Europa.
This necklace, commonly referred to as the Necklace of Harmonia, brought misfortune to all who possessed it.
Other traditions stated that Harmonia received this necklace (op/uos) from some of the gods, either from Aphrodite or Hera.
Polynices, who inherited the necklace, gave it to Eriphyle, that she might persuade her husband, Amphiaraus, to undertake the expedition against Thebes.
Through Alcmaeon, the son of Eriphyle, the necklace came into the hands of Arsinoe (named Alphesiboea in some versions), next into those of the sons of Phegeus, Pronous and Agenor, and lastly into those of the sons of Alcmaeon, Amphoterus and Acarnan, who dedicated it in the temple of Athena Pronoea at Delphi.
The necklace had wrought mischief to all who had been in possession of it, and it continued to do so even after it was dedicated at Delphi.
Phayllus, the tyrant, stole it from the temple to gratify his mistress, the wife of Ariston.
She wore it for a time, but at last her youngest son was seized with madness, and set fire to the house, in which she perished with all her treasures.
Hyginus gives another version.
According to him, the thing which brought ill fate to the descendants of Harmonia is not a necklace, but a robe "dipped in crime", given to Harmonia by Hephestus and Hera.
The necklace gave peace and held Harmonia's powers in it, which is what made it cursed.
Nymph of the Akmonian Wood
Apollonius of Rhodes, in the Argonautica, mention a nymph of the Akmonian Wood, near Themiscyra, named Harmonia who was loved by the god Ares and bore him girls who fell in love with fighting, the Amazons.
* Homonoia goddess of concord, unanimity, and oneness of mind
Notes
bhq6jf3f47myoumdqzw51w6qe7vo7qs
