Chakras (.
The concept is found in the early traditions of Hinduism.
Beliefs differ between the Indian religions, with many Buddhist texts consistently mentioning five chakras, while Hindu sources offer six or even seven.
Within kundalini yoga, the techniques of breath exercises, visualizations, mudras, bandhas, kriyas, and mantras are focused on transmuting subtle energy through chakras.
Etymology
Lexically, cakra is the Indic reflex of an ancestral Indo-European form *kʷékʷlos, whence also "wheel" and "cycle" (Ancient Greek κύκλος).
and metaphorical uses, as in the "wheel of time" or "wheel of dharma", such as in Rigveda hymn verse 1.164.11, pervasive in the earliest Vedic texts.
In Buddhism, especially in Theravada, the Pali noun cakka connotes "wheel".
Within the central "Tripitaka", the Buddha variously refers the "dhammacakka", or "wheel of dharma", connoting that this dharma, universal in its advocacy, should bear the marks characteristic of any temporal dispensation.
The Buddha spoke of freedom from cycles in and of themselves, whether karmic, reincarnative, liberative, cognitive or emotional.
In Jainism, the term chakra also means "wheel" and appears in various contexts in its ancient literature.
As in other Indian religions, chakra in esoteric theories in Jainism such as those by Buddhisagarsuri means a yogic energy center.
History
The term chakra appears to first emerge within the Hindu Vedas, though not precisely in the sense of psychic energy centers, rather as chakravartin or the king who "turns the wheel of his empire" in all directions from a center, representing his influence and power.
The iconography popular in representing the Chakras, states White, trace back to the five symbols of yajna, the Vedic fire altar: "square, circle, triangle, half moon and dumpling".
The hymn 10.136 of the Rigveda mentions a renunciate yogi with a female named kunamnama.
Literally, it means "she who is bent, coiled", representing both a minor goddess and one of many embedded enigmas and esoteric riddles within the Rigveda.
Some scholars, such as David Gordon White and Georg Feuerstein, interpret this might be related to kundalini shakti, and an overt overature to the terms of esotericism that would later emerge in Post-Aryan Bramhanism.
the Upanishad.
Breath channels (nāḍi) are mentioned in the classical Upanishads of Hinduism from the 1st millennium BCE, but not psychic-energy chakra theories.
The latter, states David Gordon White, were introduced about 8th-century CE in Buddhist texts as hierarchies of inner energy centers, such as in the Hevajra Tantra and Caryāgiti.
These are called by various terms such as cakka, padma (lotus) or pitha (mound).
The theory posited that human life simultaneously exists in two parallel dimensions, one "physical body" (sthula sarira) and other "psychological, emotional, mind, non-physical" it is called the "subtle body" (sukshma sarira).
This subtle body is energy, while the physical body is mass.
The psyche or mind plane corresponds to and interacts with the body plane, and the theory posits that the body and the mind mutually affect each other.
The chakra theories of Hinduism and Buddhism differs from the historic Chinese system of meridians in acupuncture.
The meditation is aided by extensive symbology, mantras, diagrams, models (deity and mandala).
The practitioner proceeds step by step from perceptible models, to increasingly abstract models where deity and external mandala are abandoned, inner self and internal mandalas are awakened.
These ideas are not unique to Hindu and Buddhist traditions.
Similar and overlapping concepts emerged in other cultures in the East and the West, and these are variously called by other names such as subtle body, spirit body, esoteric anatomy, sidereal body and etheric body.
Contrast with classical yoga
Chakra and related theories have been important to the esoteric traditions, but they are not directly related to mainstream yoga.
According to the Indologist Edwin Bryant and other scholars, the goals of classical yoga such as spiritual liberation (freedom, self-knowledge, moksha) is "attained entirely differently in classical yoga, and the cakra kundalini physiology is completely peripheral to it."
Classical traditions
The classical eastern traditions, particularly those that developed in India during the 1st millennium AD, primarily describe nadi and cakra in a "subtle body" context.
The concept of "life energy" varies between the texts, ranging from simple inhalation-exhalation to far more complex association with breath-mind-emotions-sexual energy.
Hindu Tantra
Different esoteric traditions in Hinduism mention numerous numbers and arrangements chakras, of which a classical system of seven is most prevalent.
The Chakra methodology is extensively developed in the goddess tradition of Hinduism called Shaktism.
It is an important concept along with yantras, mandalas and kundalini yoga in its practice.
Chakra in Shakta tantrism means circle, an "energy center" within, as well as being a term for group rituals such as in chakra-puja (worship within a circle) which may or may not involve tantra practice.
The cakra-based system is a part of the meditative exercises that came to be known as yoga.
Beyond its original Shakta milieu, various sub-traditions within the Shaiva and Vaishnava schools of Hinduism also developed texts and practices on Nadi and Chakra systems.
Modern Hindu groups including the Bihar School of Yoga and the Self Realization Fellowship utilize a technique of circular energy that works based on the chakras known as kriya yoga.
Although Paramahansa Yogananda claimed this was the same technique taught as kriya yoga by Patañjali in the Yoga Sūtras and by Krishna in the Bhagavad Gita (as karma yoga), Swami Satyananda of the Bihar school disagreed with this assessment and acknowledged the similarities between kriya and taoist inner orbit practices.
Both schools claim the technique is taught in every age by an avatar of god known as Babaji.
The historicity of its techniques in India prior to the early twentieth century are not well established.
It believed by its practitioners to activate the chakras and stimulate faster spiritual development.
Buddhist Tantra
The esoteric traditions in Buddhism generally teach four chakras.
In one development within the Nyingma lineage of the Mantrayana of Tibetan Buddhism a popular conceptualization of chakras in increasing subtlety and increasing order is as follows: Nirmanakaya (gross self), Sambhogakaya (subtle self), Dharmakaya (causal self), and Mahasukhakaya (non-dual self), each vaguely - yet by no means directly - corresponding to the categories within the Shaiva Mantramarga universe, i.e., Svadhisthana, Anahata, Visuddha, Sahasrara, etc.
However, depending on the meditational tradition, these vary between three and six.
* Abdominal chakra (Element: Water, Buddha: Ratnasambhava, Bija mantra: VAM)
* Heart chakra (Element: Fire, Buddha: Akshobhya, Bija mantra: RAM)
* Throat chakra (Element: Wind, Buddha: Amitabha, Bija mantra: YAM)
* Crown chakra (Element: Space, Buddha: Vairochana, Bija mantra: KHAM)
Chakras clearly play a key role in Tibetan Buddhism, and are considered to be the pivotal providence of Tantric thinking.
And, the precise use of the chakras across the gamut of tantric sadhanas gives little space to doubt the primary efficacy of Tibetan Buddhism as distinct religious agency, that being that precise revelation that, without Tantra there would be no Chakras, but more importantly, without Chakras, there is no Tibetan Buddhism.
The highest practices in Tibetan Buddhism point to the ability to bring the subtle pranas of an entity into alignment with the central channel, and to thus penetrate the realisation of the ultimate unity, namely, the "organic harmony" of one's individual consciousness of Wisdom with the co-attainment of All-embracing Love, thus synthesizing a direct cognition of absolute Buddhahood.
According to Geoffrey Samuel, the buddhist esoteric systems developed cakra and nadi as "central to their soteriological process".
The theories were sometimes, but not always, coupled with a unique system of physical exercises, called yantra yoga or phrul 'khor.
Chakras, according to the Bon tradition, enable the gestalt of experience, with each of the five major chakras, being psychologically linked with the five experiential qualities of unenlightened consciousness, the six realms of woe.
The tsa lung practice embodied in the Trul khor lineage, unbaffles the primary channels, thus activating and circulating liberating prana.
Yoga awakens the deep mind, thus bringing forth positive attributes, inherent gestalts, and virtuous qualities.
In a computer analogy, the screen of one's consciousness is slated and a attribute-bearing file is called up that contains necessary positive or negative, supportive qualities.
Tantric practice is said to eventually transform all experience into clear light.
The practice aims to liberate from all negative conditioning, and the deep cognitive salvation of freedom from control and unity of perception and cognition.
The qì, equivalent to the Hindu prana, flows through the energy channels called meridians, equivalent to the nadi, but two other energies are also important: jīng, or primordial essence, and shén, or spirit energy.
In the principle circuit of qì, called the microcosmic orbit, energy rises up a main meridian along the spine, but also comes back down the front torso.
Throughout its cycle it enters various dantian (elixir fields) which act as furnaces, where the types of energy in the body (jing, qi and shen) are progressively refined.
These dantian play a very similar role to that of chakras.
The number of dantian varies depending on the system; the navel dantian is the most well-known, but there is usually a dantian located at the heart and between the eyebrows.
The lower dantian at or below the navel transforms essence, or jīng, into qì.
The middle dantian in the middle of the chest transforms qì into shén, or spirit, and the higher dantian at the level of the forehead (or at the top of the head), transforms shen into wuji, infinite space of void.
Silat
Traditional spirituality in the Malay Archipelago borrows heavily from Hindu-Buddhist concepts.
In Malay and Indonesian metaphysical theory, the chakras' energy rotates outwards along diagonal lines.
Defensive energy emits outwards from the centre line, while offensive energy moves inwards from the sides of the body.
This can be applied to energy-healing, meditation, or martial arts.
Silat practitioners aim to harmonise their movements with these chakras, thereby increasing the power and effectiveness of attacks and movements.
The seven chakra system
The more common and most studied chakra system incorporates six major chakras along with a seventh center generally not regarded as a chakra.
These points are arranged vertically along the axial channel (sushumna nadi in Hindu texts, Avadhuti in some Buddhist texts).
According to Gavin Flood, this system of six chakras plus the sahasrara "center" at the crown first appears in the Kubjikāmata-tantra, an 11th century Kaula work.
It was this chakra system that was translated in early 20th century by Sir John Woodroffe in the text The Serpent Power.
Avalon translated the Hindu text Ṣaṭ-Cakra-Nirūpaṇa meaning the examination (nirūpaṇa) of the six (ṣaṭ) chakras (cakra).
The Chakras are traditionally considered meditation aids.
The yogi progresses from lower chakras to the highest chakra blossoming in the crown of the head, internalizing the journey of spiritual ascent.
In both the Hindu and Buddhist kundalini or candali traditions, the chakras are pierced by a dormant energy residing near or in the lowest chakra.
In Hindu texts she is known as Kundalini, while in Buddhist texts she is called Candali or Tummo (Tibetan: gtum mo, "fierce one").
In esoteric Buddhism, it is called Sambhoga and is generally considered to be the petal lotus of "Enjoyment" corresponding to the third state of Four Noble Truths.
while the Shakti is Dakini.
The associated animal is the elephant.
Other chakras
Gary Osborn, for instance, has described the chakras as metaphysical counterparts to the endocrine glands, while Anodea Judith noted a marked similarity between the positions of the two and the roles described for each.
Stephen Sturgess also links the lower six chakras to specific nerve plexuses along the spinal cord as well as glands.
C. W. Leadbeater associated the Ajna chakra with the pineal gland, which is a part of the endocrine system.
* Surya Namaskar-the Sun Salutation, in which each posture is sometimes associated with a chakra and a mantra
Notes
Further reading
* Banerji, S. C. Tantra in Bengal.
Second Revised and Enlarged Edition.
* Shyam Sundar Goswami, Layayoga: The Definitive Guide to the Chakras and Kundalini, Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1980.
* Leadbeater, C.W.
The Chakras Wheaton, Illinois, USA:1926-Theosophical Publishing House-Picture of the Chakras on plates facing page 17 as claimed to have been observed by Leadbeater with his third eye
* Guru Dharam Singh Khalsa and Darryl O'Keeffe.
The Kundalini Yoga Experience New York, NY USA:2002, Fireside, Simon & Schuster, Inc.
Copyright by Gaia Books Limited.
Kriyas and meditations copyright Yogi Bhajan, All Rights reserved.
Revised Edition published 2016 as "Kundalini Yoga"
* Judith, Anodea (1996).
Eastern Body Western Mind: Psychology And The Chakra System As A Path To The Self.
Berkeley, California, USA: Celestial Arts Publishing.
* Florin Lowndes, 'Enlivening the Chakra of the Heart: The Fundamental Spiritual Exercises of Rudolf Steiner' , first English edition 1998 from the original German edition of 1996, comparing 'traditional' chakra teaching, and that of C.W.Leadbeater, with that of Rudolf Steiner.
