Kazakhstan{{efn|, Kazakhstan shares borders with Russia, China, Kyrgyzstan, Uzbekistan, and Turkmenistan, and also adjoins a large part of the Caspian Sea.
The terrain of Kazakhstan includes flatlands, steppe, taiga, rock canyons, hills, deltas, snow-capped mountains, and deserts.
Kazakhstan has an estimated 18.3 million people .
Its population density is among the lowest, at less than 6 people per square kilometre (15 people per sq mi).
The capital is Nur-Sultan (until 2019 Astana), where it was moved in 1997 from Almaty, the country's largest city.
The territory of Kazakhstan has historically been inhabited by nomadic groups and empires.
In antiquity, the nomadic Scythians have inhabited the land and the Persian Achaemenid Empire expanded towards the southern territory of the modern country.
Turkic nomads who trace their ancestry to many Turkic states such as Turkic Khaganate etc. have inhabited the country throughout its history.
In the 13th century, the territory joined the Mongolian Empire under Genghis Khan.
By the 16th century, the Kazakh emerged as a distinct group, divided into three jüz (ancestor branches occupying specific territories).
The Russians began advancing into the Kazakh steppe in the 18th century, and by the mid-19th century, they nominally ruled all of Kazakhstan as part of the Russian Empire.
Following the 1917 Russian Revolution, and subsequent civil war, the territory of Kazakhstan was reorganised several times.
In 1936, it was made the Kazakh Soviet Socialist Republic, part of the Soviet Union.
Kazakhstan was the last of the Soviet republics to declare independence during the dissolution of the Soviet Union in 1991.
Nursultan Nazarbayev, the first President of Kazakhstan, was characterized as an authoritarian, and his government was accused of numerous human rights violations, including suppression of dissent and censorship of the media.
Nazarbayev resigned in March 2019, with Senate Chairman Kassym-Jomart Tokayev taking office as Interim President.
Human Rights Watch says that "Kazakhstan heavily restricts freedom of assembly, speech, and religion", and other human rights organisations regularly describe Kazakhstan's human rights situation as poor.
Kazakhstan's 131 ethnicities include Kazakhs (63% of the population), Russians, Uzbeks, Ukrainians, Germans, Tatars, and Uyghurs.
Islam is the religion of about 70% of the population, with Christianity practised by 26%.
Kazakhstan officially allows freedom of religion, but religious leaders who oppose the government are suppressed.
The Kazakh language is the state language, and Russian has equal official status for all levels of administrative and institutional purposes.
Kazakhstan is a member of the United Nations (UN), WTO, CIS, the Shanghai Cooperation Organization (SCO), the Eurasian Economic Union, CSTO, OSCE, OIC, and TURKSOY.
Etymology
The name "Kazakh" comes from the ancient Turkic word qaz, "to wander", reflecting the Kazakhs' nomadic culture.
The name "Cossack" is of the same origin.
History
Kazakhstan has been inhabited since the Paleolithic.
Pastoralism developed during the Neolithic as the region's climate and terrain are best suited for a nomadic lifestyle.
The Kazakh territory was a key constituent of the Eurasian Steppe route, the ancestor of the terrestrial Silk Roads.
Archaeologists believe that humans first domesticated the horse (i.e. ponies) in the region's vast steppes.
During recent prehistoric times Central Asia was inhabited by groups like the possibly Proto-Indo-European Afanasievo culture, later early Indo-Iranians cultures such as Andronovo, and later Indo-Iranians such as the Saka and Massagetae.
Other groups included the nomadic Scythians and the Persian Achaemenid Empire in the southern territory of the modern country.
In 329 BC, Alexander the Great and his Macedonian army fought in the Battle of Jaxartes against the Scythians along the Jaxartes River, now known as the Syr Darya along the southern border of modern Kazakhstan.
Kazakh Khanate
File:Жуз.svg|thumb|left|250px|Approximate areas occupied by the three Kazakh jüz in the early 20th century.
The Cuman entered the steppes of modern-day Kazakhstan around the early 11th century, where they later joined with the Kipchak and established the vast Cuman-Kipchak confederation.
While ancient cities Taraz (Aulie-Ata) and Hazrat-e Turkestan had long served as important way-stations along the Silk Road connecting Asia and Europe, true political consolidation began only with the Mongol rule of the early 13th century.
Under the Mongol Empire, the largest in world history, administrative districts were established.
These eventually came under the rule of the emergent Kazakh Khanate (Kazakhstan).
Throughout this period, traditional nomadic life and a livestock-based economy continued to dominate the steppe.
In the 15th century, a distinct Kazakh identity began to emerge among the Turkic tribes, a process which was consolidated by the mid-16th century with the appearance of the Kazakh language, culture, and economy.
Nevertheless, the region was the focus of ever-increasing disputes between the native Kazakh emirs and the neighbouring Persian-speaking peoples to the south.
At its height, the Khanate would rule parts of Central Asia and control Cumania.
By the early 17th century, the Kazakh Khanate was struggling with the impact of tribal rivalries, which had effectively divided the population into the Great, Middle and Little (or Small) hordes (jüz).
Political disunion, tribal rivalries, and the diminishing importance of overland trade routes between east and west weakened the Kazakh Khanate.
Khiva Khanate used this opportunity and annexed Mangyshlak Peninsula.
Uzbek rule there lasted two centuries until the Russian arrival.
During the 17th century, the Kazakhs fought Oirats, a federation of western Mongol tribes, including the Dzungar.
The beginning of the 18th century marked the zenith of the Kazakh Khanate.
During this period the Little Horde participated in the 1723-1730 war against the Dzungar Khanate, following their "Great Disaster" invasion of Kazakh territories.
Under the leadership of Abul Khair Khan, the Kazakh won major victories over the Dzungar at the Bulanty River in 1726, and at the Battle of Anrakay in 1729.
Ablai Khan participated in the most significant battles against the Dzungar from the 1720s to the 1750s, for which he was declared a "batyr" ("hero") by the people.
The Kazakh suffered from the frequent raids against them by the Volga Kalmyk.
The Kokand Khanate used the weakness of Kazakh jüzs after Dzungar and Kalmyk raids and conquered present Southeastern Kazakhstan, including Almaty, the formal capital in the first quarter of the 19th century.
Also, the Emirate of Bukhara ruled Shymkent before the Russians took dominance.
Russian Empire
In the first half of the 18th century the Russian Empire constructed the Irtysh line, a series of forty-six forts and ninety-six redoubts, including Omsk (1716), Semipalatinsk (1718), Pavlodar (1720), Orenburg (1743) and Petropavlovsk (1752), to prevent Kazakh and Oirat raids into Russian territory.
In the late 18th century the Kazakhs took advantage of Pugachev's rebellion, which was centred on the Volga area, to raid Russian and Volga German settlements.
In the 19th century, the Russian Empire began to expand its influence into Central Asia.
The "Great Game" period is generally regarded as running from approximately 1813 to the Anglo-Russian Convention of 1907.
The tsars effectively ruled over most of the territory belonging to what is now the Republic of Kazakhstan.
The Russian Empire introduced a system of administration and built military garrisons and barracks in its effort to establish a presence in Central Asia in the so-called "Great Game" for dominance in the area against the British Empire, which was extending its influence from the south in India and Southeast Asia.
Russia built its first outpost, Orsk, in 1735.
Russia introduced the Russian language in all schools and governmental organisations.
Russian efforts to impose its system aroused the resentment by the Kazakh people, and, by the 1860s, some Kazakhs resisted Russia's rule.
It had disrupted the traditional nomadic lifestyle and livestock-based economy, and people were suffering from hunger and starvation, with some Kazakh tribes being decimated.
The Kazakh national movement, which began in the late 19th century, sought to preserve the native language and identity by resisting the attempts of the Russian Empire to assimilate and stifle them.
From the 1890s onward, ever-larger numbers of settlers from the Russian Empire began colonising the territory of present-day Kazakhstan, in particular, the province of Semirechye.
The number of settlers rose still further once the Trans-Aral Railway from Orenburg to Tashkent was completed in 1906.
A specially created Migration Department (Переселенческое Управление) in St. Petersburg oversaw and encouraged the migration to expand Russian influence in the area.
During the 19th century about 400,000 Russians immigrated to Kazakhstan, and about one million Slavs, Germans, Jews, and others immigrated to the region during the first third of the 20th century.
Vasile Balabanov was the administrator responsible for the resettlement during much of this time.
The competition for land and water that ensued between the Kazakh and the newcomers caused great resentment against colonial rule during the final years of the Russian Empire.
The most serious uprising, the Central Asian Revolt, occurred in 1916.
The Kazakh attacked Russian and Cossack settlers and military garrisons.
The revolt resulted in a series of clashes and in brutal massacres committed by both sides.
Both sides resisted the communist government until late 1919.
Soviet Union
Following the collapse of central government in Petrograd in November 1917, the Kazakhs (then in Russia officially referred to as "Kirghiz") experienced a brief period of autonomy (the Alash Autonomy) to eventually succumb to the Bolsheviks′ rule.
On 26 August 1920, the Kirghiz Autonomous Socialist Soviet Republic within the Russian Soviet Federative Socialist Republic (RSFSR) was established.
The Kirghiz ASSR included the territory of present-day Kazakhstan, but its administrative centre was a mainly Russian-populated town of Orenburg.
In June 1925, the Kirghiz ASSR was renamed the Kazak ASSR and its administrative centre was transferred to the town of Kyzylorda, and in April 1927 to Alma-Ata.
Soviet repression of the traditional elite, along with forced collectivisation in the late 1920s and 1930s, brought famine and high fatalities, leading to unrest (see also: Famine in Kazakhstan of 1932-33).
During the 1930s, some members of the Kazakh cultured society were executed - as part of the policies of political reprisals pursued by the Soviet government in Moscow.
On 5 December 1936, the Kazakh Autonomous Soviet Socialist Republic (whose territory by then corresponded to that of modern Kazakhstan) was detached from the Russian Soviet Federative Socialist Republic (RSFSR) and made the Kazakh Soviet Socialist Republic, a full union republic of the USSR, one of eleven such republics at the time, along with the Kirghiz Soviet Socialist Republic.
The republic was one of the destinations for exiled and convicted persons, as well as for mass resettlements, or deportations affected by the central USSR authorities during the 1930s and 1940s, such as approximately 400,000 Volga Germans deported from the Volga German Autonomous Soviet Socialist Republic in September-October 1941, and then later the Greeks and Crimean Tatars.
Deportees and prisoners were interned in some of the biggest Soviet labour camps (the Gulag), including ALZhIR camp outside Astana, which was reserved for the wives of men considered "enemies of the people".
Many moved due to the policy of population transfer in the Soviet Union and others were forced into involuntary settlements in the Soviet Union.
File:International conference on Primary Health Care - Conferencia Internacional sobre Atención Primaria de Salud - Almaty -1978.jpg|thumb|
The International Conference on Primary Health Care in 1978, known as the Alma-Ata Declaration.
The Soviet-German War (1941-1945) led to an increase in industrialisation and mineral extraction in support of the war effort.
At the time of the USSR's leader Joseph Stalin's death in 1953, however, Kazakhstan still had an overwhelmingly agricultural economy.
In 1953, Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev initiated the Virgin Lands Campaign designed to turn the traditional pasturelands of Kazakhstan into a major grain-producing region for the Soviet Union.
The Virgin Lands policy brought mixed results.
However, along with later modernisations under Soviet leader Leonid Brezhnev (in power 1964-1982), it accelerated the development of the agricultural sector, which remains the source of livelihood for a large percentage of Kazakhstan's population.
Because of the decades of privation, war and resettlement, by 1959 the Kazakh had become a minority in the country, making up 30% of the population.
Ethnic Russians accounted for 43%.
In 1947, the USSR government, as part of its atomic bomb project, founded an atomic bomb test site near the north-eastern town of Semipalatinsk, where the first Soviet nuclear bomb test was conducted in 1949.
Hundreds of nuclear tests were conducted until 1989 and had negative ecological and biological consequences.
The Anti-nuclear movement in Kazakhstan became a major political force in the late 1980s.
In December 1986, mass demonstrations by young ethnic Kazakhs, later called the Jeltoqsan riot, took place in Almaty to protest the replacement of the First Secretary of the Communist Party of the Kazakh SSR Dinmukhamed Konayev with Gennady Kolbin from the Russian SFSR.
Governmental troops suppressed the unrest, several people were killed, and many demonstrators were jailed.
In the waning days of Soviet rule, discontent continued to grow and found expression under Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev's policy of glasnost.
Independence
On 25 October 1990, Kazakhstan declared its sovereignty on its territory as a republic within the Soviet Union.
Following the August 1991 aborted coup attempt in Moscow, Kazakhstan declared independence on 16 December 1991, thus becoming the last Soviet republic to declare independence.
Ten days later, the Soviet Union itself ceased to exist.
Kazakhstan's communist-era leader, Nursultan Nazarbayev, became the country's first President.
Nazarbayev ruled in an authoritarian manner, which was needed in the first years of independence.
Emphasis was on converting the country's economy to a market economy while political reforms lagged behind achievements in the economy.
By 2006, Kazakhstan generated 60% of the GDP of Central Asia, primarily through its oil industry.
In 1997, the government moved the capital to Astana (renamed Nur-Sultan on 23 March 2019) from Almaty, Kazakhstan's largest city, where it had been established under the Soviet Union.
Geography
As it extends across both sides of the Ural River, considered the dividing line with the European continent, Kazakhstan is one of only two landlocked countries in the world that has territory in two continents (the other is Azerbaijan).
With an area of
General
* https:/ web https:/ handle 552643 Caspian Pipeline Controversy from the https:/ web https:/ handle 552494 Dean Peter Krogh Foreign Affairs Digital Archives
* http:/ 2 asia-pacific 1298071.stm Country Profile from BBC News.
* https:/ p ci Kazakhstan information from the United States Department of State
* https:/ web http:/ rr amed kazakhstan.html Portals to the World from the United States Library of Congress.
* https:/ web http:/ govpubs kazakhstan.htm Kazakhstan at UCB Libraries GovPubs.
* http:/ Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Kazakhstan
* http:/ WBSITE COUNTRIES KAZAKHSTANEXTN Kazakhstan Internet Encyclopedia
* http:/ node blogs 2011 unrest-kazakhstan "Blowing the lid off" - Unrest in Kazakhstan, The Economist, 20 December 2011
* https:/ web http:/
The Region Initiative (TRI)
* http:/ kazakhstan-facts.html Country Facts from http:/ Kazakhstan Discovery
* https:/ web http:/ g rls 2008 119135.htm 2008 Human Rights Report: Kazakhstan.
Department of State; Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights and Labor
* http:/ ifs Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Kazakhstan
* http:/ wps web https:/ library world-leaders-1 kazakhstan.html Chief of State and Cabinet Members
Trade
* http:/ CountryProfile KAZ 2012/Summary World Bank Summary Trade Statistics Kazakhstan
97b9fggm4419wcngxay23ikkq8b16zh
