The Atlantic cod (Gadus morhua) is a benthopelagic fish of the family Gadidae, widely consumed by humans.
It is also commercially known as cod or codling.
Dry cod may be prepared as unsalted stockfish, as cured salt cod or clipfish.
In the western Atlantic Ocean, cod has a distribution north of Cape Hatteras, North Carolina, and around both coasts of Greenland and the Labrador Sea; in the eastern Atlantic, it is found from the Bay of Biscay north to the Arctic Ocean, including the Baltic Sea, the North Sea, Sea of the Hebrides, areas around Iceland and the Barents Sea.
The largest individual on record was long and weighed , but usually the cod is between and long and weighs up to .
Males and females are similar in size and weight.
Atlantic cod can live for 25 years, and usually attain sexual maturity between ages two and four, although cod in the northeast Arctic can take as long as eight years to mature fully.
Colouring is brown or green, with spots on the dorsal side, shading to silver ventrally.
A stripe along its lateral line (used to detect vibrations) is clearly visible.
Its habitat ranges from the shoreline down to the continental shelf.
Several cod stocks collapsed in the 1990s (declined by >95% of maximum historical biomass) and have failed to fully recover even with the cessation of fishing.
Lifecycle
File:Gravid female cod.jpg|Gravid female in captivity
File:Jonge kabeljauwen of gul nieuwsgierig bij een wrak-4885743.webm|Juveniles on a wreck in the North Sea
File:Gadus morhua (head).jpg|Atlantic cod juvenile
File:Gadus morhua Cod-2b-Atlanterhavsparken-Norway.
JPG|Adult
Adult cod form spawning aggregations from late winter to spring.
Females release their eggs in batches, and males compete to fertilize them.
Fertilized eggs drift with ocean currents and develop into larvae ("fry").
Age of maturation varies between cod stocks, from ages two to four in the west Atlantic, but as late as eight years in the northeast Arctic.
Taxonomy
The Atlantic cod is one of three cod species in the genus Gadus along with Pacific cod and Greenland cod.
A variety of fish species are colloquially known as cod, but they are not all classified within the Gadus, though some are in the Atlantic cod family, Gadidae.
Behaviour
Shoaling
Atlantic cod are a shoaling species and move in large, size-structured aggregations.
Larger fish act as scouts and lead the shoal's direction, particularly during post spawning migrations inshore for feeding.
Cod actively feed during migration and changes in shoal structure occur when food is encountered.
Shoals are generally thought to be relatively leaderless, with all fish having equal status and an equal distribution of resources and benefits.
However, some studies suggest that leading fish gain certain feeding benefits.
One study of a migrating Atlantic cod shoal showed significant variability in feeding habits based on size and position in the shoal.
Larger scouts consumed a more variable, higher quantity of food, while trailing fish had less variable diets and consumed less food.
Fish distribution throughout the shoal seems to be dictated by fish size, and ultimately, the smaller lagging fish likely benefit from shoaling because they are more successful in feeding in the shoal than they would be if migrating individually, due to social facilitation.
Predation
Atlantic cod are apex predators in the Baltic and adults are generally free from the concerns of predation.
Juvenile cod, however, may serve as prey for adult cod, which sometimes practice cannibalism.
Juvenile cod make substrate decisions based on risk of predation.
Substrates refer to different feeding and swimming environments.
Without apparent risk of predation, juvenile cod demonstrated a preference for finer-grained substrates such as sand and gravel-pebble.
However, in the presence of a predator, they preferred to seek safety in the space available between stones of a cobble substrate.
Selection of cobble significantly reduces the risk of predation.
Without access to cobble, the juvenile cod simply tries to escape a predator by fleeing.
Additionally, juvenile Atlantic cod vary their behaviour according to the foraging behaviour of predators.
In the vicinity of a passive predator, cod behaviour changes very little.
The juveniles prefer finer-grained substrates and otherwise avoid the safer kelp, steering clear of the predator.
In contrast, in the presence of an actively foraging predator, juveniles are highly avoidant and hide in cobble or in kelp if cobble is unavailable.
As apex predators, heavy fishing of cod in the 1990s and the collapse of American and Canadian cod stocks resulted in trophic cascades.
Overfishing cod removed a significant predatory pressure on other Atlantic fish and crustacean species.
Population-limiting effects on several species including American lobsters, crabs, and shrimp from cod predation have decreased significantly, and the abundance of these species and their increasing range serve as evidence of the Atlantic cod's role as a major predator rather than prey.
Response to changing temperatures
Swimming and physiological behaviours change in response to fluctuations in water temperature.
Respirometry experiments show that heart rates of Atlantic cod change drastically with changes in temperature of only a few degrees.
A rise in water temperature causes marked increases in cod swimming activity.
Cod typically avoid new temperature conditions, and the temperatures can dictate where they are distributed in water.
They prefer to be deeper, in colder water layers during the day, and in shallower, warmer water layers at night.
These fine-tuned behavioural changes to water temperature are driven by an effort to maintain homeostasis to preserve energy.
This is demonstrated by the fact that a decrease of only caused a highly costly increase in metabolic rate of 15 to 30%.
Feeding and diet
Stomach sampling studies have discovered that small Atlantic cod feed primarily on crustaceans, while large Atlantic cod feed primarily on fish.
In certain regions, the main food source is decapods with fish as a complementary food item in the diet.
Wild Atlantic cod throughout the North Sea depend, to a large extent, on commercial fish species also used in fisheries, such as Atlantic mackerel, haddock, whiting, Atlantic herring, European plaice, and common sole, making fishery manipulation of cod significantly easier.
Reproduction
Atlantic cod reproduce during a 1- to 2-month spawning season annually.
Males and females aggregate in spawning schools and each spawning season yields an average of 8.3 egg batches.
Females release gametes in a ventral mount, and males then fertilize the released eggs.
Evidence suggests male sound production and other sexually selected characteristics allow female cod to actively choose a spawning partner.
Males also exhibit aggressive interactions for access to females.
Based on behavioral observations of cod, that cod mating systems resemble those of lekking species, which is characterized by males aggregating and establishing dominance hierarchies, at which point females may visit and choose a spawning partner based on status and sexual characteristics.
Parasites
Atlantic cod act as intermediate, paratenic, or definitive hosts to a large number of parasite species: 107 taxa listed by Hemmingsen and MacKenzie (2001)
Technologies that contributed to the collapse of Atlantic cod include engine-powered vessels and frozen food compartments aboard ships.
Engine-powered vessels had larger nets, greater range, and better navigation.
The capacity to catch fish became limitless.
In addition, sonar technology gave an edge to detecting and catching fish.
Sonar was originally developed during World War II to locate enemy submarines, but was later applied to locating schools of fish.
These new technologies, as well as bottom trawlers that destroyed entire ecosystems, contributed to the collapse of Atlantic cod.
They were vastly different from old techniques used, such as hand lines and long lines.
The fishery has only recently begun to recover, and may never fully recover because of a possibly stable change in the food chain.
Atlantic cod was a top-tier predator, along with haddock, flounder and hake, feeding upon smaller prey, such as herring, capelin, shrimp, and snow crab.
With the large predatory fish removed, their prey have had population explosions and have become the top predators, affecting the survival rates of cod eggs and fry.
In the winter of 2011-2012, the cod fishery succeeded in convincing NOAA to postpone for one year the planned 82% reduction in catch limits.
Instead, the limit was reduced by 22%.
The fishery brought in $15.8 million in 2010, coming second behind Georges Bank haddock among the region's 20 regulated bottom-dwelling groundfish.
Data released in 2011 indicated that even closing the fishery would not allow populations to rebound by 2014 to levels required under federal law.
Restrictions on cod effectively limit fishing on other groundfish species with which the cod swim, such as flounder and haddock.
Cod populations or stocks can differ significantly both in appearance and biology.
For instance, the cod stocks of the Baltic Sea are adapted to low-salinity water.
Organisations such as the Northwest Atlantic Fishery Organization (NAFO) and ICES divide the cod into management units or stocks; however, these units are not always biologically distinguishable stocks.
Some major stocks US shelf are the Southern Labrador-Eastern Newfoundland stock (NAFO divisions 2J3KL), the Northern Gulf of St. Lawrence stock (NAFO divisions 3Pn4RS), the Northern Scotian Shelf stock (NAFO divisions 4VsW), which all lie in Canadian waters, and the Georges Bank and Gulf of Maine stocks in United States waters.
In the European Atlantic, the numerous separate stocks are on the shelves of Iceland, the coast of Norway, the Barents Sea, the Faroe Islands, off western Scotland, the North Sea, the Irish Sea, the Celtic Sea, and the Baltic Sea.
Northeast Atlantic cod
The Northeast Atlantic has the world's largest population of cod.
By far, the largest part of this population is the Northeast Arctic cod, as it is labelled by the ICES, or the Arcto-Norwegian cod stock, also referred to as skrei, a Norwegian name meaning something like "the wanderer", distinguishing it from coastal cod.
The Northeast Arctic cod is found in the Barents Sea area.
This stock spawns in March and April along the Norwegian coast, about 40% around the Lofoten archipelago.
Newly hatched larvae drift northwards with the coastal current while feeding on larval copepods.
By summer, the young cod reach the Barents Sea, where they stay for the rest of their lives, until their spawning migration.
As the cod grow, they feed on krill and other small crustaceans and fish.
Adult cod primarily feed on fish such as capelin and herring.
The northeast Arctic cod also show cannibalistic behaviour.
Estimated stock size was in 2008.
The North Sea cod stock is primarily fished by European Union member states and Norway.
In 1999, the catch was divided among Denmark (31%), Scotland (25%), the rest of the United Kingdom (12%), the Netherlands (10%), Belgium, Germany and Norway (17%).
In the 1970s, the annual catch rose to between .
Due to concerns about overfishing, catch quotas were repeatedly reduced in the 1980s and 1990s.
In 2003, ICES stated a high risk existed of stock collapse if then current exploitation levels continued, and recommended a moratorium on catching Atlantic cod in the North Sea during 2004.
However, agriculture and fisheries ministers from the Council of the European Union endorsed the EU/Norway Agreement and set the total allowable catch at .
Seafood sustainability guides, such as the Monterey Bay Aquarium's Seafood Watch, often recommend environmentally conscious customers not purchase Atlantic cod.
The stock of Northeast Arctic cod was more than four million tons following World War II, but declined to a historic minimum of in 1983.
The catch reached a historic maximum of in 1956, and bottomed out at in 1990.
Since 2000, the spawning stock has increased quite quickly, helped by low fishing pressure.
The total catch in 2012 was , the major fishers being Norway and Russia.
Baltic cod
There are at least two populations of cod in the Baltic Sea: One large population that spawns east of Bornholm and one population spawning west of Bornholm.
Eastern Baltic cod is genetically distinct and adapted to the brackish environment.
Adaptations include differences in hemoglobin type, osmoregulatory capacity, egg bouyancy, sperm swimming characteristics and spawning season.
The adaptive responses to the environmental conditions in the Baltic Sea may contribute to an effective reproductive barrier, and thus, eastern Baltic cod can be viewed as an example of ongoing speciation.
The western Baltic cod consists of one or several small subpopulations that are genetically more similar to the North Sea cod.
In the http:/ gazetteer.php?p
details&id
2406 Arkona basin, spawning and migrating cod from both the eastern and western stocks intermingle in proportions that vary seasonally.
The immigration of eastern cod into the western Baltic management unit may mask a poor state of the populations in the western management unit.
Recommendations for management
Scientifically based recommendations for long-term conservation of Baltic cod from the research project https:/ baltgene cod BONUS BAMBI:
* Manage the eastern and western Baltic cod as separate units, since the eastern population is adapted to spawning in low salinity and may not be replaced by cod from elsewhere if depleted.
Moreover, the large-scale fishing of Baltic cod is expected to cause (unwanted) evolutionary changes, such as reduced age and size at maturity.
* Monitor mixing proportions of eastern and western cod in the http:/ gazetteer.php?p
details&id
2406 Arkona basin.
* Potentially divide the western Baltic cod into more than one management unit, since it is unclear whether there are several spawning populations within this area.
Human consumption
Notes
