Dionysus is the god of the grape-harvest, winemaking and wine, of fertility, ritual madness, religious ecstasy, and theatre in ancient Greek religion and myth.
He is also known as Bacchus ( or ; , Bákkhos), the name adopted by the Romans and the frenzy he induces is bakkheia.
His thyrsus, sometimes wound with ivy and dripping with honey, is both a beneficent wand and a weapon used to destroy those who oppose his cult and the freedoms he represents.
As Eleutherios ("the liberator"), his wine, music and ecstatic dance free his followers from self-conscious fear and care, and subvert the oppressive restraints of the powerful.
Those who partake of his mysteries are believed to become possessed and empowered by the god himself.
In his religion, identical with or closely related to Orphism, Dionysus was believed to have been born from the union of Zeus and Persephone, and to have himself represented a chthonic or underworld aspect of Zeus.
Many believed that he had been born twice, having been killed and reborn as the son of Zeus and the mortal Semele.
In the Eleusinian Mysteries he was identified with Iacchus, the son (or, alternately, husband) of Demeter.
His origins are uncertain, and his cults took many forms; some are described by ancient sources as Thracian, others as Greek.
Though most accounts say he was born in Thrace, traveled abroad, and arrived in Greece as a foreigner, evidence from the Mycenaean period of Greek history show that he is one of Greece's oldest attested gods.
His attribute of "foreignness" as an arriving outsider-god may be inherent and essential to his cults, as he is a god of epiphany, sometimes called "the god that comes".
Wine played an important role in Greek culture, and the cult of Dionysus was the main religious focus surrounding its consumption.
Wine, as well as the vines and grapes that produce it, were seen as not only a gift of the god, but a symbolic incarnation of him on earth.
He is sometimes categorised as a dying-and-rising god.
Etymology
The dio- element has been associated since antiquity with Zeus (genitive Dios).
The earliest attested form of the name is in Mycenaean Greek (di-wo-nu-so), Ancient Greek
The Bibliotheca seems to be following Pherecydes, who relates how the infant Dionysus, god of the grapevine, was nursed by the rain-nymphs, the Hyades at Nysa.
Young Dionysus was also said to have been one of the many famous pupils of the centaur Chiron.
According to Ptolemy Chennus in the Library of Photius, "Dionysus was loved by Chiron, from whom he learned chants and dances, the bacchic rites and initiations."
Travels and invention of wine
When Dionysus grew up, he discovered the culture of the vine and the mode of extracting its precious juice, being the first to do so; but Hera struck him with madness, and drove him forth a wanderer through various parts of the earth.
In Phrygia the goddess Cybele, better known to the Greeks as Rhea, cured him and taught him her religious rites, and he set out on a progress through Asia teaching the people the cultivation of the vine.
The most famous part of his wanderings is his expedition to India, which is said to have lasted several years.
According to a legend, when Alexander the Great reached a city called Nysa near the Indus river, the locals said that their city was founded by Dionysus in the distant past and their city was dedicated to the god Dionysus.
These travels took something of the form of military conquests; according to Diodorus Siculus he conquered the whole world except for Britain and Ethiopia.
Another myth according to Nonnus involves Ampelus, a satyr, who was loved by Dionysus.
As related by Ovid, Ampelus became the constellation Vindemitor, or the "grape-gatherer": ...not so will the Grape-gatherer escape thee.
The origin of that constellation also can be briefly told.
'Tis said that the unshorn Ampelus, son of a nymph and a satyr, was loved by Bacchus on the Ismarian hills.
Upon him the god bestowed a vine that trailed from an elm's leafy boughs, and still the vine takes from the boy its name.
While he rashly culled the gaudy grapes upon a branch, he tumbled down; Liber bore the lost youth to the stars."
Another story of Ampelus was related by https:/ stream 340 2up 10.175-430, https:/ stream 358 2up Ampelos 11, https:/ stream 396 2up Ampelos 12.1-117 .
Return to Greece
Returning in triumph to Greece after his travels in Asia, Dionysus came to be considered the founder of the triumphal procession.
He undertook efforts to introduce his religion into Greece, but was opposed by rulers who feared it, on account of the disorders and madness it brought with it.
In one myth, adapted in Euripides' play The Bacchae, Dionysus returns to his birthplace, Thebes, which is ruled by his cousin Pentheus.
Pentheus, as well as his mother Agave and his aunts Ino and Autonoe, disbelieve Dionysus' divine birth.
Despite the warnings of the blind prophet Tiresias, they deny him worship and denounce him for inspiring the women of Thebes to madness.
Dionysus uses his divine powers to drive Pentheus insane, then invites him to spy on the ecstatic rituals of the Maenads, in the woods of Mount Cithaeron.
Pentheus, hoping to witness a sexual orgy, hides himself in a tree.
The Maenads spot him; maddened by Dionysus, they take him to be a mountain-dwelling lion, and attack him with their bare hands.
Pentheus' aunts and his mother Agave are among them, and they rip him limb from limb.
Agave mounts his head on a pike, and takes the trophy to her father Cadmus.
The madness passes.
Dionysus arrives in his true, divine form, banishes Agave and her sisters, and transforms Cadmus and his wife Harmonia into serpents.
Only Tiresias is spared.
When King Lycurgus of Thrace heard that Dionysus was in his kingdom, he imprisoned Dionysus' followers, the Maenads.
Dionysus fled and took refuge with Thetis, and sent a drought which stirred the people to revolt.
The god then drove King Lycurgus insane and had him slice his own son into pieces with an axe in the belief that he was a patch of ivy, a plant holy to Dionysus.
An oracle then claimed that the land would stay dry and barren as long as Lycurgus lived, and his people had him drawn and quartered.
Appeased by the king's death, Dionysus lifted the curse.
This story is told in Homer's Iliad 6.136-7.
In an alternative version, sometimes depicted in art, Lycurgus tries to kill Ambrosia, a follower of Dionysus, who was transformed into a vine that twined around the enraged king and slowly strangled him.
Captivity and escape
The Homeric Hymn 7 to Dionysus recounts how, while he sat on the seashore, some sailors spotted him, believing him a prince.
They attempted to kidnap him and sail away to sell him for ransom or into slavery.
No rope would bind him.
The god turned into a fierce lion and unleashed a bear on board, killing all in his path.
Those who jumped ship were mercifully turned into dolphins.
The only survivor was the helmsman, Acoetes, who recognized the god and tried to stop his sailors from the start.
In a similar story, Dionysus hired a Tyrrhenian pirate ship to sail from Icaria to Naxos.
When he was aboard, they sailed not to Naxos but to Asia, intending to sell him as a slave.
This time the god turned the mast and oars into snakes, and filled the vessel with ivy and the sound of flutes so that the sailors went mad and, leaping into the sea, were turned into dolphins.
In Ovid's Metamorphoses, Bacchus begins this story as a young child found by the pirates, but transforms to a divine adult when on board.
Many of the Dionysus myths involve the god, whose birth was secret, defending his godhead against skeptics.
Malcolm Bull notes that "It is a measure of Bacchus's ambiguous position in classical mythology that he, unlike the other Olympians, had to use a boat to travel to and from the islands with which he is associated".
Paola Corrente notes that in many sources, the incident with the pirates happens towards the end of Dionysus' time among mortals.
In that sense, it serves as final proof of his divinity, and is often followed by his descent into Hades to retrieve his mother, both of whom can then ascend into heaven to live alongside the other Olympian gods.
This mythic event was commemorated with a yearly nighttime festival, the details of which were held secret by the local religion.
According to Paola Corrente, the emergence of Dionysus from the waters of the lagoon may signify a form of rebirth for both him and Semele as they reemerged from the underworld.
A variant of this myth forms the basis of Aristophanes' comedy The Frogs.
This story survives in full only in Christian sources, whose aim was to discredit pagan mythology, but it appears to have also served to explain the origin of secret objects used by the Dionysian Mysteries.
This same myth of Dionysus' descent to the underworld is related by both Diodorus Siculus in his 1st century BC work Bibliotheca historica, and Pseudo-Apollodorus in the third book of his 1st century AD work Bibliotheca.
In the latter, Apollodorus tells how after having been hidden away from Hera's wrath, Dionysus traveled the world opposing those who denied his godhood, finally proving it when he transformed his pirate captors into dolphins.
After this, the culmination of his life on earth was his descent to retrieve his mother from the underworld.
He renamed his mother Thyone, and ascended with her to heaven, where she became a goddess.
In this variant of the myth, it is implied that Dionysus both must prove his godhood to mortals, then also legitimize his place on Olympus by proving his lineage and elevating his mother to divine status, before taking his place among the Olympic gods.
Ariadne
:Ceramus
:Enyeus
:Euanthes
:Eurymedon
:Latramys
:Maron
:Oenopion
:Phanus
:Peparethus
:Phlias
:Staphylus
:Tauropolis
:Thoas
Aura
:Iacchus
:Iacchus' twin brother
Alexirrhoe
:Carmanor
Alphesiboea
:Medus
Althaea
:Deianira
Araethyrea
:Phlias
Chthonophyle
:Phlias
Carya
:No known offspring
Chione
:Priapus (possibly)
Circe
:Comus
Cronois
:Charites (Graces)
:: Pasithea
:: Euphrosyne
:: Thalia
Nicaea
:Telete
Pallene
:No known offspring
Percote
:Priapus (possibly)
Physcoa
:Narcaeus
Unnamed
:Methe
Unnamed
:Sabazios
Unnamed
:Thysa
Iconography
Symbols
The earliest cult images of Dionysus show a mature male, bearded and robed.
He holds a fennel staff, tipped with a pine-cone and known as a thyrsus.
Later images show him as a beardless, sensuous, naked or half-naked androgynous youth: the literature describes him as womanly or "man-womanish".
In its fully developed form, his central cult imagery shows his triumphant, disorderly arrival or return, as if from some place beyond the borders of the known and civilized.
His procession (thiasus) is made up of wild female followers (maenads) and bearded satyrs with erect penises; some are armed with the thyrsus, some dance or play music.
The god himself is drawn in a chariot, usually by exotic beasts such as lions or tigers, and is sometimes attended by a bearded, drunken Silenus.
This procession is presumed to be the cult model for the followers of his Dionysian Mysteries.
Dionysus is represented by city religions as the protector of those who do not belong to conventional society and he thus symbolizes the chaotic, dangerous and unexpected, everything which escapes human reason and which can only be attributed to the unforeseeable action of the gods.
Dionysus was a god of resurrection and he was strongly linked to the bull.
In a cult hymn from Olympia, at a festival for Hera, Dionysus is invited to come as a bull; "with bull-foot raging".
Walter Burkert relates, "Quite frequently Dionysus is portrayed with bull horns, and in Kyzikos he has a tauromorphic image", and refers also to an archaic myth in which Dionysus is slaughtered as a bull calf and impiously eaten by the Titans.
The snake and phallus were symbols of Dionysus in ancient Greece, and of Bacchus in Greece and Rome.
He typically wears a panther or leopard skin and carries a Thyrsus - a long stick or wand topped with a pine cone.
His iconography sometimes include maenads, who wear wreaths of ivy and serpents around their hair or neck.
The cult of Dionysus was closely associated with trees, specifically the fig tree, and some of his bynames exhibit this, such as "he in the tree" or , "he of the tree".
Peters suggests the original meaning as "he who runs among the trees", or that of a "runner in the woods".
Janda (2010) accepts the etymology but proposes the more cosmological interpretation of "he who impels the (world-)tree".
This interpretation explains how Nysa could have been re-interpreted from a meaning of "tree" to the name of a mountain: the axis mundi of Indo-European mythology is represented both as a world-tree and as a world-mountain.
Dionysus is also closely associated with the transition between summer and autumn.
In the Mediterranean summer, marked by the rising of the dog star Sirius, the weather becomes extremely hot, but it is also a time when the promise of coming harvests grow.
Late summer, when Orion is at the center of the sky, was the time of the grape harvest in ancient Greece.
Plato describes the gifts of this season as the fruit that is harvested as well as Dionysian joy.
Pindar describes the "pure light of high summer" as closely associated with Dionysus and possibly even an embodiment of the god himself.
An image of Dionysus' birth from Zeus' thigh call him "the light of Zeus" (Dios phos) and associate him with the light of Sirius.
In these, the treatment of the god himself ranged from severe archaising or Neo Attic types such as the Dionysus Sardanapalus to types showing him as an indolent and androgynous young man, often nude.
"Nymph" by this stage "means simply an ideal female of the Dionysian outdoors, a non-wild bacchant".
Hellenistic sculpture also includes for the first time large genre subjects of children and peasants, many of whom carry Dionysian attributes such as ivy wreaths, and "most should be seen as part of his realm.
They have in common with satyrs and nymphs that they are creatures of the outdoors and are without true personal identity."
The 4th-century BC Derveni Krater, the unique survival of a very large scale Classical or Hellenistic metal vessel of top quality, depicts Dionysus and his followers.
Dionysus appealed to the Hellenistic monarchies for a number of reasons, apart from merely being a god of pleasure: He was a human who became divine, he came from, and had conquered, the East, exemplified a lifestyle of display and magnificence with his mortal followers, and was often regarded as an ancestor.
He continued to appeal to the rich of Imperial Rome, who populated their gardens with Dionysian sculpture, and by the 2nd century AD were often buried in sarcophagi carved with crowded scenes of Bacchus and his entourage.
The 4th-century AD Lycurgus Cup in the British Museum is a spectacular cage cup which changes colour when light comes through the glass; it shows the bound King Lycurgus being taunted by the god and attacked by a satyr; this may have been used for celebration of Dionysian mysteries.
Elizabeth Kessler has theorized that a mosaic appearing on the triclinium floor of the House of Aion in Nea Paphos, Cyprus, details a monotheistic worship of Dionysus.
In the mosaic, other gods appear but may only be lesser representations of the centrally imposed Dionysus.
The mid-Byzantine Veroli Casket shows the tradition lingering in Constantinople around 1000 AD, but probably not very well understood.
Post-classical culture
Art from the Renaissance on
Bacchic subjects in art resumed in the Italian Renaissance, and soon became almost as popular as in antiquity, but his "strong association with feminine spirituality and power almost disappeared", as did "the idea that the destructive and creative powers of the god were indissolubly linked".
In Michelangelo's statue (1496-97)
"madness has become merriment".
The statue aspires to suggest both drunken incapacity and an elevated consciousness, but this was perhaps lost on later viewers, and typically the two aspects were thereafter split, with a clearly drunk Silenus representing the former, and a youthful Bacchus often shown with wings, because he carries the mind to higher places.
Titian's Bacchus and Ariadne (1522-23) and The Bacchanal of the Andrians (1523-26), both painted for the same room, offer an influential heroic pastoral, while Diego Velázquez in The Triumph of Bacchus (or Los borrachos - "the drinkers", c. 1629) and Jusepe de Ribera in his Drunken Silenus choose a genre realism.
Flemish Baroque painting frequently painted the Bacchic followers, as in Van Dyck's Drunken Silenus and many works by Rubens; Poussin was another regular painter of Bacchic scenes.
A common theme in art beginning in the 16th century was the depiction of Bacchus and Ceres caring for a representation of love - often Venus, Cupid, or Amore.
This tradition derived from a quotation by the Roman comedian Terence (c. 195/185 - c. 159 BC) which became a popular proverb in the Early Modern period: Sine Cerere et Baccho friget Venus ("without Ceres and Bacchus, Venus freezes").
Its simplest level of meaning is that love needs food and wine to thrive.
Artwork based on this saying was popular during the period 1550-1630, especially in Northern Mannerism in Prague and the Low Countries, as well as by Rubens.
Because of his association with the vine harvest, Bacchus became the god of autumn, and he and his followers were often shown in sets depicting the seasons.
Modern literature and philosophy
Dionysus has remained an inspiration to artists, philosophers and writers into the modern era.
In The Birth of Tragedy (1872), the German philosopher Friedrich Nietzsche proposed that a tension between Apollonian and Dionysian aesthetic principles underlay the development of Greek tragedy; Dionysus represented what was unrestrained chaotic and irrational, while Apollo represented the rational and ordered.
This concept of a rivalry or opposition between Dionysus and Apollo has been characterized as a "modern myth", as it is the invention of modern thinkers like Nietzsche and Johann Joachim Winckelmann, and is not found in classical sources.
However, the acceptance and popularity of this theme in Western culture has been so great, that its undercurrent has influenced the conclusions of classical scholarship.
Nietzsche also claimed that the oldest forms of Greek Tragedy were entirely based upon the suffering Dionysus.
In Nietzsche's 1886 work Beyond Good and Evil, and later The Twilight of the Idols, The Antichrist and Ecce Homo, Dionysus is conceived as the embodiment of the unrestrained will to power.
In The Hellenic Religion of the Suffering God (1904), and Dionysus and Early Dionysianism (1921), the poet Vyacheslav Ivanov elaborates the theory of Dionysianism, tracing the origins of literature, and tragedy in particular, to ancient Dionysian mysteries.
Karl Kerényi characterizes Dionysus as representative of the psychological life force (Greek Zoê).
Other psychological interpretations place Dionysus' emotionality in the foreground, focusing on the joy, terror or hysteria associated with the god.
Sigmund Freud specified that his ashes should be kept in an Ancient Greek vase painted with Dionysian scenes from his collection, which remains on display at Golders Green Crematorium in London.
In CS Lewis' Prince Caspian , Bacchus is a dangerous-looking, androgynous young boy who helps Aslan awaken the spirits of the Narnian trees and rivers.
Rick Riordan's series of books Percy Jackson & The Olympians presents Dionysus as an uncaring, childish and spoiled god.
In the novel Household Gods by Harry Turtledove and Judith Tarr, Nicole Gunther-Perrin is a lawyer in the 20th century.
She makes a libation to Liber and Libera, Roman equivalents of Dionysus and Persephone, and is transported back in time to ancient Rome.
In The Secret History by Donna Tartt, a group of classics students reflect on reviving the worship of Dionysus during their time in college.
Modern film and performance art
Walt Disney depicted Bacchus in the "Pastoral" segment of the animated film Fantasia, as a Silenus-like character.
In 1969, an adaption of The Bacchae was performed, called Dionysus in '69.
A film was made of the same performance.
The production was notable for involving audience participation, nudity, and theatrical innovations.
In 1974, Stephen Sondheim and Burt Shevelove adapted Aristophanes' comedy The Frogs into a modern musical, which hit broadway in 2004 and was revived in London in 2017.
The musical keeps the descent of Dionysus into Hades to bring back a playwright; however, the playwrights are updated to modern times, and Dionysus is forced to choose between George Bernard Shaw and William Shakespeare.
In 2018, the Australian musical project Dead Can Dance released an album entitled Dionysus.
Musician Brendan Perry described the inspiration for the album as a trance-like, "Dionysian" experience he had at a festival during a trip to rural Spain.
"It's the spring festivals like that one where you see the real remnants of Dionysian festivals.
They're all over the Mediterranean in remote places where Christian influence hasn't been as great. ...
People wear masks and dance in circles almost like time has stood still in their celebrations."
Perry chose to employ Mediterranean folk instruments that mimic natural sounds in addition to a vocal chorus, in order to evoke the atmosphere of an ancient festival.
Parallels with Christianity
Numerous scholars have compared narratives surrounding the Christian figure of Jesus with those associated with Dionysus.
Death and resurrection
Some scholars of comparative mythology identify both Dionysus and Jesus with the dying-and-rising god mythological archetype.
On the other hand, it has been noted that the details of Dionysus' death and rebirth are starkly different both in content and symbolism from Jesus.
The two stories take place in very different historical and geographic contexts.
Also, the manner of death is different; in the most common myth, Dionysus was torn to pieces and eaten by the titans, but "eventually restored to a new life" from the heart that was left over.
Trial
Another parallel can be seen in The Bacchae where Dionysus appears before King Pentheus on charges of claiming divinity, which is compared to the New Testament scene of Jesus being interrogated by Pontius Pilate.
However, a number of scholars dispute this parallel, since the confrontation between Dionysus and Pentheus ends with Pentheus dying, torn into pieces by the mad women, whereas the trial of Jesus ends with him being sentenced to death.
The discrepancies between the two stories, including their resolutions, have led many scholars to regard the Dionysus story as radically different from the one about Jesus, except for the parallel of the arrest, which is a detail that appears in many biographies as well.
Sacred food and drink
Other elements, such as the celebration by a ritual meal of bread and wine, also have parallels.
Scholars from the 16th century onwards, especially Gerard Vossius, also discussed the parallels between the biographies of Dionysus/Bacchus and Moses (Vossius named his sons Dionysius and Isaac).
Such comparisons surface in details of paintings by Poussin.
Tacitus, John the Lydian, and Cornelius Labeo all identify Yahweh with the Greek god Dionysus.
Jews themselves frequently used symbols that were also associated with Dionysus such as kylixes, amphorae, leaves of ivy, and clusters of grapes.
In his Quaestiones Convivales, the Greek writer Plutarch of Chaeronea writes that the Jews hail their god with cries of "Euoi" and "Sabi", phrases associated with the worship of Dionysus.
According to Sean M. McDonough, Greek-speakers may have confused Aramaic words such as Sabbath, Alleluia, or even possibly some variant of the name Yahweh itself for more familiar terms associated with Dionysus.
John Moles has argued that the Dionysian cult influenced early Christianity, and especially the way that Christians understood themselves as a "new" religion centered around a savior deity.
In particular, he argues that the account of Christian origins in the Acts of the Apostles was heavily influenced by Euripides' The Bacchae.
File:Remich Statue of Dionysus.
JPG|Statue of Dionysus in Remich Luxembourg
File:Fane Table.jpg|A Bacchus themed table - the top was made in Florence (c. 1736) and the gilded wood base in Britain or Ireland (circa 1736-1740).
File:Bacchus,_Simeon_Solomon.jpg|Bacchus - Simeon Solomon (1867)
File:Bacchus_ (Giovanni_Francesco_Romanelli)_-_Nationalmuseum_-_17103.tif|Bacchus - Giovanni Francesco Romanelli (17th century)
File:Dionüszosz amfóra.jpg|Dionysian amphora
File:Dionüszosz kancsó.jpg|Dionysian jug
File:3326 - Athens - Stoà of Attalus Museum - Head of Dyonisos - Photo by Giovanni Dall'Orto, Nov 9 2009.jpg|Terracotta vase in the shape of Dionysus' head (circa 410 BC) - on display in the Ancient Agora Museum in Athens, housed in the Stoa of Attalus
File:Amphora with cult mask of Dionysus, by the Antimenes Painter, arounbd 520 BC, Altes Museum Berlin (13718436013).jpg|Amphora with cult mask of Dionysus, by the Antimenes Painter, arounbd 520 BC, Altes Museum
File:Marble head of Dionysus, from the Gymnasium of Salamis, 2nd century AD, Cyprus Museum, Nicosia, Cyprus (22309811890).jpg|Marble head of Dionysus, from the Gymnasium of Salamis, 2nd century AD, Cyprus Museum, Nicosia, Cyprus
File:Dionysos - Landesmuseum Württemberg.jpg|Cult mask of Dionysus from Boeotia, 4th century BC
Notes
Bibliography
* Aristides, Aristides ex recensione Guilielmi Dindorfii, Volume 3, Wilhelm Dindorf, Weidmann, G. Reimer, 1829.
https:/ Record hopper/text?doc=Aristoph.+Frogs Online version at the Perseus Digital Library.
* Arnobius of Sicca, The Seven Books of Arnobius Adversus Gentes, translated by Archibald Hamilton Bryce and Hugh Campbell, Edinburg: T. & T. Clark.
https:/ stream n9 2up Internet Archive.
* Arrian, Anabasis of Alexander, Volume I: Books 1-4, translated by P. A. Brunt.
Loeb Classical Library No. 236.
Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press, 1976. .
https:/ view 1976/volume.xml Online version at Harvard University Press.
* Arrian, Anabasis of Alexander, Volume II: Books 5-7, translated by P. A. Brunt.
Loeb Classical Library No. 269.
Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press, 1976. .
https:/ view 1983/volume.xml Online version at Harvard University Press.
* Bowie, A. M., Aristophanes: Myth, Ritual and Comedy, Cambridge University Press, 1993. .
* Bowie, E. L., "Time and Place, Narrative and Speech in Philicus, Philodams and Limenius" in Hymnic Narrative and the Narratology of Greek Hymns, edited by Andrew Faulkner, Owen Hodkinson, BRILL, 2015. .
*Bull, Malcolm, The Mirror of the Gods, How Renaissance Artists Rediscovered the Pagan Gods, Oxford UP, 2005,
* Burkert, Walter, Greek Religion, Harvard University Press, 1985. .
* Clement of Alexandria, The Exhortation to the Greeks.
The Rich Man's Salvation.
To the Newly Baptized.
Translated by G. W. Butterworth.
Loeb Classical Library No. 92.
Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press, 1919. .
http:/ view 1919 stream n7 2up Internet Archive 1960 edition.
* Collard, Christopher and Martin Cropp, Euripides Fragments: Oedipus-Chrysippus: Other Fragments, Loeb Classical Library No. 506.
Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press, 2008. .
https:/ view 2009/volume.xml Online version at Harvard University Press.
* Diodorus Siculus, Diodorus Siculus: The Library of History.
Translated by C. H. Oldfather.
Twelve volumes.
Loeb Classical Library.
Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press; London: William Heinemann, Ltd. 1989.
http:/ Thayer Roman Diodorus_Siculus/home.html Online version by Bill Thayer
Edmonds, Radcliffe (1999), "Tearing Apart the Zagreus Myth: A Few Disparaging Remarks On Orphism and Original Sin", Classical Antiquity 18 (1999): 35-73.
https:/ web http:/ classics zagreus.pdf PDF.
* Encinas Reguero, M. Carmen, "The Names of Dionysos in Euripides’ Bacchae and the Rhetorical Language of Teiresias", in Redefining Dionysos, Editors: Alberto Bernabé, Miguel Herrero de Jáuregui, Ana Isabel Jiménez San Cristóbal, Raquel Martín Hernández.
Walter de Gruyter, 2013. .
* Euripides, Bacchae, translated by T. A. Buckley in The Tragedies of Euripides, London.
Henry G. Bohn.
http:/ hopper/text?doc=Perseus%3atext%3a1999.01.0092 Online version at the Perseus Digital Library.
* Euripides, Cyclops, in Euripides, with an English translation by David Kovacs, Cambridge.
Harvard University Press.
forthcoming.
http:/ hopper/text?doc=urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0006.tlg001.perseus-eng1:63-81 Online version at the Perseus Digital Library.
* Euripides, Ion, translated by Robert Potter in The Complete Greek Drama, edited by Whitney J. Oates and Eugene O'Neill, Jr. Volume 1.
New York.
Random House.
http:/ hopper/text?doc=Perseus%3atext%3a1999.01.0110 Online version at the Perseus Digital Library.
* Euripides, The Trojan Women, in The Plays of Euripides, translated by E. P. Coleridge.
Volume I. London.
George Bell and Sons. 1891.
http:/ hopper/text?doc=Perseus%3atext%3a1999.01.0124 Online version at the Perseus Digital Library.
* Fantuzzi, Marco, "Sung Poetry: The Case of Inscribed Paeans" in A Companion to Hellenistic Literature, editors: James J. Clauss, Martine Cuypers, John Wiley & Sons, 2010. .
* Farnell, Lewis Richard, The Cults of the Greek States vol 5, Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1909 https:/ details page/n3 Internet Archive; cf. Chapter IV, "Cults of Dionysos"; Chapter V, "Dionysiac Ritual"; Chapter VI, "Cult-Monuments of Dionysos"; Chapter VII, "Ideal Dionysiac Types".
* Lightfoot, J. L. Hellenistic Collection: Philitas.
Alexander of Aetolia.
Hermesianax.
Euphorion.
Parthenius.
Edited and translated by J. L. Lightfoot.
Loeb Classical Library No. 508.
Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press, 2010. .
http:/ view 2010/volume.xml Online version at Harvard University Press.
* Fox, William Sherwood, The Mythology of All Races, v.1, Greek and Roman, 1916, General editor, Louis Herbert Gray.
* Gantz, Timothy, Early Greek Myth: A Guide to Literary and Artistic Sources, Johns Hopkins University Press, 1996, Two volumes: (Vol. 1), (Vol. 2).
* Graf, F. (1974), Eleusis und die orphische Dichtung Athens in vorhellenistischer Zeit, Walter de Gruyter, 1974. .
* Graf, F. (2005), "Iacchus" in Brill's New Pauly: Encyclopaedia of the Ancient World.
Antiquity, Volume 6, Lieden-Boston 2005.
* Grimal, Pierre, The Dictionary of Classical Mythology, Wiley-Blackwell, 1996, .
* Guthrie, W. K. C., Orpheus and Greek Religion: A Study of the Orphic Movement, Princeton University Press, 1935. .
* Hard, Robin, The Routledge Handbook of Greek Mythology: Based on H.J. Rose's "Handbook of Greek Mythology", Psychology Press, 2004, .
* Harder, Annette, Callimachus: Aetia: Introduction, Text, Translation and Commentary, Oxford University Press, 2012. .
(two volume set).
https:/ books?id=a5YdwJJatoAC Google Books
* Harrison, Jane Ellen, Prolegomena to the Study of Greek Religion, second edition, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1908.
https:/ stream n7 2up Internet Archive
* Herodotus; Histories, A. D. Godley (translator), Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1920; .
http:/ hopper/text?doc=Hdt.+1.1.0 Online version at the Perseus Digital Library.
* Hesiod, Theogony, in The Homeric Hymns and Homerica with an English Translation by Hugh G. Evelyn-White, Cambridge, Massachusetts., Harvard University Press; London, William Heinemann Ltd. 1914.
http:/ hopper/text?doc=Perseus%3Atext%3A1999.01.0130%3Acard%3D1 Online version at the Perseus Digital Library.
* Homer, The Iliad with an English Translation by A.T. Murray, PhD in two volumes.
Cambridge, Massachusetts., Harvard University Press; London, William Heinemann, Ltd. 1924.
http:/ hopper/text?doc=Perseus%3Atext%3A1999.01.0134%3Abook%3D1%3Acard%3D1 Online version at the Perseus Digital Library.
* Homer; The Odyssey with an English Translation by A.T. Murray, PH.D. in two volumes.
Cambridge, Massachusetts., Harvard University Press; London, William Heinemann, Ltd. 1919.
http:/ hopper/text?doc=Perseus%3Atext%3A1999.01.0136%3Abook%3D1%3Acard%3D1 Online version at the Perseus Digital Library.
* Hyginus, Gaius Julius, Fabulae in Apollodorus' Library and Hyginus' Fabuae: Two Handbooks of Greek Mythology, Translated, with Introductions by R. Scott Smith and Stephen M. Trzaskoma, Hackett Publishing Company, 2007. .
Janda, Michael, Die Musik nach dem Chaos, Innsbruck 2010.
* Jameson, Michael.
"The Asexuality of Dionysus."
Masks of Dionysus.
Ed.
Thomas H. Carpenter and Christopher A. Faraone.
Ithaca: Cornell UP, 1993. .
* Jiménez San Cristóbal, Anna Isabel, 2012, "Iacchus in Plutarch" in Plutarch in the Religious and Philosophical Discourse of Late Antiquity, edited by Fernando Lautaro Roig Lanzillotta and Israel Mu Oz Gallarte, Brill, .
* Jiménez San Cristóbal, Anna Isabel 2013, "The Sophoclean Dionysos" in Redefining Dionysus, Editors: Alberto Bernabé, Miguel Herrero de Jáuregui, Ana Isabel Jiménez San Cristóbal, Raquel Martín Hernández, Walter de Gruyter. .
* Kerényi, Karl 1967, Eleusis: Archetypal Image of Mother and Daughter, Princeton University Press, 1991. .
* Kerényi, Karl 1976, Dionysos: Archetypal Image of Indestructible Life, Princeton University Press, 1996. .
* Linforth, Ivan M., The Arts of Orpheus, Berkeley, University of California Press, 1941.
https:/ cgi/pt?id
mdp.39015008294699;view
1up;seq=9 Online version at HathiTrust
* Lloyd-Jones, Hugh, Sophocles: Fragments, Edited and translated by Hugh Lloyd-Jones, Loeb Classical Library No. 483.
Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press, 1996. .
http:/ view 1996 stream n5 2up Internet Archive
* Lucretius, De Rerum Natura, William Ellery Leonard.
E. P. Dutton.
http:/ hopper/text?doc=Perseus%3Atext%3A1999.02.0131%3Abook%3D1%3Acard%3D1 Online version at the Perseus Digital Library.
* Marcovich, Miroslav, Studies in Graeco-Roman Religions and Gnosticism, BRILL, 1988. .
* Marsh, Jenny, Cassell's Dictionary of Classical Mythology, Casell & Co, 2001. .
https:/ stream n0 2up Internet Archive
Nauck, Johann August, Tragicorum graecorum fragmenta, Leipzig, Teubner, 1989.
https:/ stream n7 2up Internet Archive
* Nilsson, Martin, P., "Early Orphism and Kindred Religions Movements", The Harvard Theological Review, Vol. 28, No. 3 (Jul., 1935), pp. 181-230.
* Nonnus, Dionysiaca; translated by Rouse, W H D, I Books I-XV.
Loeb Classical Library No. 344, Cambridge, Massachusetts, Harvard University Press; London, William Heinemann Ltd. 1940.
https:/ stream n7 2up Internet Archive
* Nonnus, Dionysiaca; translated by Rouse, W H D, III Books XXXVI-XLVIII.
Loeb Classical Library No. 346, Cambridge, Massachusetts, Harvard University Press; London, William Heinemann Ltd. 1940.
https:/ stream n5 2up Internet Archive.
* Ogden, Daniel, Drakōn: Dragon Myth and Serpent Cult in the Greek and Roman Worlds, Oxford University Press, 2013. .
* Ovid, Metamorphoses, Brookes More.
Boston.
Cornhill Publishing Co. 1922.
http:/ hopper/text?doc=Perseus%3Atext%3A1999.02.0028%3Abook%3D1%3Acard%3D1 Online version at the Perseus Digital Library.
* Parker, Robert (2002), "Early Orphism" in The Greek World, edited by Anton Powell, Routledge, 2002. .
* Parker, Robert (2005) Polytheism and Society at Athens, OUP Oxford, 2005. .
* Pausanias, Pausanias Description of Greece with an English Translation by W.H.S. Jones, Litt.D., and H.A. Ormerod, M.A., in 4 Volumes.
Cambridge, Massachusetts, Harvard University Press; London, William Heinemann Ltd. 1918.
http:/ hopper 1503231 Sara Peterson, An account of the Dionysiac presence in Indian art and culture.
Academia, 2016
* Pickard-Cambridge, Arthur, The Theatre of Dionysus at Athens, 1946.
* Plutarch, Moralia, Volume V: Isis and Osiris.
The E at Delphi.
The Oracles at Delphi No Longer Given in Verse.
The Obsolescence of Oracles.
Translated by Frank Cole Babbitt.
Loeb Classical Library No. 306.
Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press, 1936. .
http:/ view 1936/volume.xml
Online version at Harvard University Press.
* Powell, Barry B., Classical Myth, 5th edition, 2007.
* Ridgeway, William, Origin of Tragedy, 1910.
Kessinger Publishing (June 2003). .
* Ridgeway, William, The Dramas and Dramatic Dances of non-European Races in special reference to the origin of Greek Tragedy, with an appendix on the origin of Greek Comedy, 1915.
*Riu, Xavier, http:/ bmcr 2000-06-13.html
Dionysism and Comedy, Rowman and Littlefield Publishers (1999). .
* Rose, Herbert Jennings, "Iacchus" in The Oxford Classical Dictionary, second edition, Hammond, N.G.L. and Howard Hayes Scullard (editors), Oxford University Press, 1992. .
* Rutherford, Ian, (2016)
Greco-Egyptian Interactions: Literature, Translation, and Culture, 500 BC-AD 300, Oxford University Press, 2016. .
* Rutherford, William G., (1896)
Scholia Aristphanica, London, Macmillan and Co. and New York, 1896.
https:/ stream n5 2up Internet Archive*Smith, R.R.R., Hellenistic Sculpture, a handbook, Thames & Hudson, 1991,
* Smith, William; Dictionary of Greek and Roman Biography and Mythology, London (1873).
http:/ hopper/text?doc=Perseus%3atext%3a1999.04.0104 Online version at the Perseus Digital Library
* Smyth, Herbert Weir, Aeschylus, with an English translation by Herbert Weir Smyth, Volume II, London Heinemann, 1926.
https:/ stream n7 2up Internet Archive
* Sommerstein, Alan H., Aeschylus: Fragments.
Edited and translated by Alan H. Sommerstein.
Loeb Classical Library No. 505.
Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press, 2009. .
http:/ view 2009/volume.xml
Online version at Harvard University Press.
* Sophocles, The Antigone of Sophocles, Edited with introduction and notes by Sir Richard Jebb, Sir Richard Jebb.
Cambridge.
Cambridge University Press. 1891.
http:/ hopper/text?doc=Perseus%3Atext%3A1999.01.0186%3Acard%3D1 Online version at the Perseus Digital Library
* Strabo, Geography, translated by Horace Leonard Jones; Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press; London: William Heinemann, Ltd. (1924).
http:/ hopper/text?doc=Perseus%3Atext%3A1999.01.0198%3Abook%3D6%3Achapter%3D1%3Asection%3D1 Books 6-14, at the Perseus Digital Library
* Sutton, Dana F., Ancient Comedy, Twayne Publishers (August 1993). .
* Tripp, Edward, Crowell's Handbook of Classical Mythology, Ty Crowell Co; First edition (June 1970).
* Versnel, H. S., “ΙΑΚΧΟΣ.
Some Remarks Suggested by an Unpublished Lekythos in the Villa Giulia”, Talanta http:/ publications 1969-1973-●-volume-i-v 4, 1972, 23-38.
http:/ wp-content 2014 Versnel-23-38.pdf PDF
* West, M. L. (1983), The Orphic Poems, Clarendon Press. .
Further reading
* Livy, http:/ txt Livy/Livy39.html History of Rome, Book 39:13, Description of banned Bacchanalia in Rome and Italy
* Detienne, Marcel, Dionysos at Large, tr. by Arthur Goldhammer, Harvard University Press, 1989. .
* http:/ ucbclassics festschrift18/ Albert Henrichs, Between City and Country: Cultic Dimensions of Dionysus in Athens and Attica, (April 1, 1990).
Department of Classics, UCB. Cabinet of the Muses: Rosenmeyer Festschrift.
Paper festschrift18.
* https:/ 1503231 Sara Peterson, An account of the Dionysiac presence in Indian art and culture.
Academia, 2016
* Taylor-Perry, Rosemarie The God Who Comes: Dionysian Mysteries Revisited.
New York: Algora Press, 2003 .
