The mourning dove (Zenaida macroura) is a member of the dove family, Columbidae.
The bird is also known as the American mourning dove or the rain dove, and erroneously as the turtle dove, and was once known as the Carolina pigeon or Carolina turtledove.
It is one of the most abundant and widespread of all North American birds.
It is also a leading gamebird, with more than 20 million birds (up to 70 million in some years) shot annually in the U.S., both for sport and for meat.
Its ability to sustain its population under such pressure is due to its prolific breeding; in warm areas, one pair may raise up to six broods of two young each in a single year.
The wings make an unusual whistling sound upon take-off and landing, a form of sonation.
The bird is a strong flier, capable of speeds up to .
It is the national bird of the British Virgin Islands.
Mourning doves are light grey and brown and generally muted in color.
Males and females are similar in appearance.
The species is generally monogamous, with two squabs (young) per brood.
Both parents incubate and care for the young.
Mourning doves eat almost exclusively seeds, but the young are fed crop milk by their parents.
Taxonomy
The mourning dove is closely related to the eared dove (Zenaida auriculata) and the Socorro dove (Zenaida graysoni).
Some authorities describe them as forming a superspecies and these three birds are sometimes classified in the separate genus Zenaidura, It has recently invaded the Florida Keys.
The genus name was bestowed in 1838 by French zoologist Charles L. Bonaparte in honor of his wife, Princess Zénaide, and macroura is from Ancient Greek makros, "long" and oura, "tail".
The "mourning" part of its common name comes from its call.
The mourning dove was thought to be the passenger pigeon's closest living relative based on morphological grounds until genetic analysis showed Patagioenas pigeons to be more closely related.
The mourning dove was even suggested to belong to the same genus, Ectopistes, and was listed by some authors as E. carolinensis.
Distribution
The mourning dove has a large range of nearly .
The species is resident throughout the Greater Antilles, most of Mexico, the Continental United States, southern Canada, and the Atlantic archipelago of Bermuda.
Much of the Canadian prairie sees these birds in summer only, and southern Central America sees them in winter only.
The species is a vagrant in northern Canada, Alaska, and South America.
It has been spotted as an accidental at least seven times in the Western Palearctic with records from the British Isles (5), the Azores (1) and Iceland (1).
In 1963, the mourning dove was introduced to Hawaii, and in 1998 there was still a small population in North Kona.
The mourning dove also appeared on Socorro Island, off the western coast of Mexico, in 1988, sixteen years after the Socorro dove was extirpated from that island.
Description
The mourning dove is a medium-sized, slender dove approximately in length.
Mourning doves weigh , usually closer to .
The elliptical wings are broad, and the head is rounded.
Its tail is long and tapered ("macroura" comes from the Greek words for "large" and "tail").
Mourning doves have perching feet, with three toes forward and one reversed.
The legs are short and reddish colored.
The beak is short and dark, usually a brown-black hue.
The nest is constructed of twigs, conifer needles, or grass blades, and is of flimsy construction.
Most nests are in trees, both deciduous and coniferous.
Sometimes, they can be found in shrubs, vines, or on artificial constructs like buildings, The eggs are white, , long, wide, at laying (5-6% of female body mass).
Both sexes incubate, the male from morning to afternoon, and the female the rest of the day and at night.
Mourning doves are devoted parents; nests are very rarely left unattended by the adults.
The primary predators of this species are diurnal birds of prey, such as falcons and hawks.
During nesting, corvids, grackles, housecats, or rat snakes will prey on their eggs.
Behavior
Like other columbines, the mourning dove drinks by suction, without lifting or tilting its head.
It often gathers at drinking spots around dawn and dusk.
Mourning doves sunbathe or rainbathe by lying on the ground or on a flat tree limb, leaning over, stretching one wing, and keeping this posture for up to twenty minutes.
These birds can also waterbathe in shallow pools or bird baths.
Dustbathing is common as well.
Outside the breeding season, mourning doves roost communally in dense deciduous trees or in conifers.
During sleep, the head rests between the shoulders, close to the body; it is not tucked under the shoulder feathers as in many other species.
During the winter in Canada, roosting flights to the roosts in the evening, and out of the roosts in the morning, are delayed on colder days.
Conservation status
The number of individual mourning doves is estimated to be approximately 475 million.
The large population and its vast range explain why the mourning dove is considered to be of least concern, meaning that the species is not at immediate risk.
However, more recent reporting cautions that mourning doves are in decline in the western United States, and susceptible everywhere in the country due to lead poisoning as they eat spent shot left over in hunting fields.
In some cases the fields are specifically planted with a favored seed plant to lure them to those sites.
As a symbol and in the arts
The eastern mourning dove (Z. m. carolinensis) is Wisconsin's official symbol of peace.
The bird is also Michigan's state bird of peace.
The mourning dove appears as the Carolina turtle-dove on plate 286 of Audubon's Birds of America.
Lorine Niedecker, and Charles Wright.
Closest related species
The mourning dove is a related species to the passenger pigeon (Ectopistes migratorius), which was hunted to extinction in the early 1900s.
For this reason, the possibility of using mourning doves for cloning the passenger pigeon has been discussed.
