The Nintendo Entertainment System (NES) is an 8-bit third-generation home video game console produced, released, and marketed by Nintendo.
It is a remodelled export version of the company's (FC) platform in Japan, commonly known as the , which was launched on July 15, 1983.
The NES was launched in a test market of New York City on October 18, 1985, followed by Los Angeles as a second test market in February 1986, followed by Chicago and San Francisco, then other top 12 American markets, followed by a full launch across North America and some countries in Europe in September 1986, followed by Australia and other countries in Europe in 1987.
Brazil saw only unlicensed clones until the official local release in 1993.
In South Korea, it was packaged as the Hyundai Comboy and distributed by Hyundai Electronics which is now SK Hynix; the Comboy was released in 1989.
As the best-selling gaming console of its time, the NES helped revitalize the US video game industry following the Video game crash of 1983.
With the NES, Nintendo introduced a now-standard business model of licensing third-party developers, authorizing them to produce and distribute games for Nintendo's platform.
It had been preceded by Nintendo's first home video game console, the Color TV-Game, and was succeeded by the Super Nintendo Entertainment System (SNES).
History
Development
Following a series of arcade game successes in the early 1980s, Nintendo made plans to create a cartridge-based console called the Famicom, which is short for Family Computer.
Masayuki Uemura designed the system.
Original plans called for an advanced 16-bit system which would function as a full-fledged computer with a keyboard and floppy disk drive, but Nintendo president Hiroshi Yamauchi rejected this and instead decided to go for a cheaper, more conventional cartridge-based game console as he believed that features such as keyboards and disks were intimidating to non-technophiles.
A test model was constructed in October 1982 to verify the functionality of the hardware, after which work began on programming tools.
Because 65xx CPUs had not been manufactured or sold in Japan up to that time, no cross-development software was available and it had to be produced from scratch.
Early Famicom games were written on a system that ran on an NEC PC-8001 computer and LEDs on a grid were used with a digitizer to design graphics as no software design tools for this purpose existed at that time.
The code name for the project was "GameCom", but Masayuki Uemura's wife proposed the name "Famicom", arguing that "In Japan, 'pasokon' is used to mean a personal computer, but it is neither a home or personal computer.
Perhaps we could say it is a family computer."
Meanwhile, Hiroshi Yamauchi decided that the console should use a red and white theme after seeing a billboard for DX Antenna (a Japanese antenna manufacturer) which used those colors.
which contrasts with the flicker and slowdown commonly seen on Atari 2600 games.
Uemura, head of Famicom development, stated that the ColecoVision set the bar for the Famicom.
Original plans called for the Famicom's cartridges to be the size of a cassette tape, but ultimately they ended up being twice as big.
Careful design attention was paid to the cartridge connectors because loose and faulty connections often plagued arcade machines.
As it necessitated 60 connection lines for the memory and expansion, Nintendo decided to produce its own connectors.
Nintendo also had its sights set on the North American market, entering into negotiations with Atari to release the Famicom under Atari's name as the Nintendo Advanced Video Gaming System.
The deal was set to be finalized and signed at the Summer Consumer Electronics Show in June 1983.
However, Atari discovered at that show that its competitor Coleco was illegally demonstrating its Coleco Adam computer with Nintendo's Donkey Kong game.
This violation of Atari's exclusive license with Nintendo to publish the game for its own computer systems delayed the implementation of Nintendo's game console marketing contract with Atari.
Atari's CEO Ray Kassar was fired the next month, so the deal went nowhere, and Nintendo decided to market its system on its own.
At June 1985's Consumer Electronics Show (CES), Nintendo unveiled the American version of its Famicom, with a new case redesigned by Lance Barr and featuring a "zero insertion force" cartridge slot.
The change from a top-loader in the Famicom to a front-loader was to make the new console more like a video cassette recorder, which had grown in popularity by 1985, and differentiate the unit from past video game consoles.
This would eventually be officially deployed as the Nintendo Entertainment System, or the colloquial "NES".
Nintendo seeded these first systems to limited American test markets starting in New York City on October 18, 1985, and followed up with a full North American release in February 1986.
The nationwide release came in September 1986.
Nintendo released 17 launch games: 10-Yard Fight, Baseball, Clu Clu Land, Duck Hunt, Excitebike, Golf, Gyromite, Hogan’s Alley, Ice Climber, Kung Fu, Pinball, Soccer, Stack-Up, Tennis, Wild Gunman, Wrecking Crew, and Super Mario Bros.
For expedient production, some varieties of these launch games contain Famicom chips with an adapter inside the cartridge so they play on North American consoles, which is why the title screens of Gyromite and Stack-Up have the Famicom titles "Robot Gyro" and "Robot Block", respectively.
The system's launch represented not only a new product, but also a reframing of the severely damaged home video game market.
The 1983 video game crash had occurred in large part due to a lack of consumer and retailer confidence in video games, which had been partially due to confusion and misrepresentation in video game marketing.
Prior to the NES, the packaging of many video games presented bombastic artwork which exaggerated the graphics of the actual game.
In terms of product identity, a single game such as Pac-Man would appear in many versions on many different game consoles and computers, with large variations in graphics, sound, and general quality between the versions.
In stark contrast, Nintendo's marketing strategy aimed to regain consumer and retailer confidence by delivering a singular platform whose technology was not in need of exaggeration and whose qualities were clearly defined.
To differentiate Nintendo's new home platform from the perception of a troubled and shallow video game market still reeling from the 1983 crash, the company freshened its product nomenclature and established a strict product approval and licensing policy.
The overall platform is referred to as "Entertainment System" instead of a "video game system", is centered upon a machine called a "Control Deck" instead of a "console", and features software cartridges called "Game Paks" instead of "video games".
This allowed Nintendo to gain more traction in selling the system in toy stores.
To deter production of games which had not been licensed by Nintendo, and to prevent copying, the 10NES lockout chip system act as a lock-and-key coupling of each Game Pak and Control Deck.
The packaging of the launch lineup of NES games bear pictures of close representations of actual onscreen graphics.
To reduce consumer confusion, symbols on the games' packaging clearly indicate the genre of the game.
A seal of quality is on all licensed game and accessory packaging.
The initial seal states, "This seal is your assurance that Nintendo has approved and guaranteed the quality of this product".
This text was later changed to "Official Nintendo Seal of Quality".
Unlike with the Famicom, Nintendo of America marketed the console primarily to children, instituting a strict policy of censoring profanity, sexual, religious, or political content.
The most famous example is Lucasfilm's attempts to port the comedy-horror game Maniac Mansion to the NES, which Nintendo insisted be considerably watered down.
Nintendo of America continued its censorship policy until 1994 with the advent of the Entertainment Software Rating Board system, coinciding with criticism stemming from the cuts made to the Super NES port of Mortal Kombat compared to the Sega Genesis'.
The optional Robotic Operating Buddy, or R.O.B., was part of a marketing plan to portray the NES's technology as being novel and sophisticated when compared to previous game consoles, and to portray its position as being within reach of the better established toy market.
Though at first, the American public exhibited limited excitement for the console itself, peripherals such as the light gun and R.O.B. attracted extensive attention.
In Europe, Oceania, and Canada, the system was released in two separate marketing regions.
The first consisted of mainland Europe (excluding Italy) where distribution was handled by a number of different companies, with Nintendo responsible for most cartridge releases.
Most of this region saw a 1986 release.
The release in the Netherlands was in Q4 1987, where it was distributed by Bandai BV.
In 1987 Mattel handled distribution for the second region, consisting of the United Kingdom, Ireland, Canada, Italy, Australia and New Zealand.
Not until the 1990s did Nintendo's newly created European branch direct distribution throughout Europe.
In Brazil, the console was released late in 1993 by Playtronic, even after the SNES.
But the Brazilian market had been dominated by unlicensed NES clones - both locally made, and smuggled from China and Taiwan.
One of the most successful local clones is the Phantom System, manufactured by Gradiente, which would end up licensing Nintendo products in the country for the following decade.
The sales of officially licensed products were low, due to the cloning, the quite late official launch, and the high prices of Nintendo's licensed products.
For its complete North American release, the Nintendo Entertainment System was progressively released over the ensuing years in several different bundles, beginning with the Deluxe Set, the Basic Set, the Action Set and the Power Set.
The Deluxe Set, retailing at (), Two more bundle packages were later released using the original model NES console.
The Challenge Set of 1992 included the console, two controllers, and a Super Mario Bros. 3 Game Pak for a retail price of .
The Basic Set was repackaged for a retail .
It included only the console and two controllers, and no longer was bundled with a cartridge.
The Famicom was officially discontinued in September 2003.
Nintendo offered repair service for the Famicom in Japan until 2007, when it was discontinued due to a shortage of available parts.
The original NES, meanwhile, featured a front-loading cartridge covered by a small, hinged door that can be opened to insert or remove a cartridge and closed at other times.
It features a more subdued gray, black, and red color scheme.
An expansion port was found on the bottom of the unit and the cartridge connector pinout was changed.
In the UK, Italy and Australia which share the PAL-A region, two versions of the NES were released; the "Mattel Version" and "NES Version".
When the NES was first released in those countries, it was distributed by Mattel and Nintendo decided to use a lockout chip specific to those countries, different from the chip used in other European countries.
When Nintendo took over European distribution in 1990, it produced consoles that were then labelled "NES Version"; therefore, the only differences between the two are the text on the front flap and texture on the top/bottom of the casing.
In October 1993, Nintendo redesigned the NES to follow many of the same design cues as the newly introduced Super Nintendo Entertainment System and the Japanese Super Famicom.
Like the SNES, the NES-101 model loads cartridges through a covered slot on top of the unit replacing the complicated mechanism of the earlier design.
In December 1993, the Famicom received a similar redesign.
It also loads cartridges through a covered slot on the top of the unit and uses non-hardwired controllers.
Because HVC-101 uses composite video output instead of being RF only like the HVC-001, Nintendo marketed the newer model as the Since the new controllers don't have microphones on them like the second controller on the original console, certain games such as the Disk System version of The Legend of Zelda and Raid on Bungeling Bay have certain tricks that cannot be replicated when played on an HVC-101 Famicom without a modified controller.
In October 1987, Nintendo released a 3D stereoscopic headset called the Famicom 3D System (HVC-031) in Japan only.
Design flaws
Nintendo's design styling for US release was made deliberately different from that of other game consoles.
Nintendo wanted to distinguish its product from those of competitors and to avoid the generally poor reputation that game consoles had acquired following the North American video game crash of 1983.
One result of this philosophy is to disguise the cartridge slot design as a front-loading zero insertion force (ZIF) cartridge socket, designed to resemble the front-loading mechanism of a VCR.
The newly designed connector works quite well when both the connector and the cartridges are clean and the pins on the connector are new.
Unfortunately, the ZIF connector is not truly zero insertion force.
When a user inserts the cartridge into the NES, the force of pressing the cartridge down and into place bends the contact pins slightly, as well as pressing the cartridge's ROM board back into the cartridge itself.
Frequent insertion and removal of cartridges cause the pins to wear out from repeated usage over the years and the ZIF design prove more prone to interference by dirt and dust than an industry-standard card edge connector.
These design issues are exacerbated by Nintendo's choice of materials; the console slot nickel connector springs wear due to design and the game cartridge copper connectors are also prone to tarnishing.
Nintendo sought to fix these issues by redesigning the next generation Super Nintendo Entertainment System (SNES) as a top loader similar to the Famicom to ensure better results reading the game cartridges.
Many players try to alleviate issues in the game caused by this corrosion by blowing into the cartridges, then reinserting them, which actually speeds up the tarnishing due to moisture.
One way to slow down the tarnishing process and extend the life of the cartridges is to use isopropyl alcohol and swabs, as well as non-conductive metal polish such as Brasso or Sheila Shine.
Lockout
The Famicom contains no lockout hardware and, as a result, unlicensed cartridges (both legitimate and bootleg) were extremely common throughout Japan and the Far East.
The original NES (but not the top-loading NES-101) contain the 10NES lockout chip, which significantly increased the challenges faced by unlicensed developers.
Hobbyists in later years discovered that disassembling the NES and cutting the fourth pin of the lockout chip would change the chip's mode of operation from "lock" to "key", removing all effects and greatly improving the console's ability to play legal games, as well as bootlegs and converted imports.
NES consoles sold in different regions have different lockout chips, so games marketed in one region do not work on consoles from another region.
Known regions are these: USA/Canada (3193 lockout chip); most of Europe (3195); Asia (3196); and UK, Italy, and Australia (3197).
Because two types of lockout chip were released in Europe, European NES game boxes often have an "A" or "B" letter on the front, indicating whether the game is compatible with UK Australian consoles (A), or the rest of Europe (B).
Games in the rest of Europe typically have text on the box stating "This game is not compatible with the Mattel or NES versions of the Nintendo Entertainment System".
Similarly, UK Australia games state "This game is only compatible with the Mattel or NES versions of the Nintendo Entertainment System".
Problems with the 10NES lockout chip frequently result in the console's most infamous problem: the blinking red power light, in which the system appears to turn itself on and off repeatedly because the 10NES would reset the console once per second.
The lockout chip required constant communication with the chip in the game to work.
In 1989, Nintendo released an official NES Cleaning Kit to help users clean malfunctioning cartridges and consoles.
With the release of the top-loading NES-101 (NES 2) toward the end of the NES's lifespan, Nintendo resolved the problems by switching to a standard card edge connector and eliminating the lockout chip.
All of the Famicom systems use standard card edge connectors, as do Nintendo's two subsequent game consoles, the Super Nintendo Entertainment System and the Nintendo 64.
In response to these hardware flaws, "Nintendo Authorized Repair Centers" sprang up across the U.S.
According to Nintendo, the authorization program was designed to ensure that the machines were properly repaired.
Nintendo would ship the necessary replacement parts only to shops that had enrolled in the authorization program.
In practice, the authorization process consisted of nothing more than paying a fee to Nintendo for the privilege.
Famicom 3D System
Nintendo released a stereoscopic headset peripheral called Famicom 3D System.
This was never released outside Japan, since it was a commercial failure, making some gamers experience headaches and nausea.
Famicom Modem
Nintendo released a modem peripheral called Famicom Modem.
This was not intended for traditional games but for gambling on real horse races, stock trading, and banking.
Technical specifications
For its CPU, the NES uses the Ricoh 2A03, an 8-bit microprocessor containing a MOS Technology 6502 core, running at 1.79 MHz for the NTSC NES and 1.66 MHz for the PAL version.
The NES contains 2 kB of onboard work RAM.
A game cartridge may contain expanded RAM to increase this amount.
The sizes of NES games vary from 8 kB (Galaxian) to 1 MB (Metal Slader Glory), but 128 to 384 kB is the most common.
The NES uses a custom-made Picture Processing Unit (PPU) developed by Ricoh.
All variations of the PPU feature 2 kB of video RAM, 256 bytes of on-die "object attribute memory" (OAM) to store the positions, colors, and tile indices of up to 64 sprites on the screen, and 28 bytes of on-die palette RAM to allow selection of background and sprite colors.
The console's 2 kB of onboard RAM may be used for tile maps and attributes on the NES board and 8 kB of tile pattern ROM or RAM may be included on a cartridge.
The system has an available color palette of 48 colors and 6 grays.
Up to 25 simultaneous colors may be used without writing new values mid-frame: a background color, four sets of three tile colors, and four sets of three sprite colors.
The NES palette is based on NTSC rather than RGB values.
A total of 64 sprites may be displayed onscreen at a given time without reloading sprites mid-screen.
The standard display resolution of the NES is 256 horizontal pixels by 240 vertical pixels.
Video output connections vary between console models.
The original HVC-001 model of the Family Computer features only radio frequency (RF) modulator output.
The North American and European consoles have support for composite video through RCA connectors in addition to the RF modulator.
The HVC-101 model of the Famicom omits the RF modulator entirely and has composite video output via a proprietary 12-pin "multi-out" connector first introduced on the Super Famicom and Super Nintendo Entertainment System.
Conversely, the North American re-released NES-101 model most closely resembles the original HVC-001 model Famicom, in that it features RF modulator output only.
Due to wiring differences between the Famicom and NES, a stock NES console is incapable of passing through audio generated by expansion chips utilizing additional sound channels, but can be modified to regain this capability.
Accessories
Controllers
The game controller used for both the NES and the Famicom features an oblong brick-like design with a simple four button layout: two round buttons labeled "A" and "B", a "START" button, and a "SELECT" button.
Additionally, the controllers utilize the cross-shaped joypad, designed by Nintendo employee Gunpei Yokoi for Nintendo Game & Watch systems, to replace the bulkier joysticks on earlier gaming consoles' controllers.
This was changed to the circular designs because of the square buttons being caught in the controller casing when pressed down and glitches within the hardware causing the system to freeze occasionally while playing a game.
Instead of the Famicom's hardwired controllers, the NES features two custom 7-pin ports on the front of the console to support swappable and potentially third-party controllers.
The controllers bundled with the NES are identical and include the START and SELECT buttons, allowing some NES versions of games, such as The Legend of Zelda, to use the START button on the second controller to save the game at any time.
The NES controllers lack the microphone, which is used on the Famicom version of Zelda to kill certain enemies, or for singing with karaoke games.
The original Famicom features a deepened DA-15 expansion port on the front of the unit, which is used to connect most auxiliary devices.
The original NES controller has become one of the most recognizable symbols of the console.
Nintendo has mimicked the look of the controller in several other products, from promotional merchandise to limited edition versions of the Game Boy Advance.
Japanese accessories
Few of the numerous peripheral devices and software packages for the Famicom, were released outside Japan.
Family BASIC is an implementation of BASIC for the Famicom, packaged with a keyboard.
Similar in concept to the Atari 2600 BASIC cartridge, it allows the user to write programs, especially games, which can be saved on an included cassette recorder.
Nintendo of America rejected releasing Famicom BASIC in the US because it did not think it fit their primary marketing demographic of children.
A dialup modem was never released for NES.
Family Computer Disk System
In 1986, Nintendo released the Famicom Disk System (FDS) in Japan, a type of floppy drive that uses a single-sided, proprietary 5 cm (2") disk and plugs into the cartridge port.
It contains RAM for the game to load into and an extra single-cycle wavetable-lookup sound chip.
The disks are used both for storing the game and saving progress, with a total capacity of 128k (64k per side).
The disks were originally obtained from kiosks in malls and other public places where buyers could select a game and have it written to the disk.
This process cost less than cartridges and users could take the disk back to a vending booth and have it rewritten with a new game, or the high score faxed to Nintendo for national leaderboard contests.
A variety of games for the FDS were released by Nintendo , and third party companies such as Konami, Taito, or unlicensed publishers.
Its limitations became quickly apparent as larger ROM chips were introduced, allowing cartridges with greater than 128k of space.
More advanced memory management chips (MMC) soon appeared and the FDS quickly became obsolete.
Nintendo also charged developers high prices to produce FDS games, and many refused to develop for it, instead continuing to make cartridge games.
After only two years, the FDS was discontinued, although vending booths remained in place until 1993 and Nintendo continued to service drives, and to rewrite and offer replacement disks until 2003.
Approximately four million drives were sold.
Nintendo did not release the Disk System outside Japan due to numerous problems encountered with the medium in Japan, and due to the increasing data storage capacity and reducing cost of the highly reliable cartridge medium.
As a result, many Disk System games such as Castlevania, The Legend of Zelda, and Bubble Bobble were converted to cartridge format for their export releases, resulting in simplified sound and the disk save function replaced by passwords or battery save systems.
Hardware clones
A thriving market of unlicensed NES hardware clones emerged during the climax of the console's popularity.
Initially, such clones were popular in markets where Nintendo never issued a legitimate version of the console.
In particular, the Dendy (), an unlicensed hardware clone produced in Taiwan and sold in the former Soviet Union, emerged as the most popular video game console of its time in that setting and it enjoyed a degree of fame roughly equivalent to that experienced by the NES/Famicom in North America and Japan.
A range of Famicom clones was marketed in Argentina during the late 1980s and early 1990s under the name of "Family Game", resembling the original hardware design.
The Micro Genius (Simplified Chinese: 小天才) was marketed in Southeast Asia as an alternative to the Famicom; Samurai was the popular PAL alternative to the NES; and in Central Europe, especially Poland, the Pegasus was available.
Since 1989, there were many Brazilian clones of NES, These unauthorized clones have been helped by the invention of the so-called NES-on-a-chip.
As was the case with unlicensed games, Nintendo has typically gone to the courts to prohibit the manufacture and sale of unlicensed cloned hardware.
Many of the clone vendors have included built-in copies of licensed Nintendo software, which constitutes copyright infringement in most countries.
Although most hardware clones were not produced under license by Nintendo, certain companies were granted licenses to produce NES-compatible devices.
The Sharp Corporation produced at least two such clones: the Twin Famicom and the SHARP 19SC111 television.
The Twin Famicom is compatible with both Famicom cartridges and Famicom Disk System disks.
Like the Famicom, it is red and black and has hardwired controllers, but has a different case design.
The SHARP 19SC111 television includes a built-in Famicom.
A similar licensing deal was reached with Hyundai Electronics, who licensed the system under the name Comboy in the South Korean market.
This deal with Hyundai was made necessary because of the South Korean government's wide ban on all Japanese "cultural products", which remained in effect until 1998 and ensured that the only way Japanese products could legally enter the South Korean market was through licensing to a third-party (non-Japanese) distributor (see also Japan-Korea disputes).
In India, the system was sold under the name Samurai and assembled locally under license from kits due to policies that banned imports of electronics.
NES Test Station
The NES Test Station diagnostics machine was introduced in 1988.
It is a NES-based unit designed for testing NES hardware, components, and games.
It was only provided for use in World of Nintendo boutiques as part of the Nintendo World Class Service program.
Visitors were to bring items to test with the station, and could be assisted by a store technician or employee.
The NES Test Station's front features a Game Pak slot and connectors for testing various components (AC adapter, RF switch, Audio/Video cable, NES Control Deck, accessories and games), with a centrally-located selector knob to choose which component to test.
The unit itself weighs approximately 11.7 pounds without a TV.
It connects to a television via a combined A V Cable or RF Switch connection.
The television it is connected to (typically 11" to 14") is meant to be placed atop it.
In 1991, Nintendo provided an add-on called the "Super NES Counter Tester" that tests Super Nintendo components and games.
The SNES Counter Tester is a standard SNES on a metal fixture with the connection from the back of the SNES re-routed to the front of the unit.
These connections may be made directly to the test station or to the TV, depending on what is to be tested.
Games
The Nintendo Entertainment System has a number of groundbreaking games.
Super Mario Bros. pioneered side-scrollers whilst The Legend of Zelda established the genre of action adventure games, and helped popularize battery-backed save functionality.
Game Pak
The NES uses a 72-pin design, as compared with 60 pins on the Famicom.
To reduce costs and inventory, some early games released in North America are simply Famicom cartridges attached to an adapter to fit inside the NES hardware.
The back of the cartridge bears a label with handling instructions.
Production and software revision codes were imprinted as stamps on the back label to correspond with the software version and producer.
All licensed NTSC and PAL cartridges are a standard shade of gray plastic, with the exception of The Legend of Zelda and Zelda II: The Adventure of Link, which were manufactured in gold-plastic carts.
Unlicensed carts were produced in black, robin egg blue, and gold, and are all slightly different shapes than standard NES cartridges.
Nintendo also produced yellow-plastic carts for internal use at Nintendo Service Centers, although these "test carts" were never made available for purchase.
All licensed US cartridges were made by Nintendo, Konami, and Acclaim.
For promotion of s theme song, "Life is like a hurricane".
Famicom cartridges are shaped slightly differently.
Unlike NES games, official Famicom cartridges were produced in many colors of plastic.
Adapters, similar in design to the popular accessory Game Genie, are available that allow Famicom games to be played on an NES.
In Japan, several companies manufactured the cartridges for the Famicom.
Some of the Nintendo platform-control measures were adopted in a less stringent way by later console manufacturers such as Sega, Sony, and Microsoft.
To this end, a 10NES authentication chip is in every console and in every officially licensed cartridge.
If the console's chip can not detect a counterpart chip inside the cartridge, the game does not load.
Nintendo's intention was to reserve a large part of NES game revenue for itself.
Nintendo required that it be the sole manufacturer of all cartridges, and that the publisher had to pay in full before the cartridges for that game be produced.
Cartridges could not be returned to Nintendo, so publishers assumed all the risk.
As a result, some publishers lost more money due to distress sales of remaining inventory at the end of the NES era than they ever earned in profits from sales of the games.
Because Nintendo controlled the production of all cartridges, it was able to enforce strict rules on its third-party developers, which were required to sign a contract by Nintendo that would obligate these parties to develop exclusively for the system, order at least 10,000 cartridges, and only make five games per year.
GameSpy noted that Nintendo's "iron-clad terms" made the company many enemies during the 1980s.
Some developers tried to circumvent the five game limit by creating additional company brands like Konami's Ultra Games label and others tried circumventing the 10NES chip.
The United States Department of Justice and several states began probing Nintendo's business practices, leading to the involvement of Congress and the Federal Trade Commission (FTC).
The FTC conducted an extensive investigation which included interviewing hundreds of retailers.
During the FTC probe, Nintendo changed the terms of its publisher licensing agreements to eliminate the two-year rule and other restrictive terms.
Nintendo and the FTC settled the case in April 1991, with Nintendo required to send vouchers giving a $5 discount off to a new game, to every person that had purchased a NES game between June 1988 and December 1990.
GameSpy remarked that Nintendo's punishment was particularly weak giving the case's findings, although it has been speculated that the FTC did not want to damage the video game industry in the United States.
Nintendo lost the lawsuit, but did win on a claim of copyright infringement.
Blockbuster was banned from including original, copyrighted instruction booklets with its rented games.
In compliance with the ruling, Blockbuster produced original short instructions-usually in the form of a small booklet, card, or label stuck on the back of the rental box-that explained the game's basic premise and controls.
Video rental shops continued the practice of renting video games.
Reception
By 1988, industry observers stated that the NES's popularity had grown so quickly that the market for Nintendo cartridges was larger than that for all home computer software.
"Computer game makers are scared stiff", the magazine said, stating that Nintendo's popularity caused most competitors to have poor sales during the previous Christmas and resulted in serious financial problems for some.
File:NES Famicom PAL NTSC European American Japanese.jpg|thumb|Comparison of NES from different regions.
From top: Japanese Famicom, European NES and American NES
In June 1989, Nintendo of America's vice president of marketing Peter Main, said that the Famicom was present in 37% of Japan's households.
By 1990, 30% of American households owned the NES, compared to 23% for all personal computers.
By 1990, the NES had outsold all previously released consoles worldwide.
The slogan for this brand was "It can't be beaten".
while the Nintendo Entertainment System was not available in the Soviet Union.
In the early 1990s, gamers predicted that competition from technologically superior systems such as the 16-bit Sega Genesis would mean the immediate end of the NES's dominance.
Instead, during the first year of Nintendo's successor console the Super Famicom (named Super Nintendo Entertainment System outside Japan), the Famicom remained the second highest-selling video game console in Japan, outselling the newer and more powerful NEC PC Engine and Sega Mega Drive by a wide margin.
The launch of the Genesis was overshadowed by the launch of Super Mario Bros. 3 for NES.
The console remained popular in Japan and North America until late 1993, when the demand for new NES software abruptly plummeted.
In the wake of ever decreasing sales and the lack of new games, Nintendo of America officially discontinued the NES by 1995.
Nintendo produced new Famicom units in Japan until September 25, 2003, and continued to repair Famicom consoles until October 31, 2007, attributing the discontinuation of support to insufficient supplies of parts.
Legacy
The NES was released two years after the North American video game crash of 1983, when many retailers and adult consumers regarded electronic games as a passing fad, and set the stage for Japanese dominance of the video game industry.
With the NES, Nintendo also changed the relationship between console manufacturers and third-party software developers by restricting developers from publishing and distributing software without licensed approval.
This led to higher-quality games, which helped change the attitude of a public that had grown weary from poorly produced games for earlier systems.
The system's hardware limitations led to design principles that still influence the development of modern video games.
Many prominent game franchises originated on the NES, including Nintendo's own Super Mario Bros., franchise, Konami's Castlevania including Nintendo's own Game Boy Advance.
NESticle, a popular MS-DOS-based emulator, was released on April 3, 1997.
Nintendo offers officially licensed emulation of many specific NES games via its own Virtual Console for the Wii, Nintendo 3DS, and Wii U, and the Nintendo Switch Online service.
Re-release
On July 14, 2016, Nintendo announced the November 2016 launch of a miniature replica of the NES, named the Nintendo Entertainment System: NES Classic Edition in the United States and Nintendo Classic Mini: Nintendo Entertainment System in Europe and Australia.
The emulation-based console includes 30 permanently inbuilt games from the vintage NES library, including the Super Mario Bros. and The Legend of Zelda series.
The system features HDMI display output and a new replica controller, which can also connect to the Wii Remote for use with Virtual Console games.
It was discontinued in North America on April 13, 2017, and worldwide on April 15, 2017.
However, Nintendo announced in September 2017 that the NES Classic Mini would return to production on June 29, 2018.
Notes
Transliterations
