The platypus (Ornithorhynchus anatinus), sometimes referred to as the duck-billed platypus, is a semiaquatic egg-laying mammal endemic to eastern Australia, including Tasmania.
The platypus is the sole living representative of its family (Ornithorhynchidae) and genus (Ornithorhynchus), though a number of related species appear in the fossil record.
Together with the four species of echidna, it is one of the five capable of causing severe pain to humans.
The unusual appearance of this egg-laying, duck-billed, beaver-tailed, otter-footed mammal baffled European naturalists when they first encountered it, and the first scientists to examine a preserved platypus body (in 1799) judged it a fake, made of several animals sewn together.
The unique features of the platypus make it an important subject in the study of evolutionary biology, and a recognisable and iconic symbol of Australia.
It has appeared as a mascot at national events and features on the reverse of the Australian twenty-cent coin, and the platypus is the animal emblem of the state of New South Wales.
Until the early 20th century humans hunted the platypus for its fur, but it is now protected throughout its range.
Although captive-breeding programs have had only limited success, and the platypus is vulnerable to the effects of pollution, it is not under any immediate threat.
Taxonomy and etymology
When the platypus was first encountered by Europeans in 1798, a pelt and sketch were sent back to Great Britain by Captain John Hunter, the second Governor of New South Wales.
British scientists' initial hunch was that the attributes were a hoax.
George Shaw, who produced the first description of the animal in the Naturalist's Miscellany in 1799, stated it was impossible not to entertain doubts as to its genuine nature, and Robert Knox believed it might have been produced by some Asian taxidermist.
The common name "platypus" is the latinisation of the Greek word (), "flat-footed", from (), "broad, wide, flat" and (), "foot".
Shaw assigned the species the Linnaean name Platypus anatinus when he initially described it, but the genus term was quickly discovered to already be in use as the name of the wood-boring ambrosia beetle genus Platypus.
It was independently described as Ornithorhynchus paradoxus by Johann Blumenbach in 1800 (from a specimen given to him by Sir Joseph Banks) and following the rules of priority of nomenclature, it was later officially recognised as Ornithorhynchus anatinus.
The body and the broad, flat tail of the platypus are covered with dense, brown fur that traps a layer of insulating air to keep the animal warm.
The platypus uses its tail for storage of fat reserves (an adaptation also found in animals such as the Tasmanian devil).
The webbing on the feet is more significant on the front feet and is folded back when walking on land.
The elongated snout and lower jaw are covered in soft skin, forming the bill.
The nostrils are located on the dorsal surface of the snout, while the eyes and ears are located in a groove set just back from it; this groove is closed when swimming.
The platypus has an average body temperature of about rather than the typical of placental mammals.
Research suggests this has been a gradual adaptation to harsh environmental conditions on the part of the small number of surviving monotreme species rather than a historical characteristic of monotremes.
Modern platypus young have three teeth in each of the maxillae (one premolar and two molars) and dentaries (three molars), which they lose before or just after leaving the breeding burrow; The platypus jaw is constructed differently from that of other mammals, and the jaw-opening muscle is different.
It has a reptilian gait, with the legs on the sides of the body, rather than underneath.
Venom
While both male and female platypuses are born with ankle spurs, only the male's spurs deliver venom,
composed largely of defensin-like proteins (DLPs), three of which are unique to the platypus.
The DLPs are produced by the immune system of the platypus.
The function of defensins is to cause lysis in pathogenic bacteria and viruses, but in platypuses they also are formed into venom for defence.
Although powerful enough to kill smaller animals such as dogs, the venom is not lethal to humans, but the pain is so excruciating that the victim may be incapacitated.
Oedema rapidly develops around the wound and gradually spreads throughout the affected limb.
Information obtained from case histories and anecdotal evidence indicates the pain develops into a long-lasting hyperalgesia (a heightened sensitivity to pain) that persists for days or even months.
Venom is produced in the spur on each hind limb.
The female platypus, in common with echidnas, has rudimentary spur buds that do not develop (dropping off before the end of their first year) and lack functional crural glands.
Electrolocation
Monotremes are the only mammals known to have a sense of electroreception: they locate their prey in part by detecting electric fields generated by muscular contractions.
The platypus's electroreception is the most sensitive of any monotreme.
The electroreceptors are located in rostrocaudal rows in the skin of the bill, while mechanoreceptors (which detect touch) are uniformly distributed across the bill.
The electrosensory area of the cerebral cortex is contained within the tactile somatosensory area, and some cortical cells receive input from both electroreceptors and mechanoreceptors, suggesting a close association between the tactile and electric senses.
Both electroreceptors and mechanoreceptors in the bill dominate the somatotopic map of the platypus brain, in the same way human hands dominate the Penfield homunculus map.
The platypus can determine the direction of an electric source, perhaps by comparing differences in signal strength across the sheet of electroreceptors.
This would explain the characteristic side-to-side motion of the animal's head while hunting, seen also in the Hammerhead shark while foraging.
The cortical convergence of electrosensory and tactile inputs suggests a mechanism that determines the distance of prey that, when they move, emit both electrical signals and mechanical pressure pulses.
The platypus uses the difference between arrival times of the two signals to sense distance.
Rather, when it digs in the bottom of streams with its bill, its electroreceptors detect tiny electric currents generated by muscular contractions of its prey, so enabling it to distinguish between animate and inanimate objects, which continuously stimulate its mechanoreceptors.
Monotreme electrolocation probably evolved in order to allow the animals to forage in murky waters, and may be tied to their tooth loss.
The extinct Obdurodon was electroreceptive, but unlike the modern platypus it foraged pelagically (near the ocean surface).
Although the platypus's eyes are small and not used under water, several features indicate that vision played an important role in its ancestors.
The corneal surface and the adjacent surface of the lens is flat while the posterior surface of the lens is steeply curved, similar to the eyes of other aquatic mammals such as otters and sea-lions.
A temporal (ear side) concentration of retinal ganglion cells, important for binocular vision, indicates a role in predation, while the accompanying visual acuity is insufficient for such activities.
Furthermore, this limited acuity is matched by a low cortical magnification, a small lateral geniculate nucleus and a large optic tectum, suggesting that the visual midbrain plays a more important role than the visual cortex, as in some rodents.
These features suggest that the platypus has adapted to an aquatic and nocturnal lifestyle, developing its electrosensory system at the cost of its visual system; an evolutionary process paralleled by the small number of electroreceptors in the short-beaked echidna, which dwells in dry environments, whilst the long-beaked echidna, which lives in moist environments, is intermediate between the other two monotremes.
Inland, its distribution is not well known; it is extinct in South Australia and is no longer found in the main part of the Murray-Darling Basin, possibly due to the declining water quality brought about by extensive land clearing and irrigation schemes.
Along the coastal river systems, its distribution is unpredictable; it appears to be absent from some relatively healthy rivers, and yet maintains a presence in others, for example, the lower Maribyrnong, that are quite degraded.
In captivity, platypuses have survived to 17 years of age, and wild specimens have been recaptured when 11 years old.
Mortality rates for adults in the wild appear to be low.
The introduction of red foxes in 1845 for hunting may have had some impact on its numbers on the mainland.
Its habitat bridges rivers and the riparian zone for both a food supply of prey species, and banks where it can dig resting and nesting burrows.
The platypus is an excellent swimmer and spends much of its time in the water foraging for food.
When swimming, it can be distinguished from other Australian mammals by the absence of visible ears.
Uniquely among mammals, it propels itself when swimming by an alternate rowing motion of the front feet; although all four feet of the platypus are webbed, the hind feet (which are held against the body) do not assist in propulsion, but are used for steering in combination with the tail.
The species is endothermic, maintaining its body temperature at about 32 °C (90 °F), lower than most mammals, even while foraging for hours in water below 5 °C (41 °F).
When not in the water, the platypus retires to a short, straight resting burrow of oval cross-section, nearly always in the riverbank not far above water level, and often hidden under a protective tangle of roots.
Diet
The platypus is a ) that it digs out of the riverbed with its snout or catches while swimming.
It uses cheek-pouches to carry prey to the surface, where it is eaten.
Females are thought likely to become sexually mature in their second year, with breeding confirmed still to take place in animals over nine years old.
The male takes no part in caring for its young, and retreats to his year-long burrow.
The female softens the ground in the burrow with dead, folded, wet leaves, and she fills the nest at the end of the tunnel with fallen leaves and reeds for bedding material.
This material is dragged to the nest by tucking it underneath her curled tail.
It lays one to three (usually two) small, leathery eggs (similar to those of reptiles), about in diameter and slightly rounder than bird eggs.
The eggs develop in utero for about 28 days, with only about 10 days of external incubation (in contrast to a chicken egg, which spends about one day in tract and 21 days externally).
During the second phase, the digits develop, and in the last phase, the egg tooth appears.
Most mammal zygotes go through holoblastic cleavage, meaning that following fertilisation the ovum is split due to cell divisions into multiple, divisible daughter cells.
This is in comparison to the more ancestral process of meroblastic division in non-mammals (including platypuses), which causes the ovum to split but not completely.
This causes the cells at the edge of the yolk to be cytoplasmically continuous with the egg's cytoplasm.
This allows the yolk, which contains the embryo, to exchange waste and nutrients with the cytoplasm.
The newly hatched young are vulnerable, blind, and hairless, and are fed by the mother's milk.
Although possessing mammary glands, the platypus lacks teats.
Instead, milk is released through pores in the skin.
The milk pools in grooves on her abdomen, allowing the young to lap it up.
After about five weeks, the mother begins to spend more time away from her young and, at around four months, the young emerge from the burrow.
Evolution
The platypus and other monotremes were very poorly understood, and some of the 19th century myths that grew up around them-for example, that the monotremes were "inferior" or quasireptilian-still endure.
In 1947, William King Gregory theorised that placental mammals and marsupials may have diverged earlier, and a subsequent branching divided the monotremes and marsupials, but later research and fossil discoveries have suggested this is incorrect.
In fact, modern monotremes are the survivors of an early branching of the mammal tree, and a later branching is thought to have led to the marsupial and placental groups.
Molecular clock and fossil dating suggest platypuses split from echidnas around 19-48 million years ago.
The oldest discovered fossil of the modern platypus dates back to about 100,000 years ago, during the Quaternary period.
The extinct monotremes Teinolophos and Steropodon were once thought to be closely related to the modern platypus, The fossilised Steropodon was discovered in New South Wales and is composed of an opalised lower jawbone with three molar teeth (whereas the adult contemporary platypus is toothless).
The molar teeth were initially thought to be tribosphenic, which would have supported a variation of Gregory's theory, but later research has suggested, while they have three cusps, they evolved under a separate process.
The fossil is thought to be about 110 million years old, making it the oldest mammal fossil found in Australia.
Unlike the modern platypus (and echidnas), Teinolophos lacked a beak.
A fossilised tooth of a giant platypus species, Obdurodon tharalkooschild, was dated 5-15 million years ago.
Judging by the tooth, the animal measured 1.3 meters long, making it the largest platypus on record.
Because of the early divergence from the therian mammals and the low numbers of extant monotreme species, the platypus is a frequent subject of research in evolutionary biology.
In 2004, researchers at the Australian National University discovered the platypus has ten sex chromosomes, compared with two (XY) in most other mammals.
These ten chromosomes form five unique pairs of XY in males and XX in females, i.e. males are XYXYXYXYXY.
One of the X chromosomes of the platypus has great homology to the bird Z chromosome.
The platypus genome also has both reptilian and mammalian genes associated with egg fertilisation.
Though the platypus lacks the mammalian sex-determining gene SRY, a study found that the mechanism of sex determination is the AMH gene on the oldest Y chromosome.
A draft version of the platypus genome sequence was published in Nature on 8 May 2008, revealing both reptilian and mammalian elements, as well as two genes found previously only in birds, amphibians, and fish.
More than 80% of the platypus's genes are common to the other mammals whose genomes have been sequenced.
Much of the world was introduced to the platypus in 1939 when National Geographic Magazine published an article on the platypus and the efforts to study and raise it in captivity.
The latter is a difficult task, and only a few young have been successfully raised since, notably at Healesville Sanctuary in Victoria.
The leading figure in these efforts was David Fleay, who established a platypusary-a simulated stream in a tank-at the Healesville Sanctuary, where breeding was successful in 1943.
In 1972, he found a dead baby of about 50 days old, which had presumably been born in captivity, at his wildlife park at Burleigh Heads on the Gold Coast, Queensland.
Healesville repeated its success in 1998 and again in 2000 with a similar stream tank.
including second-generation (captive born themselves breeding in captivity).
Taronga Zoo in Sydney bred twins in 2003, and breeding was again successful there in 2006.
Platypus in wildlife sanctuaries
The platypus is kept, for conservation purposes, in special aquariums at the following Australian wildlife sanctuaries:
Queensland
* David Fleay Wildlife Park, Gold Coast, Queensland.
* Lone Pine Koala Sanctuary, Fig Tree Pocket, Brisbane, Queensland.
* Walkabout Creek Wildlife Centre, The Gap, Brisbane, Queensland.
The Australian Platypus Park at Tarzali Lakes, Millaa Millaa, Queensland
New South Wales
* Australian Reptile Park, Somersby, New South Wales
Victoria
* Healesville Sanctuary, near Melbourne, Victoria, where the platypus was first bred in captivity by naturalist David Fleay in 1943.
Cultural references
The platypus has been a subject in the Dreamtime stories of indigenous Australians, who believed the animal was a hybrid of a duck and a water rat.
According to one story, the major animal groups, the land animals, water animals and birds, all competed for the platypus to join their respective groups, but the platypus ultimately decided to not join any of them, feeling that he did not need to be part of a group to be special.
Expo Oz the platypus was the mascot for World Expo 88, which was held in Brisbane in 1988, and Hexley the platypus is the mascot for the Darwin operating system, the BSD-based core of macOS and other operating systems from Apple Inc.
The platypus has been featured in songs, such as Green Day's "Platypus (I Hate You)" and Mr. Bungle's "Platypus".
It is the subject of a children's poem by Banjo Paterson.
The platypus has frequently appeared in Australian postage stamps and coins.
The earliest appearance is the 9d Australian stamp from 1937.
The platypus re-appeared in the 1960-64 Australian Native Animal Series.
Souvenir sheet of "from" Laos and Equatorial Guinea has also featured the animal.
The platypus has appeared on a 1987 36-cent stamp and an Australian 1996 95-cent stamp.
The 2006 Australian Bush Babies stamp series features a $4.65AUD stamp of a young platypus.
A 5-cent stamp also produced in 2006 features the platypus also.
Since the introduction of decimal currency to Australia in 1966, the embossed image of a platypus, designed and sculpted by Stuart Devlin, has appeared on the reverse (tails) side of the 20-cent coin.
In the animated series Phineas and Ferb, the title characters own a pet platypus, named Perry, who unknown to them, is a secret agent.
The choice of a platypus was inspired by media underuse, as well as to exploit the animal's striking appearance.
As a character, Perry has been well received by both fans and critics.
* Wildlife Treasury - The duck-billed platypus was mentioned prominently in the television commercial for the animal card products.
Notes
;Documentary
