A car (or automobile) is a wheeled motor vehicle used for transportation.
Most definitions of car say they run primarily on roads, seat one to eight people, have four tires, and mainly transport people rather than goods.
There are costs and benefits to car use.
The costs to the individual include acquiring the vehicle, interest payments (if the car is financed), repairs and maintenance, fuel, depreciation, driving time, parking fees, taxes, and insurance.
The costs to society include maintaining roads, land use, road congestion, air pollution, public health, health care, and disposing of the vehicle at the end of its life.
Traffic collisions are the largest cause of injury-related deaths worldwide.
The personal benefits include on-demand transportation, mobility, independence, and convenience.
Etymology
The word car is believed to originate from the Latin word carrus or carrum ("wheeled vehicle"), or the Middle English word carre .
In turn, these originated from the Gaulish word karros (a Gallic chariot).
It originally referred to any wheeled horse-drawn vehicle, such as a cart, carriage, or wagon.
"Motor car" is attested from 1895, and is the usual formal name for cars in British English.
"Autocar" is a variant that is also attested from 1895, but that is now considered archaic.
It literally means "self-propelled car".
The term "horseless carriage" was used by some to refer to the first cars at the time that they were being built, and is attested from 1895.
The word "automobile" is a classical compound derived from the Ancient Greek word autós (αὐτός), meaning "self", and the Latin word mobilis, meaning "movable".
It entered the English language from French, and was first adopted by the Automobile Club of Great Britain in 1897.
Over time, the word "automobile" fell out of favour in Britain, and was replaced by "motor car".
"Automobile" remains chiefly North American, particularly as a formal or commercial term.
An abbreviated form, "auto", was formerly a common way to refer to cars in English, but is now considered old-fashioned.
The word is still very common as an adjective in American English, usually in compound formations like "auto industry" and "auto mechanic".
In Dutch and German, two languages historically related to English, the abbreviated form "auto" (Dutch) "Automobil" (German) are still used - in either the short form is the most regular word for "car".
History
The first working steam-powered vehicle was designed - and quite possibly built - by Ferdinand Verbiest, a Flemish member of a Jesuit mission in China around 1672.
It was a 65-cm-long scale-model toy for the Chinese Emperor that was unable to carry a driver or a passenger.
It is not known with certainty if Verbiest's model was successfully built or run.
He also constructed two steam tractors for the French Army, one of which is preserved in the French National Conservatory of Arts and Crafts.
His inventions were, however, handicapped by problems with water supply and maintaining steam pressure.
Coincidentally, in 1807 the Swiss inventor François Isaac de Rivaz designed his own 'de Rivaz internal combustion engine' and used it to develop the world's first vehicle to be powered by such an engine.
The Niépces' Pyréolophore was fuelled by a mixture of Lycopodium powder (dried spores of the Lycopodium plant), finely crushed coal dust and resin that were mixed with oil, whereas de Rivaz used a mixture of hydrogen and oxygen.
In November 1881, French inventor Gustave Trouvé demonstrated the first working (three-wheeled) car powered by electricity at the International Exposition of Electricity, Paris.
Although several other German engineers (including Gottlieb Daimler, Wilhelm Maybach, and Siegfried Marcus) were working on the problem at about the same time, Karl Benz generally is acknowledged as the inventor of the modern car.
The Studebaker Automobile Company, subsidiary of a long-established wagon and coach manufacturer, started to build cars in 1897 and commenced sales of electric vehicles in 1902 and gasoline vehicles in 1904.
In Britain, there had been several attempts to build steam cars with varying degrees of success, with Thomas Rickett even attempting a production run in 1860.
Santler from Malvern is recognized by the Veteran Car Club of Great Britain as having made the first gasoline-powered car in the country in 1894, followed by Frederick William Lanchester in 1895, but these were both one-offs.
Mass production
Large-scale, production-line manufacturing of affordable cars was started by Ransom Olds in 1901 at his Oldsmobile factory in Lansing, Michigan and based upon stationary assembly line techniques pioneered by Marc Isambard Brunel at the Portsmouth Block Mills, England, in 1802.
The assembly line style of mass production and interchangeable parts had been pioneered in the U.S. by Thomas Blanchard in 1821, at the Springfield Armory in Springfield, Massachusetts.
This concept was greatly expanded by Henry Ford, beginning in 1913 with the world's first moving assembly line for cars at the Highland Park Ford Plant.
As a result, Ford's cars came off the line in fifteen-minute intervals, much faster than previous methods, increasing productivity eightfold, while using less manpower (from 12.5-man-hours to 1 hour 33 minutes).
It was so successful, paint became a bottleneck.
Only Japan black would dry fast enough, forcing the company to drop the variety of colors available before 1913, until fast-drying Duco lacquer was developed in 1926.
This is the source of Ford's apocryphal remark, "any color as long as it's black".
Most cars in use in the 2010s run on gasoline burnt in an internal combustion engine (ICE).
The International Organization of Motor Vehicle Manufacturers says that, in countries that mandate low sulfur gasoline, gasoline-fuelled cars built to late 2010s standards (such as Euro-6) emit very little local air pollution.
Some cities ban older gasoline-fuelled cars and some countries plan to ban sales in future.
However some environmental groups say this phase-out of fossil fuel vehicles must be brought forward to limit climate change.
Production of gasoline fueled cars peaked in 2017.
Other hydrocarbon fossil fuels also burnt by deflagration (rather than detonation) in ICE cars include diesel, Autogas and CNG.
Removal of fossil fuel subsidies, concerns about oil dependence, tightening environmental laws and restrictions on greenhouse gas emissions are propelling work on alternative power systems for cars.
This includes hybrid vehicles, plug-in electric vehicles and hydrogen vehicles.
2.1 million light electric vehicles (of all types but mainly cars) were sold in 2018, over half in China: this was an increase of 64% on the previous year, giving a global total on the road of 5.4 million.
Vehicles using alternative fuels such as ethanol flexible-fuel vehicles and natural gas vehicles are also gaining popularity in some countries.
Cars for racing or speed records have sometimes employed jet or rocket engines, but these are impractical for common use.
Oil consumption has increased rapidly in the 20th and 21st centuries because there are more cars; the 1985-2003 oil glut even fuelled the sales of low-economy vehicles in OECD countries.
The BRIC countries are adding to this consumption.
User interface
Cars are equipped with controls used for driving, passenger comfort and safety, normally operated by a combination of the use of feet and hands, and occasionally by voice on 21st century cars.
These controls include a steering wheel, pedals for operating the brakes and controlling the car's speed (and, in a manual transmission car, a clutch pedal), a shift lever or stick for changing gears, and a number of buttons and dials for turning on lights, ventilation and other functions.
Modern cars' controls are now standardised, such as the location for the accelerator and brake, but this was not always the case.
Controls are evolving in response to new technologies, for example the electric car and the integration of mobile communications.
Some of the original controls are no longer required.
For example, all cars once had controls for the choke valve, clutch, ignition timing, and a crank instead of an electric starter.
However new controls have also been added to vehicles, making them more complex.
These include air conditioning, navigation systems, and in car entertainment.
Another trend is the replacement of physical knobs and switches by secondary controls with touchscreen controls such as BMW's iDrive and Ford's MyFord Touch.
Another change is that while early cars' pedals were physically linked to the brake mechanism and throttle, in the 2010s, cars have increasingly replaced these physical linkages with electronic controls.
Lighting
Cars are typically fitted with multiple types of lights.
These include headlights, which are used to illuminate the way ahead and make the car visible to other users, so that the vehicle can be used at night; in some jurisdictions, daytime running lights; red brake lights to indicate when the brakes are applied; amber turn signal lights to indicate the turn intentions of the driver; white-colored reverse lights to illuminate the area behind the car (and indicate that the driver will be or is reversing); and on some vehicles, additional lights (e.g., side marker lights) to increase the visibility of the car.
Interior lights on the ceiling of the car are usually fitted for the driver and passengers.
Some vehicles also have a trunk light and, more rarely, an engine compartment light.
Weight
In the United States, "from 1975 to 1980, average car weight dropped from , likely in response to rising gasoline prices" and new fuel efficiency standards.
The average new car weighed in 1987 but in 2010, due to modern steel safety cages, anti-lock brakes, airbags, and "more-powerful-if more-efficient-engines."
Heavier cars are safer for the driver from a crash perspective, but more dangerous for other vehicles and road users.
In some competitions such as the Shell Eco Marathon, average car weights of have also been achieved.
These cars are only single-seaters (still falling within the definition of a car, although 4-seater cars are more common), but they nevertheless demonstrate the amount by which car weights could still be reduced, and the subsequent lower fuel use (i.e. up to a fuel use of 2560 km/l).
Seating and body style
Most cars are designed to carry multiple occupants, often with four or five seats.
Cars with five seats typically seat two passengers in the front and three in the rear.
Full-size cars and large sport utility vehicles can often carry six, seven, or more occupants depending on the arrangement of the seats.
On the other hand, sports cars are most often designed with only two seats.
The differing needs for passenger capacity and their luggage or cargo space has resulted in the availability of a large variety of body styles to meet individual consumer requirements that include, among others, the sedan estate, and minivan.
Safety
Traffic collisions are the largest cause of injury-related deaths worldwide.
and Henry Bliss one of the United States' first pedestrian car casualties in 1899 in New York City.
There are now standard tests for safety in new cars, such as the EuroNCAP and the US NCAP tests, and insurance-industry-backed tests by the Insurance Institute for Highway Safety (IIHS).
Costs and benefits
The costs of car usage, which may include the cost of: acquiring the vehicle, repairs and auto maintenance, fuel, depreciation, driving time, parking fees, taxes, and insurance,
Similarly the costs to society of car use may include; maintaining roads, land use, air pollution, road congestion, public health, health care, and of disposing of the vehicle at the end of its life; and can be balanced against the value of the benefits to society that car use generates.
Societal benefits may include: economy benefits, such as job and wealth creation, of car production and maintenance, transportation provision, society wellbeing derived from leisure and travel opportunities, and revenue generation from the opportunities.
The ability of humans to move flexibly from place to place has far-reaching implications for the nature of societies.
Many governments are using fiscal policies (such as road tax or the US gas guzzler tax) to influence vehicle purchase decisions, with a low figure often resulting in reduced taxation.
Fuel taxes may act as an incentive for the production of more efficient, hence less polluting, car designs (e.g. hybrid vehicles) and the development of alternative fuels.
High fuel taxes may provide a strong incentive for consumers to purchase lighter, smaller, more fuel-efficient cars, or to not drive.
On average, today's cars are about 75 percent recyclable, and using recycled steel helps reduce energy use and pollution.
According to the International Energy Agency fuel economy improved 0.7% in 2017, but an annual improvement of 3.7% is needed to meet the Global Fuel Economy Initiative 2030 target.
The increase in sales of SUVs is bad for fuel economy.
Many Chinese cities limit licensing of fossil fuel cars, and many countries plan to stop selling them between 2025 and 2050.
The manufacture of vehicles is resource intensive, and many manufacturers now report on the environmental performance of their factories, including energy usage, waste and water consumption.
Manufacturing each kWh of battery emits a similar amount of carbon as burning through one full tank of gasoline.
The growth in popularity of the car allowed cities to sprawl, therefore encouraging more travel by car resulting in inactivity and obesity, which in turn can lead to increased risk of a variety of diseases.
Transportation (of all types including trucks, buses and cars) is a major contributor to air pollution in most industrialised nations.
According to the American Surface Transportation Policy Project nearly half of all Americans are breathing unhealthy air.
Their study showed air quality in dozens of metropolitan areas has worsened over the last decade.
Animals and plants are often negatively impacted by cars via habitat destruction and pollution.
Over the lifetime of the average car the "loss of habitat potential" may be over based on primary production correlations.
Animals are also killed every year on roads by cars, referred to as roadkill.
More recent road developments are including significant environmental mitigations in their designs such as green bridges to allow wildlife crossings, and creating wildlife corridors.
Growth in the popularity of vehicles and commuting has led to traffic congestion.
Moscow, Istanbul, Bogota, Mexico City and Sao Paulo were the world's most congested cities in 2018 according to INRIX, a data analytics company.
Emerging car technologies
Although intensive development of conventional battery electric vehicles is continuing into the 2020s, other car propulsion technologies that are under development include wheel hub motors, hydrogen cars, and hydrogen/electric hybrids.
Research into alternative forms of power includes using ammonia instead of hydrogen in fuel cells.
New materials which may replace steel car bodies include duralumin, fiberglass, carbon fiber, biocomposites, and carbon nanotubes.
Telematics technology is allowing more and more people to share cars, on a pay-as-you-go basis, through car share and carpool schemes.
Communication is also evolving due to connected car systems.
Autonomous car
Fully autonomous vehicles, also known as driverless cars, already exist in prototype (such as the Google driverless car), but have a long way to go before they are in general use.
According to urban designer and futurist Michael E. Arth, driverless electric vehicles-in conjunction with the increased use of virtual reality for work, travel, and pleasure-could reduce the world's 800 million vehicles to a fraction of that number within a few decades.
This would be possible if almost all private cars requiring drivers, which are not in use and parked 90% of the time, were replaced by public self-driving taxis that would be in nearly constant use.
This would require an appropriate vehicle to be available for each particular need-a bus could come for a group of people, a limousine could come for a special night out, and a Segway could come for a short trip down the street for one person.
Children could be chauffeured in supervised safety, DUIs would no longer exist, and 41,000 lives could be saved each year in the US alone.
Open source development
There have been several projects aiming to develop a car on the principles of open design, an approach to designing in which the plans for the machinery and systems are publicly shared, often without monetary compensation.
The projects include OScar, Riversimple (through ) and c,mm,n. None of the projects have reached significant success in terms of developing a car as a whole both from hardware and software perspective and no mass production ready open-source based design have been introduced as of late 2009.
Some car hacking through on-board diagnostics (OBD) has been done so far.
Car sharing
Car-share arrangements and carpooling are also increasingly popular, in the US and Europe.
For example, in the US, some car-sharing services have experienced double-digit growth in revenue and membership growth between 2006 and 2007.
Services like car sharing offering a residents to "share" a vehicle rather than own a car in already congested neighborhoods.
Industry
The automotive industry designs, develops, manufactures, markets, and sells the world's motor vehicles, more than three-quarters of which are cars.
In 2018 there were 70 million cars manufactured worldwide, down 2 million from the previous year.
The automotive industry in China produces by far the most (24 million in 2018), followed by Japan (8 million), Germany (5 million) and India (4 million).
they burn over a trillion liters of gasoline and diesel fuel yearly, consuming about 50 EJ (nearly 300,000,000,000 kilowatt-hours) of energy.
The numbers of cars are increasing rapidly in China and India.
The sustainable transport movement focuses on solutions to these problems.
The car industry is also facing increasing competition from the public transport sector, as some people re-evaluate their private vehicle usage.
Alternatives
Established alternatives for some aspects of car use include public transport such as buses, trolleybuses, trains, subways, tramways, light rail, cycling, and walking.
Bicycle sharing systems have been established in China and many European cities, including Copenhagen and Amsterdam.
Similar programs have been developed in large US cities.
Additional individual modes of transport, such as personal rapid transit could serve as an alternative to cars if they prove to be socially accepted.
Other meanings
The term motorcar has formerly also been used in the context of electrified rail systems to denote a car which functions as a small locomotive but also provides space for passengers and baggage.
These locomotive cars were often used on suburban routes by both interurban and intercity railroad systems.
Further reading
