The golden eagle (Aquila chrysaetos) is one of the best-known birds of prey in the Northern Hemisphere.
It is the most widely distributed species of eagle.
Like all eagles, it belongs to the family Accipitridae.
These birds are dark brown, with lighter golden-brown plumage on their napes.
Immature eagles of this species typically have white on the tail and often have white markings on the wings.
Golden eagles use their agility and speed combined with powerful feet and massive, sharp talons to snatch up a variety of prey, mainly hares, rabbits, and marmots and other ground squirrels.
Golden eagles maintain home ranges or territories that may be as large as .
They build large nests in cliffs and other high places to which they may return for several breeding years.
Most breeding activities take place in the spring; they are monogamous and may remain together for several years or possibly for life.
Females lay up to four eggs, and then incubate them for six weeks.
Typically, one or two young survive to fledge in about three months.
These juvenile golden eagles usually attain full independence in the fall, after which they wander widely until establishing a territory for themselves in four to five years.
Once widespread across the Holarctic, it has disappeared from many areas which are now more heavily populated by humans.
Despite being extirpated from or uncommon in some of its former range, the species is still widespread, being present in sizeable stretches of Eurasia, North America, and parts of North Africa.
It is the largest and least populous of the five species of true accipitrid to occur as a breeding species in both the Palearctic and the Nearctic.
For centuries, this species has been one of the most highly regarded birds used in falconry.
Due to its hunting prowess, the golden eagle is regarded with great mystic reverence in some ancient, tribal cultures.
It is one of the most extensively studied species of raptor in the world in some parts of its range, such as the Western United States and the Western Palearctic.
Description
Size
The golden eagle is a very large raptor, in length.
Its wings are broad and the wingspan is .
Golden eagles' wingspan is the fifth largest among living eagle species.
The maximum size of golden eagles is debated.
Large subspecies are the heaviest representatives of the genus Aquila and this species is on average the seventh-heaviest living eagle species.
The golden eagle is the second heaviest breeding eagle in North America, Europe and Africa and the fourth heaviest in Asia.
American golden eagles are typically somewhat smaller than the large Eurasian species, but a massive female that was banded and released in 2006 around Wyoming’s Bridger-Teton National Forest became the heaviest wild golden eagle on record, at .
Captive birds have been measured with a wingspan of and a mass of , though this mass was for an eagle bred for falconry, which tend to be unnaturally heavy.
The long, straight and powerful hallux-claw (hind claw) can range from , about one centimetre longer than in a bald eagle and a little more than one centimetre less than a harpy eagle.
Colour
Adults of both sexes have similar plumage and are primarily dark brown, with some grey on the inner wing and tail, and a paler, typically golden colour on the back of the crown and nape that gives the species its common name.
The bill is dark at the tip, fading to a lighter horn colour, with a yellow cere.
Like many accipitrids, the bare portion of the feet is yellow.
Rarely, juvenile birds may have only traces of white on the tail.
Compared to the relatively consistently white tail, the white patches on the wing are extremely variable; some juveniles have almost no white visible.
Juveniles of less than 12 months of age tend to have the most white in their plumage.
Many golden eagles still have white on the tail during their first attempt at nesting.
The final adult plumage is not fully attained until the birds are between 5 and a half and 6 and a half years old.
That being said, some vocalization has been recorded, usually centering around the nesting period.
The voice of the golden eagle is considered weak, high, and shrill, has been called "quite pathetic" and "puppy-like", and seems incongruous with the formidable size and nature of the species.
A typical, unhurried soaring speed in golden eagles is around .
When hunting or displaying, the golden eagle can glide very fast, reaching speeds of up to .
This makes the golden eagle one of the two fastest living animals.
Distinguishing from other species
Size readily distinguishes this species from most other raptors when it is seen well.
Most other raptors are considerably smaller.
Buteo hawks, which are perhaps most similar to the golden eagle in structure among the species outside of the "booted eagle" group, are often counted among the larger very common raptors.
However, a mid-sized Buteo is dwarfed by a golden eagle, as an adult female eagle has about double the wingspan and about five times the weight.
Buteos are also usually distinctly paler below, although some species occur in dark morphs which can be darker than a golden eagle.
Among raptorial birds that share the golden eagle's range, only some Old World vultures and the California condor are distinctly larger, with longer, broader wings, typically held more evenly in a slower, less forceful flight; they often have dramatically different colour patterns.
In North America, the golden eagle may be confused with the turkey vulture from a great distance, as it is a large species that, like the golden eagle, often flies with a pronounced dihedral.
The turkey vulture can be distinguished by its less controlled, forceful flying style (they frequently rock back and forth unsteadily in even moderate winds) and its smaller, thinner body, much smaller head and, at closer range, its slaty black-brown colour and silvery wing secondaries.
Compared to Haliaeetus eagles, the golden eagle has wings that are only somewhat more slender but are more hawk-like and lack the flat, plank-like wing positioning seen in the other genus.
Since birds were grouped largely on superficial characteristics at that time, many species were grouped by Linnaeus into the genus Falco.
The type locality was given simply as "Europa"; it was later fixed to Sweden.
It was moved to the new genus Aquila by French ornithologist Mathurin Jacques Brisson in 1760.
Aquila is Latin for "eagle", possibly derived from aquilus, "dark in colour" and chrysaetos is Ancient Greek for the golden eagle from khrusos, "gold" and aetos, "eagle".
The golden eagle is part of a broad group of raptors called “booted eagles” which are defined by the feature that all species have feathering over their tarsus, unlike many other accipitrids which have bare legs.
Included in this group are all species described as “hawk eagles” including the genera Spizaetus and Nisaetus, as well as assorted monotypical genera such as Oroaetus, Lophaetus, Stephanoaetus, Polemaetus, Lophotriorchis and Ictinaetus.
The genus Aquila is distributed across every continent but for South America and Antarctica.
Up to 20 species have been classified in the genus, but more recently the taxonomic placement of some of the traditional species has been questioned.
Traditionally, the Aquila eagles have been grouped superficially as largish, mainly brownish or dark-colored booted eagles that vary little in transition from their juvenile to their adult plumages.
Genetic research has recently indicated the golden eagle is included in a clade with Verreaux's eagle in Africa as well as the Gurney's eagle (A. gurneyi) and the wedge-tailed eagle .
This identification of this particular clade has long been suspected based on similar morphological characteristics amongst these large-bodied species.
Other largish Aquila species, the eastern imperial, the Spanish imperial, the tawny and the steppe eagles, are now thought to be separate, close-knit clade, which attained some similar characteristics to the prior clade via convergent evolution.
The genus Hieraaetus, including the booted eagle (H. pennatus), little eagle (H. morphnoides) and Ayres's hawk-eagle (H. ayresii), consists of much smaller species, that are in fact smallest birds called eagles outside of the unrelated Spilornis serpent-eagle genus.
This genus has recently been eliminated by many authorities and is now occasionally also included in Aquila, although not all ornithological unions have followed this suit in this re-classification.
The small-bodied Wahlberg's eagle (H. wahlbergi) has been traditionally considered a Aquila species due to its lack of change from juvenile to adult plumage and brownish color but it is actually genetically aligned to the Hieraaetus lineage.
Cassin's hawk-eagle (H. africanus) is also probably closely related to the Hieraaetus group rather than the Spizaetus/Nisaetus “hawk-eagle” group (in which it was previously classified) which is not known to have radiated to Africa.
Subspecies and distribution
There are six extant subspecies of golden eagle that differ slightly in size and plumage.
Individuals of any subspecies are somewhat variable and the differences between subspecies are clinal, especially in terms of body size.
Other than these characteristics, there is little variation across the range of the species.
* Aquila chrysaetos chrysaetos (Linnaeus, 1758) - sometimes referred to as the European golden eagle.
* Aquila chrysaetos homeyeri Severtzov, 1888 -This subspecies occurs in almost the entirety of the Iberian peninsula as well as the island of Crete, though is absent from the rest of continental Europe.
It also ranges in North Africa in a narrow sub-coastal strip from Morocco to Tunisia.
A completely isolated population of golden eagles is found in Ethiopia’s Bale Mountains, at the southern limit of this species range worldwide.
Although this latter population has not been formally assigned to a subspecies, there is a high probability that it belongs with A. c. homeyeri.
This subspecies also ranges in much of Asia Minor, mainly Turkey, spottily through the Middle East and the Arabian Peninsula into northern Yemen and Oman to its eastern limits throughout the Caucasus, much of Iran and north to southwestern Kazakhstan.
* Aquila chrysaetos daphanea Severtzov, 1888 - known variously as the Asian golden eagle, Himalayan golden eagle or berkut.
This subspecies is the largest on average.
Male wing length is from , averaging , and female wing length is from , averaging .
No range of body weights are known but males will weigh approximately and females .
* Aquila chrysaetos japonica Severtzov, 1888 - the common name is the Japanese golden eagle.
This subspecies is found in northern Japan (the islands of Honshu, Hokkaido and discontinuously in Kyushu) and undefined parts of Korea.
It is the subspecies with the largest breeding range and is probably the most numerous subspecies, especially if A. c. kamtschatica is included.
* Aquila chrysaetos kamtschatica Severtzov, 1888 - sometimes is referred to as the Siberian golden eagle or the Kamchatka golden eagle.
This subspecies ranges from Western Siberia (where overlap with A. c. chrysaetos is probable), across most of Russia, including the Altay (spilling over into Northern Mongolia), to the Kamchatka Peninsula and the Anadyrsky District.
This subspecies is often included in A. c. canadensis.
No weights are known in this subspecies.
Similarly, an ancestral golden eagle, with a heavier, broader skull, larger wings and shorter legs when compared to modern birds, has been found in the La Brea Tar Pits of southern California.
Habitat and distribution
Golden eagles are fairly adaptable in habitat but often reside in areas with a few shared ecological characteristics.
They are best suited to hunting in open or semi-open areas and search them out year-around.
Native vegetation seems to be attractive to them and they typically avoid developed areas of any type from urban to agricultural as well as heavily forested regions.
In desolate areas (e.g., the southern Yukon), they can occur regularly at roadkills and garbage dumps.
The largest numbers of golden eagles are found in mountainous regions today, with many eagles doing a majority of their hunting and nesting on rock formations.
However, they are not solely tied to high elevations and can breed in lowlands if the local habitats are suitable.
Below are more detailed description of habitats occupied by golden eagles in both continents where they occur.
One golden eagle was recorded circling at above sea-level in Khumbu in May 1975.
In the mountains of Japan and Korea, the golden eagle occupies deciduous scrub woodland and carpet-like stands of Siberian dwarf pine (Pinus pumila) that merge into grasslands and alpine heathland.
The golden eagle occurs in mountains from the Adrar Plateau in Mauritania to northern Yemen and Oman where the desert habitat is largely bereft of vegetation but offers many rocky plateaus to support both the eagles and their prey.
In Israel, their habitat is mainly rocky slopes and wide wadi areas, chiefly in desert and to a lesser extent in semi-desert and Mediterranean climates, extending to open areas.
In Northeastern Africa, the habitat is often of a sparse, desert-like character and is quite similar to the habitat in Middle East and the Arabian peninsula.
In Ethiopia's Bale Mountains, where the vegetation is more lush and the climate is clearly less arid than in Northeastern Africa, the golden eagle occupies verdant mountains.
In Washington state, golden eagles can be found in clear-cut sections of otherwise dense coniferous forest zones with relatively little annual precipitation.
From east of the Canadian Rocky Mountains to the mountains of Labrador, the golden eagle is found in small numbers in boreal forest peatlands and similar mixed woodland areas.
In the foothills of the Rocky Mountains in the United States are plains and prairies where golden eagles are widespread, especially where there's a low human presence.
Here, grassland on low rolling hills and flat plains are typical, interrupted only by cottonwood stands around river valleys and wetlands where the eagles may build their nests.
Golden eagles also occupy the desert-like Great Basin from southern Idaho to northern Arizona and New Mexico.
In this habitat, trees are generally absent other than junipers with vegetation being dominated by sagebrush and other low shrub species.
Although the vegetation varies a bit more, similar habitat is occupied by golden eagles in Mexico.
However, golden eagles are typically absent in North America from true deserts, like the Sonora Desert, where annual precipitation is less than .
Golden eagles occupy the mountains and coastal areas of California and Baja California in Mexico where hot, dry summers and moist winters are typical.
The golden eagles here often nest in chaparral and oak woodland, oak savanna and grassland amongst low rolling hill typified by diverse vegetation.
In the Eastern United States, the species once bred widely in the Appalachian Plateau near burns, open marshes, meadows, bogs and lakes.
In Eastern North America, the species still breeds on the Gaspe Peninsula, Quebec.
Until 1999, a pair of golden eagles were still known to nest in Maine but they are now believed to be absent as a breeding bird from the Eastern United States.
Though they do regularly nest in the marsh-like peatland of the boreal forest, golden eagles are not generally associated with wetlands and, in fact, they can be found near some of the most arid spots on earth.
In the wintering population of Eastern United States, however, they are often associated with steep river valleys, reservoirs, and marshes in inland areas as well as estuarine marshlands, barrier islands, managed wetlands, sounds, and mouths of major river systems in coastal areas.
These wetlands are attractive due to a dominance of open vegetation, large concentrations of prey, and the general absence of human disturbance.
Dietary biology
Golden eagles usually hunt during daylight hours, but were recorded hunting from one hour before sunrise to one hour after sunset during the breeding season in southwestern Idaho.
The hunting success rate of golden eagles was calculated in Idaho, showing that, out of 115 hunting attempts, 20% were successful in procuring prey.
A fully-grown golden eagle requires about of food per day but in the life of most eagles there are cycles of feast and famine, and eagles have been known to go without food for up to a week and then gorge on up to at one sitting.
During the peak of summer in Utah, hunting and territorial flights occurred mostly between 9:00 and 11:00 am and 4:00 and 6:00 pm, with the remaining 15 or so hours of daylight spent perching or resting.
Golden eagles are believed to sleep through much of the night.
Although usually highly solitary outside of the bond between breeding pairs, exceptionally cold weather in winter may cause eagles to put their usual guard down and perch together.
The largest known congregation of golden eagles was observed on an extremely cold winter’s night in eastern Idaho when 124 individuals were observed perched closely along a line of 85 power poles.
Migration
Most populations of golden eagles are sedentary, but the species is actually a partial migrant.
Golden eagles are very hardy species, being well adapted to cold climates, however they cannot abide declining available food sources in the northern stretches of their range.
Eagles raised at latitudes greater than 60° N are usually migratory, though a short migration may be untaken by those who breed or hatch at about 50° N. During migration, they often use soaring-gliding flight, rather than powered flight.
Similarly the entire population of golden eagles from northern and central Alaska and northern Canada migrates south.
At Mount Lorette in Alberta, approximately 4,000 golden eagles may pass during the fall, the largest recorded migration of golden eagles on earth.
Here the mountain ranges are relatively moderate and consistent, thus being reliable for thermals and updrafts which made long-distance migrating feasible.
The departure dates from wintering grounds are variable.
In southwestern Canada, they leave their wintering grounds by 6 April to 8 May (the mean being 21 April); in southwestern Idaho, wintering birds leave from 20 March to 13 April (mean of 29 March); and in the Southwestern United States, wintering birds may depart by early March.
Elsewhere in the species' breeding range, golden eagles (i.e., those who breed in the contiguous Western United States, all of Europe but for Northern Scandinavia, North Africa and all of Asia but for Northern Russia) are non-migratory and tend to remain within striking distance of their breeding territories throughout the year.
Territoriality
Territoriality is believed to be the primary cause of interactions and confrontations between non-paired golden eagles.
Golden eagles maintain some of the largest known home ranges (or territories) of any bird species but there is much variation of home range size across the range, possibly dictated by food abundance and habitat preference.
Home ranges in most of the range can vary from .
In San Diego County in California, the home ranges varied from , with an average of .
However, some home ranges have been much smaller, such as in southwestern Idaho where, possibly due to an abundance of jackrabbits, home ranges as small as are maintained.
46% of undulating displays in Montana occurred shortly after the juvenile eagles left their parents range, suggesting that some residents defend and maintain territories year-round.
Elsewhere it is stated that home ranges are less strictly maintained during winter but hunting grounds are basically exclusive.
Threat displays include undulating flight and aggressive direct flapping flight with exaggerated downstrokes.
Most displays by mature golden eagles (67% for males and 76% for females) occur, rather than around the nest, at the edge of their home ranges.
In some parts of the Alps, the golden eagle population has reached the saturation point in appropriate habitat and apparently violent confrontations are more common than in other parts of the range.
Golden eagles may express their aggression via body language while perched, typically the adult female when confronted by an intruding eagle: the head and body are upright, feathers on head and neck are erect; the wings may be slightly spread and beak open; often accompanied by intense gaze.
They then often engage in a similar posture with wings spread wide and oriented toward the threat; sometimes rocking back on tail and even flopping over onto the back with talons extended upward as defense.
Such behavior may be accompanied by wing slap against the threatening intruder.
However, obvious juvenile eagles (apparent to the adult eagles due to the amount of white on their wings and tail) are sometimes allowed to penetrate deeply into a pair’s home range and all parties commonly ignore each other.
In North Dakota, it was verified that parent eagles were not aggressive towards their own young after the nesting period and some juveniles stayed on their parents territory until their 2nd spring and then left by their own accord.
Reproduction
Golden eagles usually mate for life.
A breeding pair is formed in a courtship display.
This courtship includes undulating displays by both in the pair, with the male bird picking up a piece of rock or a small stick, and dropping it only to enter into a steep dive and catch it in mid-air, repeating the maneuver 3 or more times.
The female takes a clump of earth and drops and catches it in the same fashion.
Mating and egg-laying timing for golden eagle is variable depending on the locality.
Copulation normally lasts 10-20 seconds.
Mating seems to occur around 40-46 days before the initial egg-laying.
Around this age, they also start sitting up more.
The longest-lived known captive golden eagle, a specimen in Europe, survived to 46 years of age.
The estimated adult annual survival rate on the Isle of Skye in Scotland is around 97.5%.
When this extrapolated into an estimated lifespan this results in 39 and half years as the average for adult golden eagles in this area, which is probably far too high an estimate.
Near a wind turbine facility in west-central California, estimated survival rates, based on conventional telemetry of 257 individuals, were 84% for first-year eagles, 79% for 1- to 3-year-olds and adult floaters and 91% for breeders; with no difference in survival rates between sexes.
A 19-34% survival rate was estimated for juvenile eagles from Denali National Park in their first 11 months.
Natural mortality
Natural sources of mortality are largely reported in anecdotes.
On rare occasions, golden eagles have been killed by competing predators or by hunting mammalian carnivores, including the aforementioned wolverine, snow leopard, cougar, brown bear and white-tailed eagle attacks.
Most competitive attacks resulting in death probably occur at the talons of other golden eagles.
Nestlings and fledglings are more likely to be killed by another predator than free-flying juveniles and adults.
It has been suspected that golden eagle nests may be predated more frequently by other predators (especially birds, which are often the only other large animals that can access a golden eagle nest without the assistance of man-made climbing equipment) in areas where golden eagles are regularly disturbed at the nest by humans.
Jeff Watson believed that common raven occasionally eats golden eagle eggs but only in situations where the parent eagles have abandoned their nesting attempt.
On the Isle of Rùm in Scotland, there are few cases of red deer trampling golden eagles to death, probably the result of a doe having intercepted a bird that was trying to kill a fawn.
Although usually well out-matched by the predator, occasionally other large birds can put up a formidable fight against a golden eagle.
An attempted capture of a great blue heron by a golden eagle resulted in the death of both birds from wounds sustained in the ensuing fight.
There is at least one case in Scotland of a golden eagle dying after being “oiled” by a northern fulmar, a bird whose primary defense against predators is to disgorge an oily secretion which may inhibit the predator's ability to fly.
Of natural sources of death, starvation is probably under-reported.
11 of 16 dead juvenile eagles which had hatched in Denali National Park had died of starvation.
Of 266 golden eagle deaths in Spain, only 6% were from unknown causes that could not be directly attributed to human activities.
Avian cholera caused by bacteria (Pasteurella multocida) infects eagles that eat waterfowl that have died from the disease.
The protozoan Trichomonas sp. caused the deaths of 4 fledglings in a study of wild golden eagles in Idaho.
Several further diseases that contribute to golden eagle deaths have been examined in Japan.
A captive eagle died from two malignant tumors - one in the liver and one in the kidney.
Killing permits
In December 2016, the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service proposed allowing wind-turbine electric generation companies to kill golden eagles without penalty, so long as "companies take steps to minimize the losses".
If issued, the permits would last 30 years, six times the current 5-year permits.
In human culture
Mankind has been fascinated by the golden eagle as early as the beginning of recorded history.
Most early-recorded cultures regarded the golden eagle with reverence.
It was only after the Industrial Revolution, when sport-hunting became widespread and commercial stock farming became internationally common, that humans started to widely regard golden eagles as a threat to their livelihoods.
This period also brought about the firearm and industrialized poisons, which made it easy for humans to kill the evasive and powerful birds.
Status and conservation
At one time, the golden eagle lived in a great majority of temperate Europe, North Asia, North America, North Africa, and Japan.
Although widespread and quite secure in some areas, in many parts of the range golden eagles have experienced sharp population declines and have even been extirpated from some areas.
The total number of individual golden eagles from around the range is estimated to range somewhere between 170,000 and 250,000 while the estimated total number of breeding pairs ranges from 60,000 to 100,000.
It has the largest known range of any member of its family, with a range estimated at about 140 million square kilometers.
If its taxonomic order is considered, it is the second most wide ranging species after only the osprey (Pandion haliaetus).
Few other eagle species are as numerous, though some species like tawny eagle, wedge-tailed eagle and bald eagle have total estimated populations of a similar size to the golden eagle’s despite having distributions which are more restricted.
On a global scale, the golden eagle is not considered threatened by the IUCN.
Further reading
