Down syndrome (DS or DNS), also known as trisomy 21, is a genetic disorder caused by the presence of all or part of a third copy of chromosome 21.
It is usually associated with physical growth delays, mild to moderate intellectual disability, and characteristic facial features.
The average IQ of a young adult with Down syndrome is 50, equivalent to the mental ability of an 8- or 9-year-old child, but this can vary widely.
The probability increases from less than 0.1% in 20-year-old mothers to 3% in those of age 45.
Down syndrome can be identified during pregnancy by prenatal screening followed by diagnostic testing or after birth by direct observation and genetic testing.
Since the introduction of screening, pregnancies with the diagnosis are often terminated.
Regular screening for health problems common in Down syndrome is recommended throughout the person's life.
There is no cure for Down syndrome.
Education and proper care have been shown to improve quality of life.
Some children with Down syndrome are educated in typical school classes, while others require more specialized education.
In adulthood, about 20% in the United States do paid work in some capacity, with many requiring a sheltered work environment.
Support in financial and legal matters is often needed.
Down syndrome is one of the most common chromosome abnormalities in humans.
It is named after John Langdon Down, a British doctor who fully described the syndrome in 1866.
Some aspects of the condition were described earlier by Jean-Étienne Dominique Esquirol in 1838 and Édouard Séguin in 1844.
The genetic cause of Down syndrome was discovered in 1959.
As adults, their mental abilities are typically similar to those of an 8- or 9-year-old.
Individuals with Down syndrome are at increased risk for obesity as they age.
Most individuals with Down syndrome have mild (IQ: 50-69) or moderate (IQ: 35-50) intellectual disability with some cases having severe (IQ: 20-35) difficulties.
Those with mosaic Down syndrome typically have IQ scores 10-30 points higher.
As they age, people with Down syndrome typically perform worse than their same-age peers.
Commonly, individuals with Down syndrome have better language understanding than ability to speak.
After reaching 30 years of age, some may lose their ability to speak.
While people with Down syndrome are generally happy, symptoms of depression and anxiety may develop in early adulthood.
In those who reach 60 years of age, 50-70% have the disease.
Ear infections often begin in the first year of life and are partly due to poor eustachian tube function.
Excessive ear wax can also cause hearing loss due to obstruction of the outer ear canal.
Age-related hearing loss of the sensorineural type occurs at a much earlier age and affects 10-70% of people with Down syndrome.
People with Down syndrome have a lower risk of hardening of the arteries.
the risk of testicular cancer and certain blood cancers, including acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) and acute megakaryoblastic leukemia (AMKL) is increased while the risk of other non-blood cancers is decreased.
Acute lymphoblastic leukemia in Down syndrome accounts for 1-3% of all childhood cases of ALL.
It occurs most often in those older than nine years or having a white blood cell count greater than 50,000 per microliter and is rare in those younger than one year old.
ALL in DS tends to have poorer outcomes than other cases of ALL in people without DS.
In Down syndrome, AMKL is typically preceded by transient myeloproliferative disease (TMD), a disorder of blood cell production in which non-cancerous megakaryoblasts with a mutation in the GATA1 gene rapidly divide during the later period of pregnancy.
The condition affects 3-10% of babies with Down.
In about 10% of cases, TMD progresses to AMKL during the three months to five years following its resolution.
Non-blood cancers
People with DS have a lower risk of all major solid cancers including those of lung, breast, cervix, with the lowest relative rates occurring in those aged 50 years or older.
One exception is testicular germ cell cancer which occurs at a higher rate in DS.
Type 1 diabetes mellitus is also more common.
Other frequent congenital problems include duodenal atresia, pyloric stenosis, Meckel diverticulum, and imperforate anus.
While plaque and poor oral hygiene are contributing factors, the severity of these periodontal diseases cannot be explained solely by external factors.
The weakened immune system also contributes to increased incidence of yeast infections in the mouth (from Candida albicans).
less effective oral hygiene habits, and higher plaque indexes.
Higher rates of tooth wear and bruxism are also common.
Without assisted reproductive technologies, around half of the children of someone with Down syndrome will also have the syndrome.
The parents of the affected individual are typically genetically normal.
In 1.0 to 2.5% of cases, some of the cells in the body are normal and others have trisomy 21, known as mosaic Down syndrome.
The other common mechanisms that can give rise to Down syndrome include: a Robertsonian translocation, isochromosome, or ring chromosome.
These contain additional material from chromosome 21 and occur in about 2.5% of cases.
Trisomy 21 (also known by the karyotype 47,XX,+21 for females and 47,XY,+21 for males) is caused by a failure of the 21st chromosome to separate during egg or sperm development (nondisjunction).
Translocation
The extra chromosome 21 material may also occur due to a Robertsonian translocation in 2-4% of cases.
This may be a new mutation or previously present in one of the parents.
This results in a 15% chance of having a child with Down syndrome when the mother is affected and a less than 5% probability if the father is affected.
Mechanism
The extra genetic material present in DS results in overexpression of a portion of the 310 genes located on chromosome 21.
with this area including genes for amyloid, superoxide dismutase, and likely the ETS2 proto oncogene.
Other research, however, has not confirmed these findings.
The dementia which occurs in Down syndrome is due to an excess of amyloid beta peptide produced in the brain and is similar to Alzheimer's disease.
Senile plaques and neurofibrillary tangles are present in nearly all by 35 years of age, though dementia may not be present.
Diagnosis
Before birth
When screening tests predict a high risk of Down syndrome, a more invasive diagnostic test (amniocentesis or chorionic villus sampling) is needed to confirm the diagnosis.
If the screening test has a 2% false-positive rate, this means one of eleven who test positive on screening have a fetus with DS.
The risk of limb problems may be increased in the offspring if chorionic villus sampling is performed before 10 weeks.
In the United States, the termination rate after diagnosis is around 75%,
After birth
The diagnosis can often be suspected based on the child's physical appearance at birth.
A number of tests are used, with varying levels of accuracy.
They are typically used in combination to increase the detection rate.
The presence or absence of many markers is more accurate.
Blood tests
Several blood markers can be measured to predict the risk of Down syndrome during the first or second trimester.
Testing of the mother's blood for fetal DNA is being studied and appears promising in the first trimester.
The International Society for Prenatal Diagnosis considers it a reasonable screening option for those women whose pregnancies are at a high risk for trisomy 21.
Management
Efforts such as early childhood intervention, screening for common problems, medical treatment where indicated, a good family environment, and work-related training can improve the development of children with Down syndrome.
Education and proper care can improve quality of life.
Typical childhood vaccinations are recommended.
Behavioral issues and mental illness are typically managed with counseling or medications.
Evidence to support this, however, is not very strong.
In the United States, the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act of 1975 requires public schools generally to allow attendance by students with Down syndrome.
Individuals with Down syndrome may learn better visually.
Drawing may help with language, speech, and reading skills.
Children with Down syndrome still often have difficulty with sentence structure and grammar, as well as developing the ability to speak clearly.
Several types of early intervention can help with cognitive development.
Efforts to develop motor skills include physical therapy, speech and language therapy, and occupational therapy.
Physical therapy focuses specifically on motor development and teaching children to interact with their environment.
Speech and language therapy can help prepare for later language.
Lastly, occupational therapy can help with skills needed for later independence.
Other
Tympanostomy tubes are often needed Tonsillectomy is also often done to help with sleep apnea and throat infections.
Evidence to support this in adults, however, is not very good.
Efforts to prevent respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) infection with human monoclonal antibodies should be considered, especially in those with heart problems.
donepezil, rivastigmine, or galantamine.
Plastic surgery has been suggested as a method of improving the appearance and thus the acceptance of people with Down syndrome.
It has also been proposed as a way to improve speech.
Many alternative medical techniques are used in Down syndrome; however, they are poorly supported by evidence.
Many learn to read and write and some are able to do paid work.
In Sweden, however, less than 1% have regular jobs.
Many are able to live semi-independently,
Individuals with Down syndrome have a higher risk of early death than the general population.
to 25 years in the 1980s,
Epidemiology
Globally, , Down syndrome occurs in about 1 per 1000 births More children are born with Down syndrome in countries where abortion is not allowed and in countries where pregnancy more commonly occurs at a later age.
and 1.1 per 1000 live births in Norway are affected.
The number of pregnancies with Down syndrome is more than two times greater with many spontaneously aborting.
History
English physician John Langdon Down first described Down syndrome in 1862, recognizing it as a distinct type of mental disability, and again in a more widely published report in 1866.
Édouard Séguin described it as separate from cretinism in 1844.
By the 20th century, Down syndrome had become the most recognizable form of mental disability.
In antiquity, many infants with disabilities were either killed or abandoned.
and the 16th-century painting The Adoration of the Christ Child.
In the 20th century, many individuals with Down syndrome were institutionalized, few of the associated medical problems were treated, and most died in infancy or early adult life.
With the rise of the eugenics movement, 33 of the then 48 U.S. states and several countries began programs of forced sterilization of individuals with Down syndrome and comparable degrees of disability.
Action T4 in Nazi Germany made public policy of a program of systematic involuntary euthanization.
With the discovery of karyotype techniques in the 1950s, it became possible to identify abnormalities of chromosomal number or shape.
and in 2014, the Scientific Council of the French Federation of Human Genetics unanimously awarded its Grand Prize to his colleague Marthe Gautier for her role in this discovery.
The discovery was in the laboratory of Raymond Turpin at the Hôpital Trousseau in Paris, France.
Jérôme Lejeune and Marthe Gautier were both his students.
As a result of this discovery, the condition became known as trisomy 21.
Even before the discovery of its cause, the presence of the syndrome in all races, its association with older maternal age, and its rarity of recurrence had been noticed.
Medical texts had assumed it was caused by a combination of inheritable factors that had not been identified.
Other theories had focused on injuries sustained during birth.
Society and culture
Name
Due to his perception that children with Down syndrome shared facial similarities with those of Blumenbach's Mongolian race, John Langdon Down used the term "mongoloid".
He felt that the existence of Down syndrome confirmed that all peoples were genetically related.
In the 1950s with discovery of the underlying cause as being related to chromosomes, concerns about the race-based nature of the name increased.
In 1961, 19 scientists suggested that "mongolism" had "misleading connotations" and had become "an embarrassing term".
The World Health Organization (WHO) dropped the term in 1965 after a request by the delegation from the Mongolian People's Republic.
In 1975, the United States National Institutes of Health (NIH) convened a conference to standardize the naming and recommended replacing the possessive form, "Down's syndrome" with "Down syndrome".
However, both the possessive and nonpossessive forms remain in use by the general population.
The term "trisomy 21" is also commonly used.
Ethics
Some obstetricians argue that not offering screening for Down syndrome is unethical.
As it is a medically reasonable procedure, per informed consent, people should at least be given information about it.
When results from testing become available, it is also considered unethical not to give the results to the person in question.
Some bioethicists deem it reasonable for parents to select a child who would have the highest well-being.
One criticism of this reasoning is that it often values those with disabilities less.
Some parents argue that Down syndrome shouldn't be prevented or cured and that eliminating Down syndrome amounts to genocide.
The disability rights movement does not have a position on screening, Some in the United States who are pro-life support abortion if the fetus is disabled, while others do not.
Of a group of 40 mothers in the United States who have had one child with Down syndrome, half agreed to screening in the next pregnancy.
Some of those against screening refer to it as a form of "eugenics".
Some Islamic countries allow abortion, while others do not.
Advocacy groups
Advocacy groups for individuals with Down syndrome began to be formed after the Second World War.
These were organizations advocating for the inclusion of people with Down syndrome into the general school system and for a greater understanding of the condition among the general population, Kobato Kai founded in Japan in 1964, and the National Down Syndrome Society founded in 1979 in the United States.
The first World Down Syndrome Day was held on 21 March 2006.
The day and month were chosen to correspond with 21 and trisomy, respectively.
It was recognized by the United Nations General Assembly in 2011.
Two efforts being studied are the use stem cells and gene therapy.
Other methods being studied include the use of antioxidants, gamma secretase inhibition, adrenergic agonists, and memantine.
Research is often carried out on an animal model, the Ts65Dn mouse.
Other animals
Down syndrome may also occur in animals other than humans.
In great apes chromosome 22 corresponds to the human chromosome 21 and thus trisomy 22 causes Down syndrome in apes.
The condition was observed in a common chimpanzee in 1969 and a Bornean orangutan in 1979, but neither lived very long.
The common chimpanzee Kanako (born around 1993, in Japan) has become the longest-lived known example of this condition.
Kanako has some of the same symptoms that are common in human Down syndrome.
It is unknown how common this condition is in chimps but it's plausible it could be roughly as common as Down syndrome is in humans.
