A country is a region that is identified as a distinct entity in political geography.
A country may be an independent sovereign state or part of a larger state, as a non-sovereign or formerly sovereign political division, a physical territory with a government, or a geographic region associated with sets of previously independent or differently associated people with distinct political characteristics.
Regardless of the physical geography, in the modern internationally accepted legal definition as defined by the League of Nations in 1937 and reaffirmed by the United Nations in 1945, a resident of a country is subject to the independent exercise of legal jurisdiction.
There is no hard and fast definition of what regions are countries and which are not.
Countries can refer both to sovereign states and to other political entities, while other times it can refer only to states.
For example, the CIA World Factbook uses the word in its "Country name" field to refer to "a wide variety of dependencies, areas of special sovereignty, uninhabited islands, and other entities in addition to the traditional countries or independent states".
Etymology and usage
The word country comes from Old French contrée, which derives from Vulgar Latin (terra) contrata (" (land) lying opposite"; " (land) spread before"), derived from contra ("against, opposite").
It most likely entered the English language after the Franco-Norman invasion during the 11th century.
In English the word has increasingly become associated with political divisions, so that one sense, associated with the indefinite article - "a country" - through misuse and subsequent conflation is now a synonym for state, or a former sovereign state, in the sense of sovereign territory or "district, native land".
Areas much smaller than a political state may be called by names such as the West Country in England, the Black Country , "Constable Country" , the "big country" (used in various contexts of the American West), "coal country" and many other terms.
The equivalent terms in French and other Romance languages (pays and variants) have not carried the process of being identified with political sovereign states as far as the English "country", instead derived from, pagus, which designated the territory controlled by a medieval count, a title originally granted by the Roman Church.
In many European countries the words are used for sub-divisions of the national territory, as in the German Bundesländer, as well as a less formal term for a sovereign state.
France has very many "pays" that are officially recognized at some level, and are either natural regions, like the Pays de Bray, or reflect old political or economic entities, like the Pays de la Loire.
A version of "country" can be found in the modern French language as contrée, based on the word cuntrée in Old French,
A few states consist of a union of smaller polities which are considered countries:
The Kingdom of the Netherlands includes four separate countries: Netherlands, Aruba, Curaçao, and Sint Maarten.
The United Kingdom includes England, Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland, though the latter is sometimes considered a province rather than a country.
The Crown Dependencies, which are not part of the UK itself, are also sometimes referred to as countries.
* List of sovereign states and dependent territories by continent
Notes
# ^
General information or statistical publications that adopt the wider definition for purposes such as illustration and comparison include:
Further reading
* http:/ world displaystory.cfm?story_id=15868439 Defining what makes a country The Economist
