Sanskrit (; , ) is a language of ancient India with a 3,500-year history.
and Central Asia, emerging as a language of high culture and of local ruling elites in these regions.
Sanskrit is an Old Indo-Aryan language.
Sanskrit, though not necessarily Classical Sanskrit, is the root language of many Prakrit languages.
Examples include numerous, modern, North Indian, subcontinental daughter languages such as Hindi, Marathi, Bengali, Punjabi and Nepali.
The body of Sanskrit literature encompasses a rich tradition of philosophical and religious texts, as well as poetry, music, drama, scientific, technical and other texts.
In the ancient era, Sanskrit compositions were orally transmitted by methods of memorisation of exceptional complexity, rigour and fidelity.
The earliest known inscriptions in Sanskrit are from the 1st century BCE, such as the few discovered in Ayodhya and Ghosundi-Hathibada (Chittorgarh).
Sanskrit texts dated to the 1st millennium CE were written in the Brahmi script, the Nāgarī script, the historic South Indian scripts and their derivative scripts.
Sanskrit is one of the 22 languages listed in the Eighth Schedule of the Constitution of India.
It continues to be widely used as a ceremonial and ritual language in Hinduism and some Buddhist practices such as hymns and chants.
Etymology and nomenclature
In Sanskrit verbal adjective is a compound word consisting of sam (together, good, well, perfected) and krta- (made, formed, work).
It connotes a work that has been "well prepared, pure and perfect, polished, sacred".
According to Biderman, the perfection contextually being referred to in the etymological origins of the word is its tonal-rather than semantic-qualities.
Sound and oral transmission were highly valued qualities in ancient India, and its sages refined the alphabet, the structure of words and its exacting grammar into a "collection of sounds, a kind of sublime musical mold", states Biderman, as an integral language they called Sanskrit.
From the late Vedic period onwards, state Annette Wilke and Oliver Moebus, resonating sound and its musical foundations attracted an "exceptionally large amount of linguistic, philosophical and religious literature" in India.
Sound was visualized as "pervading all creation", another representation of the world itself; the "mysterious magnum" of Hindu thought.
The search for perfection in thought and the goal of salvation were among the dimensions of sacred sound, and the common thread that weaved all ideas and inspirations became the quest for what the ancient Indians believed to be a perfect language, the "phonocentric episteme" of Sanskrit.
Sanskrit as a language competed with numerous, less exact vernacular Indian languages called Prakritic languages ().
The term prakrta literally means "original, natural, normal, artless", states Franklin Southworth.
The relationship between Prakrit and Sanskrit is found in Indian texts dated to the 1st millennium CE.
Patañjali acknowledged that Prakrit is the first language, one instinctively adopted by every child with all its imperfections and later leads to the problems of interpretation and misunderstanding.
The purifying structure of the Sanskrit language removes these imperfections.
The early Sanskrit grammarian Daṇḍin states, for example, that much in the Prakrit languages is etymologically rooted in Sanskrit, but involve "loss of sounds" and corruptions that result from a "disregard of the grammar".
Daṇḍin acknowledged that there are words and confusing structures in Prakrit that thrive independent of Sanskrit.
This view is found in the writing of Bharata Muni, the author of the ancient Nāṭyaśāstra text.
The early Jain scholar Namisādhu acknowledged the difference, but disagreed that the Prakrit language was a corruption of Sanskrit.
Namisādhu stated that the Prakrit language was the pūrvam (came before, origin) and that it came naturally to women and children, while Sanskrit was a refinement of Prakrit through "purification by grammar".
History
Origin and development
Sanskrit belongs to the Indo-European family of languages.
It is one of three ancient documented languages that arose from a common root language now referred to as Proto-Indo-European language:
* Mycenaean Greek (c. 1450 BCE) and Ancient Greek (c. 750 - 400 BC).
Mycenaean Greek is the oldest recorded form of Greek, but the limited material that has survived has a highly ambiguous writing system.
More important to Indo-European studies is Ancient Greek, documented extensively beginning with the two Homeric poems (the Iliad and the Odyssey, c. 750 BC).
* Hittite (c. 1750 - 1200 BCE).
This is the earliest-recorded of all Indo-European languages, distinguishable into Old Hittite, Middle Hittite and Neo-Hittite.
It is divergent from the others likely due to its early separation.
Discovered on clay tablets of central Turkey in cuneiform script, it possesses some highly archaic features found only fragmentarily, if at all, in other languages.
At the same time, however, it appears to have undergone a large number of early phonological and grammatical changes along with the ambiguities of its writing system.
Other Indo-European languages related to Sanskrit include archaic and classical Latin (c. 600 BCE - 100 CE, old Italian), Gothic (archaic Germanic language, c. 350 CE), Old Norse (c. 200 CE and after), Old Avestan (c. late 2nd millennium BCE) and Younger Avestan (c. 900 BCE).
as well as the extinct Avestan and Old Persian-both Iranian languages.
Sanskrit belongs to the satem group of the Indo-European languages.
Colonial era scholars familiar with Latin and Greek were struck by the resemblance of the Sanskrit language; both in its vocabulary and grammar; to the classical languages of Europe.
It suggested a common root and historical links between some of the major distant ancient languages of the world.
William Jones remarked:
QTEMPLATE |
The Sanscrit language, whatever be its antiquity, is of a wonderful structure; more perfect than the Greek, more copious than the Latin, and more exquisitely refined than either, yet bearing to both of them a stronger affinity, both in the roots of verbs and the forms of grammar, than could possibly have been produced by accident; so strong indeed, that no philologer could examine them all three, without believing them to have sprung from some common source, which, perhaps, no longer exists.
There is a similar reason, though not quite so forcible, for supposing that both the Gothick and the Celtick sic, though blended with a very different idiom, had the same origin with the Sanscrit; and the Old Persian might be added to the same family.
In order to explain the common features shared by Sanskrit and other Indo-European languages, the Indo-Aryan migration theory states that the original speakers of what became Sanskrit arrived in the Indian subcontinent from the north-west sometime during the early second millennium BCE.
Evidence for such a theory includes the close relationship between the Indo-Iranian tongues and the Baltic and Slavic languages, vocabulary exchange with the non-Indo-European Uralic languages, and the nature of the attested Indo-European words for flora and fauna.
The pre-history of Indo-Aryan languages which preceded Vedic Sanskrit is unclear and various hypotheses place it over a fairly wide limit.
According to Thomas Burrow, based on the relationship between various Indo-European languages, the origin of all these languages may possibly be in what is now Central or Eastern Europe, while the Indo-Iranian group possibly arose in Central Russia.
The Iranian and Indo-Aryan branches separated quite early.
It is the Indo-Aryan branch that moved into eastern Iran and the south into the Indian subcontinent in the first half of the 2nd millennium BCE.
Once in ancient India, the Indo-Aryan language underwent rapid linguistic change and morphed into the Vedic Sanskrit language.
Vedic Sanskrit
The pre-Classical form of Sanskrit is known as Vedic Sanskrit.
The earliest attested Sanskrit text is the Rigveda, a Hindu scripture, from the mid-to-late second millennium BCE.
No written records from such an early period survive if they ever existed.
However, scholars are confident that the oral transmission of the texts is reliable: they were ceremonial literature where the exact phonetic expression and its preservation were a part of the historic tradition.
The Rigveda is a collection of books, created by multiple authors from distant parts of ancient India.
These authors represented different generations, and the mandalas 2 to 7 are the oldest while the mandalas 1 and 10 are relatively the youngest.
Yet, the Vedic Sanskrit in these books of the Rigveda "hardly presents any dialectical diversity", states Louis Renou-an Indologist known for his scholarship of the Sanskrit literature and the Rigveda in particular.
According to Renou, this implies that the Vedic Sanskrit language had a "set linguistic pattern" by the second half of the 2nd millennium BCE.
Beyond the Rigveda, the ancient literature in Vedic Sanskrit that has survived into the modern age include the Samaveda, Yajurveda, Atharvaveda along with the embedded and layered Vedic texts such as the Brahmanas, Aranyakas and the early Upanishads.
Vedic Sanskrit was both a spoken and literary language of ancient India.
According to Michael Witzel, Vedic Sanskrit was a spoken language of the semi-nomadic Aryas who temporarily settled in one place, maintained cattle herds, practiced limited agriculture and after some time moved by wagon trains they called grama.
The Vedic Sanskrit language or a closely related Indo-European variant was recognized beyond ancient India as evidenced by the "Mitanni Treaty" between the ancient Hittite and Mitanni people, carved into a rock, in a region that are now parts of Syria and Turkey.
Parts of this treaty such as the names of the Mitanni princes and technical terms related to horse training, for reasons not understood, are in early forms of Vedic Sanskrit.
The treaty also invokes the gods Varuna, Mitra, Indra and Nasatya found in the earliest layers of the Vedic literature.
QTEMPLATE box
|quote =
O Brihaspati, when in giving names
they first set forth the beginning of Language,
Their most excellent and spotless secret
was laid bare through love,
When the wise ones formed Language with their mind,
purifying it like grain with a winnowing fan,
Then friends knew friendships -
an auspicious mark placed on their language.
|source = - Rigveda 10.71.1-4
Translated by Roger Woodard
|width = 28%
|bgcolor=#FFE0BB
|align = left
The Vedic Sanskrit found in the Rigveda is distinctly more archaic than other Vedic texts, and in many respects, the Rigvedic language is notably more similar to those found in the archaic texts of Old Avestan Zoroastrian Gathas and Homer's Iliad and Odyssey.
According to Stephanie W. Jamison and Joel P. Brereton-Indologists known for their translation of the Rigveda-, the Vedic Sanskrit literature "clearly inherited" from Indo-Iranian and Indo-European times, the social structures such as the role of the poet and the priests, the patronage economy, the phrasal equations and some of the poetic meters.
While there are similarities, state Jamison and Brereton, there are also differences between Vedic Sanskrit, the Old Avestan, and the Mycenaean Greek literature.
For example, unlike the Sanskrit similes in the Rigveda, the Old Avestan Gathas lack simile entirely, and it is rare in the later version of the language.
The Homerian Greek, like Rigvedic Sanskrit, deploys simile extensively, but they are structurally very different.
Classical Sanskrit
The early Vedic form of the Sanskrit language was far less homogenous, and it evolved over time into a more structured and homogeneous language, ultimately into the Classical Sanskrit by about the mid-1st millennium BCE.
According to Richard Gombrich-an Indologist and a scholar of Sanskrit, Pāli and Buddhist Studies-the archaic Vedic Sanskrit found in the Rigveda had already evolved in the Vedic period, as evidenced in the later Vedic literature.
The language in the early Upanishads of Hinduism and the late Vedic literature approaches Classical Sanskrit, while the archaic Vedic Sanskrit had by the Buddha's time become unintelligible to all except ancient Indian sages, states Gombrich.
The formalization of the Sanskrit language is credited to , along with Patanjali's Mahabhasya and Katyayana's commentary that preceded Patanjali's work.
Panini composed .
The century in which he lived is unclear and debated, but his work is generally accepted to be from sometime between 6th and 4th centuries BCE.
The was not the first description of Sanskrit grammar, but it is the earliest that has survived in full.
Pāṇini cites ten scholars on the phonological and grammatical aspects of the Sanskrit language before him, as well as the variants in the usage of Sanskrit in different regions of India.
The ten Vedic scholars he quotes are Apisali, Kashyapa, Gargya, Galava, Cakravarmana, Bharadvaja, Sakatayana, Sakalya, Senaka and Sphotayana.
The of Panini became the foundation of Vyākaraṇa, a Vedanga.
In the , language is observed in a manner that has no parallel among Greek or Latin grammarians.
Pāṇini's grammar, according to Renou and Filliozat, defines the linguistic expression and a classic that set the standard for the Sanskrit language.
Pāṇini made use of a technical metalanguage consisting of a syntax, morphology and lexicon.
This metalanguage is organised according to a series of meta-rules, some of which are explicitly stated while others can be deduced.
Pāṇini's comprehensive and scientific theory of grammar is conventionally taken to mark the start of Classical Sanskrit.
His systematic treatise inspired and made Sanskrit the preeminent Indian language of learning and literature for two millennia.
It is unclear whether Pāṇini wrote his treatise on Sanskrit language or he orally created the detailed and sophisticated treatise then transmitted it through his students.
Modern scholarship generally accepts that he knew of a form of writing, based on references to words such as lipi ("script") and lipikara ("scribe") in section 3.2 of the Aṣṭādhyāyī.
The Classical Sanskrit language formalized by Panini, states Renou, is "not an impoverished language", rather it is "a controlled and a restrained language from which archaisms and unnecessary formal alternatives were excluded".
The Classical form of the language simplified the sandhi rules but retained various aspects of the Vedic language, while adding rigor and flexibilities, so that it had sufficient means to express thoughts as well as being "capable of responding to the future increasing demands of an infinitely diversified literature", according to Renou.
Panini included numerous "optional rules" beyond the Vedic Sanskrit's bahulam framework, to respect liberty and creativity so that individual writers separated by geography or time would have the choice to express facts and their views in their own way, where tradition followed competitive forms of the Sanskrit language.
The phonetic differences between Vedic Sanskrit and Classical Sanskrit are negligible when compared to the intense change that must have occurred in the pre-Vedic period between Indo-Aryan language and the Vedic Sanskrit.
The noticeable differences between the Vedic and the Classical Sanskrit include the much-expanded grammar and grammatical categories as well as the differences in the accent, the semantics and the syntax.
There are also some differences between how some of the nouns and verbs end, as well as the sandhi rules, both internal and external.
Quite many words found in the early Vedic Sanskrit language are never found in late Vedic Sanskrit or Classical Sanskrit literature, while some words have different and new meanings in Classical Sanskrit when contextually compared to the early Vedic Sanskrit literature.
Arthur Macdonell was among the early colonial era scholars who summarized some of the differences between the Vedic and Classical Sanskrit.
Louis Renou published in 1956, in French, a more extensive discussion of the similarities, the differences and the evolution of the Vedic Sanskrit within the Vedic period and then to the Classical Sanskrit along with his views on the history.
This work has been translated by Jagbans Balbir.
Sanskrit and Prakrit languages
The earliest known use of the word Saṃskṛta (Sanskrit), in the context of a language, is found in verses 3.16.14 and 5.28.17-19 of the Ramayana.
Sanskrit co-existed with numerous other Prakrit languages of ancient India.
The Prakrit languages of India also have ancient roots and some Sanskrit scholars have called these Apabhramsa, literally "spoiled".
The Vedic literature includes words whose phonetic equivalent are not found in other Indo-European languages but which are found in the regional Prakrit languages, which makes it likely that the interaction, the sharing of words and ideas began early in the Indian history.
As the Indian thought diversified and challenged earlier beliefs of Hinduism, particularly in the form of Buddhism and Jainism, the Prakrit languages such as Pali in Theravada Buddhism and Ardhamagadhi in Jainism competed with Sanskrit in the ancient times.
However, states Paul Dundas, a scholar of Jainism, these ancient Prakrit languages had "roughly the same relationship to Sanskrit as medieval Italian does to Latin."
Scholars disagree in their answers.
A section of Western scholars state that Sanskrit was never a spoken language, while others and particularly most Indian scholars state the opposite.
Those who affirm Sanskrit to have been a vernacular language point to the necessity of Sanskrit being a spoken language for the oral tradition that preserved the vast number of Sanskrit manuscripts from ancient India.
Secondly, they state that the textual evidence in the works of Yaksa, Panini and Patanajali affirms that the Classical Sanskrit in their era was a language that is spoken (bhasha) by the cultured and educated.
Some sutras expound upon the variant forms of spoken Sanskrit versus written Sanskrit.
The Classical Sanskrit with its exacting grammar was thus the language of the Indian scholars and the educated classes, while others communicated with approximate or ungrammatical variants of it as well as other natural Indian languages.
Sanskrit, as the learned language of Ancient India, thus existed alongside the vernacular Prakrits.
Many Sanskrit dramas indicate that the language coexisted with the vernacular Prakrits.
Centres in Varanasi, Paithan, Pune and Kanchipuram were centers of classical Sanskrit learning and public debates until the arrival of the colonial era.
According to Étienne Lamotte-an Indologist and Buddhism scholar, Sanskrit became the dominant literary and inscriptional language because of its precision in communication.
It was, states Lamotte, an ideal instrument for presenting ideas and as knowledge in Sanskrit multiplied so did its spread and influence.
Sanskrit was adopted voluntarily as a vehicle of high culture, arts, and profound ideas.
Pollock disagrees with Lamotte, but concurs that Sanskrit's influence grew into what he terms as "Sanskrit Cosmopolis" over a region that included all of South Asia and much of southeast Asia.
The Sanskrit language cosmopolis thrived beyond India between 300 and 1300 CE.
Influence
QTEMPLATE box
|quote = Extant manuscripts in Sanskrit number over 30 million, one hundred times those in Greek and Latin combined, constituting the largest cultural heritage that any civilization has produced prior to the invention of the printing press.
|source = - Foreword of Sanskrit Computational Linguistics (2009), Gérard Huet, Amba Kulkarni and Peter Scharf
|width = 28%
|bgcolor=#FFE0BB
|align = right
Sanskrit has been the predominant language of Hindu texts encompassing a rich tradition of philosophical and religious texts, as well as poetry, music, drama, scientific, technical and others.
It is the predominant language of one of the largest collection of historic manuscripts.
The earliest known inscriptions in Sanskrit are from the 1st century BCE, such as the Ayodhya Inscription of Dhana and Ghosundi-Hathibada (Chittorgarh).
Though developed and nurtured by scholars of orthodox schools of Hinduism, Sanskrit has been the language for some of the key literary works and theology of heterodox schools of Indian philosophies such as Buddhism and Jainism.
These speculations became particularly important to the Mimamsa and the Nyaya schools of Hindu philosophy, and later to Vedanta and Mahayana Buddhism, states Frits Staal-a scholar of Linguistics with a focus on Indian philosophies and Sanskrit.
Though written in a number of different scripts, the dominant language of Hindu texts has been Sanskrit.
It or a hybrid form of Sanskrit became the preferred language of Mahayana Buddhism scholarship.
One of the early and influential Buddhist philosopher Nagarjuna (~200 CE), for example, used Classical Sanskrit as the language for his texts.
According to Renou, Sanskrit had a limited role in the Theravada tradition (formerly known as the Hinayana) but the Prakrit works that have survived are of doubtful authenticity.
Some of the canonical fragments of the early Buddhist traditions, discovered in the 20th century, suggest the early Buddhist traditions used an imperfect and reasonably good Sanskrit, sometimes with a Pali syntax, states Renou.
The Mahāsāṃghika and Mahavastu, in their late Hinayana forms, used hybrid Sanskrit for their literature.
Sanskrit was also the language of some of the oldest surviving, authoritative and much followed philosophical works of Jainism such as the Tattvartha Sutra by Umaswati.
The Sanskrit language has been one of the major means for the transmission of knowledge and ideas in Asian history.
Indian texts in Sanskrit were already in China by 402 CE, carried by the influential Buddhist pilgrim Faxian who translated them into Chinese by 418 CE.
Xuanzang, another Chinese Buddhist pilgrim, learnt Sanskrit in India and carried 657 Sanskrit texts to China in the 7th century where he established a major center of learning and language translation under the patronage of Emperor Taizong.
By the early 1st millennium CE, Sanskrit had spread Buddhist and Hindu ideas to Southeast Asia, parts of the East Asia Its position in the cultures of Greater India is akin to that of Latin and Ancient Greek in Europe.
Sanskrit has significantly influenced most modern languages of the Indian subcontinent, particularly the languages of the northern, western, central and eastern Indian subcontinent.
This coincides with the beginning of Islamic invasions of the Indian subcontinent to create, thereafter expand the Muslim rule in the form of Sultanates and later the Mughal Empire.
With the fall of Kashmir around the 13th century, a premier center of Sanskrit literary creativity, Sanskrit literature there disappeared, Muslim rulers patronized the Middle Eastern language and scripts found in Persia and Arabia, and the Indians linguistically adapted to this Persianization to gain employment with the Muslim rulers.
After Islamic rule disintegrated in the Indian subcontinent and the colonial rule era began, Sanskrit re-emerged but in the form of a "ghostly existence" in regions such as Bengal.
This decline was the result of "political institutions and civic ethos" that did not support the historic Sanskrit literary culture.
Indian authors such as M Ramakrishnan Nair state that Sanskrit was a dead language by the 1st millennium BCE.
Sheldon Pollock states that in some crucial way, "Sanskrit is dead".
Other scholars state that Sanskrit language did not die, only declined.
Hanneder disagrees with Pollock, finding his arguments elegant but "often arbitrary".
According to Hanneder, a decline or regional absence of creative and innovative literature constitutes a negative evidence to Pollock's hypothesis, but it is not positive evidence.
A closer look at Sanskrit in the Indian history after the 12th century suggests that Sanskrit survived despite the odds.
According to Hanneder,
QTEMPLATE |On a more public level the statement that Sanskrit is a dead language is misleading, for Sanskrit is quite obviously not as dead as other dead languages and the fact that it is spoken, written and read will probably convince most people that it cannot be a dead language in the most common usage of the term.
Pollock's notion of the "death of Sanskrit" remains in this unclear realm between academia and public opinion when he says that "most observers would agree that, in some crucial way, Sanskrit is dead.
"|author
|source
The Sanskrit language scholar Moriz Winternitz states, Sanskrit was never a dead language and it is still alive though its prevalence is lesser than ancient and medieval times.
Sanskrit remains an integral part of Hindu journals, festivals, Ramlila plays, drama, rituals and the rites-of-passage.
Similarly, Brian Hatcher states that the "metaphors of historical rupture" by Pollock are not valid, that there is ample proof that Sanskrit was very much alive in the narrow confines of surviving Hindu kingdoms between the 13th and 18th centuries, and its reverence and tradition continues.
Hanneder states that modern works in Sanskrit are either ignored or their "modernity" contested.
There are over 11,000 articles in the https:/ wiki Sanskrit Wikipedia, 4,000 more than in the Cambodian Wikipedia.
According to Robert Goldman and Sally Sutherland, Sanskrit is neither "dead" nor "living" in the conventional sense.
It is a special, timeless language that lives in the numerous manuscripts, daily chants and ceremonial recitations, a heritage language that Indians contextually prize and some practice.
When the British introduced English to India in the 19th century, knowledge of Sanskrit and ancient literature continued to flourish as the study of Sanskrit changed from a more traditional style into a form of analytical and comparative scholarship mirroring that of Europe.
Modern Indic languages
The relationship of Sanskrit to the Prakrit languages, particularly the modern form of Indian languages, is complex and spans about 3,500 years, states Colin Masica-a linguist specializing in South Asian languages.
A part of the difficulty is the lack of sufficient textual, archaeological and epigraphical evidence for the ancient Prakrit languages with rare exceptions such as Pali, leading to a tendency of anachronistic errors.
Sanskrit and Prakrit languages may be divided into Old Indo-Aryan (1500 BCE-600 BCE), Middle Indo-Aryan (600 BCE-1000 CE) and New Indo-Aryan (1000 CE-current), each can further be subdivided in early, middle or second, and late evolutionary substages.
Vedic Sanskrit belongs to the early Old Indo-Aryan while Classical Sanskrit to the later Old Indo-Aryan stage.
The evidence for Prakrits such as Pali (Theravada Buddhism) and Ardhamagadhi (Jainism), along with Magadhi, Maharashtri, Sinhala, Sauraseni and Niya (Gandhari), emerge in the Middle Indo-Aryan stage in two versions-archaic and more formalized-that may be placed in early and middle substages of the 600 BCE-1000 CE period.
Two literary Indic languages can be traced to the late Middle Indo-Aryan stage and these are Apabhramsa and Elu (a form of literary Sinhalese).
Numerous North, Central, Eastern and Western Indian languages, such as Hindi, Gujarati, Sindhi, Punjabi, Kashmiri, Nepali, Braj, Awadhi, Bengali, Assamese, Oriya, Marathi, and others belong to the New Indo-Aryan stage.
There is an extensive overlap in the vocabulary, phonetics and other aspects of these New Indo-Aryan languages with Sanskrit, but it is neither universal nor identical across the languages.
They likely emerged from a synthesis of the ancient Sanskrit language traditions and an admixture of various regional dialects.
Each language has some unique and regionally creative aspects, with unclear origins.
Prakrit languages do have a grammatical structure, but like the Vedic Sanskrit, it is far less rigorous than Classical Sanskrit.
The roots of all Prakrit languages may be in the Vedic Sanskrit and ultimately the Indo-Aryan language, their structural details vary from the Classical Sanskrit.
Sanskrit, states Burjor Avari, can be described as "the mother language of almost all the languages of north India".
Geographic distribution
The Sanskrit language's historic presence is attested across a wide geography beyond the Indian subcontinent.
Inscriptions and literary evidence suggests that Sanskrit language was already being adopted in Southeast Asia and Central Asia in the 1st millennium CE, through monks, religious pilgrims and merchants.
The Indian subcontinent has been the geographic range of the largest collection of the ancient and pre-18th-century Sanskrit manuscripts and inscriptions.
Myanmar, Indonesia, Cambodia, Laos, Vietnam, Thailand, and Malaysia.
Sanskrit inscriptions, manuscripts or its remnants, including some of the oldest known Sanskrit written texts, have been discovered in dry high deserts and mountainous terrains such as in Nepal, Tibet, Mongolia, Uzbekistan, Turkmenistan, Tajikistan, and Kazakhstan.
Some Sanskrit texts and inscriptions have also been discovered in Korea and Japan.
Official status
In India, Sanskrit is among the 22 official languages of India in the Eighth Schedule to the Constitution.
In 2010, Uttarakhand became the first state in India to make Sanskrit its second official language.
In 2019, Himachal Pradesh made Sanskrit its second official language, becoming the second state in India to do so.
Phonology
Sanskrit shares many Proto-Indo-European phonological features, although it features a larger inventory of distinct phonemes.
The consonantal system is the same, though it systematically enlarged the inventory of distinct sounds.
For example, Sanskrit added a voiceless aspirated "tʰ", to the voiceless "t", voiced "d" and voiced aspirated "dʰ" found in PIE languages.
The most significant and distinctive phonological development in Sanskrit is vowel-merger, states Stephanie Jamison-an Indo-European linguist specializing in Sanskrit literature.
The short *e, *o and *a, all merge as a (अ) in Sanskrit, while long *ē, *ō and *ā, all merge as long ā (आ).
These mergers occurred very early and significantly impacted Sanskrit's morphological system.
Some phonological developments in it mirror those in other PIE languages.
For example, the labiovelars merged with the plain velars as in other satem languages.
The secondary palatalization of the resulting segments is more thorough and systematic within Sanskrit, states Jamison.
A series of retroflex dental stops were innovated in Sanskrit to more thoroughly articulate sounds for clarity.
For example, unlike the loss of the morphological clarity from vowel contraction that is found in early Greek and related southeast European languages, Sanskrit deployed *y, *w, and *s intervocalically to provide morphological clarity.
Vowels
The cardinal vowels (svaras) i (इ), u (उ), a (अ) distinguish length in Sanskrit, states Jamison.
The short a (अ) in Sanskrit is a closer vowel than ā, equivalent to schwa.
The mid-vowels ē (ए) and ō (ओ) in Sanskrit are monophthongizations of the Indo-Iranian diphthongs *ai and *au.
The Old Iranian language preserved *ai and *au.
The Sanskrit vowels are inherently long, though often transcribed e and o without the diacritic.
The vocalic liquid r̥ in Sanskrit is a merger of PIE *r̥ and *l̥. The long r̥ is an innovation and it is used in a few analogically generated morphological categories.
According to Masica, Sanskrit has four traditional semivowels, with which were classed, "for morphophonemic reasons, the liquids: y, r, l, and v; that is, as y and v were the non-syllabics corresponding to i, u, so were r, l in relation to r̥ and l̥".
The northwestern, the central and the eastern Sanskrit dialects have had a historic confusion between "r" and "l".
The Paninian system that followed the central dialect preserved the distinction, likely out of reverence for the Vedic Sanskrit that distinguished the "r" and "l".
However, the northwestern dialect only had "r", while the eastern dialect probably only had "l", states Masica.
Thus literary works from different parts of ancient India appear inconsistent in their use of "r" and "l", resulting in doublets that is occasionally semantically differentiated.
Consonants
Sanskrit possesses a symmetric consonantal phoneme structure based on how the sound is articulated, though the actual usage of these sounds conceals the lack of parallelism in the apparent symmetry possibly from historical changes within the language.
The glides and liquids regularly alternate with vowels in Sanskrit, for example, i ≈ y; u ≈ ʋ (w); r̥ ≈ r ; l̥ ≈ l, states Jamison.
Sanskrit had a series of retroflex stops.
All the retroflexes in Sanskrit are in "origin conditioned alternants of dentals, though from the beginning of the language they have a qualified independence", states Jamison.
The palatals are affricates in Sanskrit, not stops.
The palatal nasal is a conditioned variant of n occurring next to palatal obstruents.
The anusvara that Sanskrit deploys is a conditioned alternant of postvocalic nasals, under certain sandhi conditions.
Its visarga is a word-final or morpheme-final conditioned alternant of s and r under certain sandhi conditions.
QTEMPLATE box
|quote = The system of Sanskrit Sounds
The order of Sanskrit sounds works along three principles: it goes from simple to complex; it goes from the back to the front of the mouth; and it groups similar sounds together.
Among themselves, both the vowels and consonants are ordered according to where in the mouth they are pronounced, going from back to front.
|source = - A. M. Ruppel, The Cambridge Introduction to Sanskrit
|width = 28%
|bgcolor=#FFE0BB
|align = right
The voiceless aspirated series is also an innovation in Sanskrit but is significantly rarer than the other three series.
While the Sanskrit language organizes sounds for expression beyond those found in the PIE language, it retained many features found in the Iranian and Balto-Slavic languages.
An example of a similar process in all three, states Jamison, is the retroflex sibilant ʂ being the automatic product of dental s following i, u, r, and k (mnemonically "ruki").
Phonological alternations, sandhi rules
Sanskrit deploys extensive phonological alternations on different linguistic levels through sandhi rules (literally, the rules of "putting together, union, connection, alliance").
This is similar to the English alteration of "going to" as gonna, states Jamison.
The Sanskrit language accepts such alterations within it, but offers formal rules for the sandhi of any two words next to each other in the same sentence or linking two sentences.
The external sandhi rules state that similar short vowels coalesce into a single long vowel, while dissimilar vowels form glides or undergo diphthongization.
Among the consonants, most external sandhi rules recommend regressive assimilation for clarity when they are voiced.
According to Jamison, these rules ordinarily apply at compound seams and morpheme boundaries.
In Vedic Sanskrit, the external sandhi rules are more variable than in Classical Sanskrit.
The internal sandhi rules are more intricate and account for the root and the canonical structure of the Sanskrit word.
These rules anticipate what are now known as the Bartholomae's law and Grassmann's law.
For example, states Jamison, the "voiceless, voiced, and voiced aspirated obstruents of a positional series regularly alternate with each other (p ≈ b ≈ bʰ; t ≈ d ≈ dʰ, etc.; note, however, c ≈ j ≈ h), such that, for example, a morpheme with an underlying voiced aspirate final may show alternants with all three stops under differing internal sandhi conditions".
The velar series (k, g, gʰ) alternate with the palatal series (c, j, h), while the structural position of the palatal series is modified into a retroflex cluster when followed by dental.
This rule create two morphophonemically distinct series from a single palatal series.
Vocalic alternations in the Sanskrit morphological system is termed "strengthening", and called guna and vriddhi in the preconsonantal versions.
There is an equivalence to terms deployed in Indo-European descriptive grammars, wherein Sanskrit's unstrengthened state is same as the zero-grade, guna corresponds to normal-grade, while vriddhi is same as the lengthened-state.
The qualitative ablaut is not found in Sanskrit just like it is absent in Iranian, but Sanskrit retains quantitative ablaut through vowel strengthening.
The transformations between unstrengthened to guna is prominent in the morphological system, states Jamison, while vriddhi is a particularly significant rule when adjectives of origin and appurtenance are derived.
The manner in which this is done slightly differs between the Vedic and the Classical Sanskrit.
Sanskrit grants a very flexible syllable structure, where they may begin or end with vowels, be single consonants or clusters.
Similarly, the syllable may have an internal vowel of any weight.
The Vedic Sanskrit shows traces of following the Sievers-Edgerton Law, but Classical Sanskrit doesn't.
Vedic Sanskrit has a pitch accent system, states Jamison, which were acknowledged by Panini, but in his Classical Sanskrit the accents disappear.
Most Vedic Sanskrit words have one accent.
However, this accent is not phonologically predictable, states Jamison.
It can fall anywhere in the word and its position often conveys morphological and syntactic information.
According to Masica, the presence of an accent system in Vedic Sanskrit is evidenced from the markings in the Vedic texts.
This is important because of Sanskrit's connection to the PIE languages and comparative Indo-European linguistics.
Sanskrit, like most early Indo-European languages, lost the so-called "laryngeal consonants (cover-symbol *H) present in the Proto-Indo-European", states Jamison.
This significantly impacted the evolutionary path of the Sanskrit phonology and morphology, particularly in the variant forms of roots.
Morphology
The basis of Sanskrit morphology is the root, states Jamison, "a morpheme bearing lexical meaning".
The verbal and nominal stems of Sanskrit words are derived from this root through the phonological vowel-gradation processes, the addition of affixes, verbal and nominal stems.
It then adds an ending to establish the grammatical and syntactic identity of the stem.
According to Jamison, the "three major formal elements of the morphology are (i) root, (ii) affix, and (iii) ending; and they are roughly responsible for (i) lexical meaning, (ii) derivation, and (iii) inflection respectively".
A Sanskrit word has the following canonical structure:
:Root + Affix + Ending
The root structure has certain phonological constraints.
Two of the most important constraints of a "root" is that it does not end in a short "a" (अ) and that it is monosyllabic.
In contrast, the affixes and endings commonly do.
The affixes in Sanskrit are almost always suffixes, with exceptions such as the augment "a-" added as prefix to past tense verb forms and the "-na/n-" infix in single verbal present class, states Jamison.
A verb in Sanskrit has the following canonical structure:
:Root + Suffix + Suffix + Ending
According to Ruppel, verbs in Sanskrit express the same information as other Indo-European languages such as English.
Both verbs and nouns in Sanskrit are either thematic or athematic, states Jamison.
Guna (strengthened) forms in the active singular regularly alternate in athematic verbs.
The finite verbs of Classical Sanskrit have the following grammatical categories: person, number, voice, tense-aspect, and mood.
According to Jamison, a portmanteau morpheme generally expresses the person-number-voice in Sanskrit, and sometimes also the ending or only the ending.
The mood of the word is embedded in the affix.
These elements of word architecture are the typical building blocks in Classical Sanskrit, but in Vedic Sanskrit these elements fluctuate and are unclear.
For example, in the Rigveda preverbs regularly occur in tmesis, states Jamison, which means they are "separated from the finite verb".
This indecisiveness is likely linked to Vedic Sanskrit's attempt to incorporate accent.
With nonfinite forms of the verb and with nominal derivatives thereof, states Jamison, "preverbs show much clearer univerbation in Vedic, both by position and by accent, and by Classical Sanskrit, tmesis is no longer possible even with finite forms".
While roots are typical in Sanskrit, some words do not follow the canonical structure.
A few forms lack both inflection and root.
Many words are inflected (and can enter into derivation) but lack a recognizable root.
Examples from the basic vocabulary include kinship terms such as mātar- (mother), nas- (nose), śvan- (dog).
According to Jamison, pronouns and some words outside the semantic categories also lack roots, as do the numerals.
Similarly, the Sanskrit language is flexible enough to not mandate inflection.
The Sanskrit words can contain more than one affix that interact with each other.
Affixes in Sanskrit can be athematic as well as thematic, according to Jamison.
Athematic affixes can be alternating.
Sanskrit deploys eight cases, namely nominative, accusative, instrumental, dative, ablative, genitive, locative, vocative.
Stems, that is "root + affix", appear in two categories in Sanskrit: vowel stems and consonant stems.
Unlike some Indo-European languages such as Latin or Greek, according to Jamison, "Sanskrit has no closed set of conventionally denoted noun declensions".
Sanskrit includes a fairly large set of stem-types.
The linguistic interaction of the roots, the phonological segments, lexical items and the grammar for the Classical Sanskrit consist of four Paninian components.
These, states Paul Kiparsky, are the Astadhyaayi, a comprehensive system of 4,000 grammatical rules, of which a small set are frequently used; Sivasutras, an inventory of anubandhas (markers) that partition phonological segments for efficient abbreviations through the pratyharas technique; Dhatupatha, a list of 2,000 verbal roots classified by their morphology and syntactic properties using diacritic markers, a structure that guides its writing systems; and, the Ganapatha, an inventory of word groups, classes of lexical systems.
There are peripheral adjuncts to these four, such as the Unadisutras, which focus on irregularly formed derivatives from the roots.
Sanskrit prosody includes linear and non-linear systems.
The system started off with seven major metres, according to Annette Wilke and Oliver Moebus, called the "seven birds" or "seven mouths of Brihaspati", and each had its own rhythm, movements and aesthetics wherein a non-linear structure (aperiodicity) was mapped into a four verse polymorphic linear sequence.
A syllable in Sanskrit is classified as either laghu (light) or guru (heavy).
This classification is based on a matra (literally, "count, measure, duration"), and typically a syllable that ends in a short vowel is a light syllable, while those that end in consonant, anusvara or visarga are heavy.
The classical Sanskrit found in Hindu scriptures such as the Bhagavad Gita and many texts are so arranged that the light and heavy syllables in them follow a rhythm, though not necessarily a rhyme.
Sanskrit metres include those based on a fixed number of syllables per verse, and those based on fixed number of morae per verse.
The Vedic Sanskrit employs fifteen metres, of which seven are common, and the most frequent are three (8-, 11- and 12-syllable lines).
QTEMPLATE box
|quote =
There is no word without meter,
nor is there any meter without words.
|source = -Natya Shastra
|align = left
Meter and rhythm is an important part of the Sanskrit language.
It may have played a role in helping preserve the integrity of the message and Sanskrit texts.
The verse perfection in the Vedic texts such as the verse Upanishads and post-Vedic Smriti texts are rich in prosody.
This feature of the Sanskrit language led some Indologists from the 19th century onwards to identify suspected portions of texts where a line or sections are off the expected metre.
The meter-feature of the Sanskrit language embeds another layer of communication to the listener or reader.
A change in metres has been a tool of literary architecture and an embedded code to inform the reciter and audience that it marks the end of a section or chapter.
Writing system
The early history of writing Sanskrit and other languages in ancient India is a problematic topic despite a century of scholarship, states Richard Salomon-an epigraphist and Indologist specializing in Sanskrit and Pali literature.
The earliest possible script from the Indian subcontinent is from the Indus Valley Civilization (3rd/2nd millennium BCE), but this script - if it is a script - remains undeciphered.
If any scripts existed in the Vedic period, they have not survived.
Scholars generally accept that Sanskrit was spoken in an oral society, and that an oral tradition preserved the extensive Vedic and Classical Sanskrit literature.
Other scholars such as Jack Goody state that the Vedic Sanskrit texts are not the product of an oral society, basing this view by comparing inconsistencies in the transmitted versions of literature from various oral societies such as the Greek, Serbian, and other cultures, then noting that the Vedic literature is too consistent and vast to have been composed and transmitted orally across generations, without being written down.
Lipi is the term in Sanskrit which means "writing, letters, alphabet".
It contextually refers to scripts, the art or any manner of writing or drawing.
The term, in the sense of a writing system, appears in some of the earliest Buddhist, Hindu, and Jaina texts.
Pāṇini's Astadhyayi, composed sometime around the 5th or 4th century BCE, for example, mentions lipi in the context of a writing script and education system in his times, but he does not name the script.
Several early Buddhist and Jaina texts, such as the Lalitavistara Sūtra and Pannavana Sutta include lists of numerous writing scripts in ancient India.
The Sahitya Akademi has given an award for the best creative work in Sanskrit every year since 1967.
In 2009, Satya Vrat Shastri became the first Sanskrit author to win the Jnanpith Award, India's highest literary award.
Sanskrit is used extensively in the Carnatic and Hindustani branches of classical music.
Kirtanas, bhajans, stotras, and shlokas of Sanskrit are popular throughout India.
The samaveda uses musical notations in several of its recessions.
In Mainland China, musicians such as Sa Dingding have written pop songs in Sanskrit.
Numerous loan Sanskrit words are found in other major Asian languages.
For example, Filipino, Cebuano, Lao, Khmer Thai and its alphabets, Malay, Indonesian (old Javanese-English dictionary by P.J. Zoetmulder contains over 25,500 entries), and even in English.
Over 90 weeklies, fortnightlies and quarterlies are published in Sanskrit.
Sudharma, a daily newspaper in Sanskrit, has been published out of Mysore, India, since 1970, while Sanskrit Vartman Patram and Vishwasya Vrittantam started in Gujarat during the last five years.
These broadcasts are also made available on the internet on AIR's website.
Sanskrit news is broadcast on TV and on the internet through the DD National channel at 6:55 AM IST.
Schools and contemporary status
Sanskrit is one the 15 languages of the Eighth Schedule to the Constitution of India.
The Central Board of Secondary Education of India (CBSE), along with several other state education boards, has made Sanskrit an alternative option to the state's own official language as a second or third language choice in the schools it governs.
In such schools, learning Sanskrit is an option for grades 5 to 8 (Classes V to VIII).
This is true of most schools affiliated with the Indian Certificate of Secondary Education (ICSE) board, especially in states where the official language is Hindi.
Sanskrit is also taught in traditional gurukulas throughout India.
A number of colleges and universities in India have dedicated departments for Sanskrit studies.
In the West
St James Junior School in London, England, offers Sanskrit as part of the curriculum.
In the United States, since September 2009, high school students have been able to receive credits as Independent Study or toward Foreign Language requirements by studying Sanskrit, as part of the "SAFL: Samskritam as a Foreign Language" program coordinated by Samskrita Bharati.
In Australia, the Sydney private boys' high school Sydney Grammar School offers Sanskrit from years 7 through to 12, including for the Higher School Certificate.
Other schools included the Ficino School in Auckland, New Zealand; St James Preparatory Schools in Cape Town, Durban and Johannesburg, South Africa; John Colet School, Sydney, Australia; Erasmus School, Melbourne, Australia.
European studies and discourse
European scholarship in Sanskrit, begun by Heinrich Roth (1620-1668) and Johann Ernst Hanxleden (1681-1731), is considered responsible for the discovery of an Indo-European language family by Sir William Jones (1746-1794).
This research played an important role in the development of Western philology, or historical linguistics.
The 18th- and 19th-century speculations about the possible links of Sanskrit to ancient Egyptian language were later proven to be wrong, but it fed an orientalist discourse both in the form Indophobia and Indophilia, states Trautmann.
Sanskrit writings, when first discovered, were imagined by Indophiles to potentially be "repositories of the primitive experiences and religion of the human race, and as such confirmatory of the truth of Christian scripture", as well as a key to "universal ethnological narrative".
The Indophobes imagined the opposite, making the counterclaim that there is little of any value in Sanskrit, portraying it as "a language fabricated by artful Brahmin priests", with little original thought, possibly copied from the Greeks who came with Alexander or perhaps the Persians.
Scholars such as William Jones and his colleagues felt the need for systematic studies of Sanskrit language and literature.
This launched the Asiatic Society, an idea that was soon transplanted to Europe starting with the efforts of Henry Thomas Colebrooke in Britain, then Alexander Hamilton who helped expand its studies to Paris and thereafter his student Friedrich Schlegel who introduced Sanskrit to the universities of Germany.
Schlegel nurtured his own students into influential European Sanskrit scholars, particularly through Franz Bopp and Friedrich Max Muller.
As these scholars translated the Sanskrit manuscripts, the enthusiasm for Sanskrit grew rapidly among European scholars, states Trautmann, and chairs for Sanskrit "were established in the universities of nearly every German statelet" creating a competition for Sanskrit experts.
Symbolic usage
In Nepal, India and Indonesia, Sanskrit phrases are widely used as mottoes for various national, educational and social organisations:
* meaning: Mother and motherland are superior to heaven.
* , and there are more units and organizations in Indonesia either Armed Forces or civil which use the Sanskrit language respectively as their mottoes and other purposes.
* Many of India's and Nepal's scientific and administrative terms use Sanskrit.
The Indian guided missile program that was commenced in 1983 by the Defence Research and Development Organisation has named the five missiles (ballistic and others) that it developed Prithvi, Agni, Akash, Nag and the Trishul missile system.
India's first modern fighter aircraft is named HAL Tejas.
In popular culture
Satyagraha, an opera by Philip Glass, uses texts from the Bhagavad Gita, sung in Sanskrit.
The closing credits of The Matrix Revolutions has a prayer from the Brihadaranyaka Upanishad.
The song "Cyber-raga" from Madonna's album Music includes Sanskrit chants, and Shanti/Ashtangi from her 1998 album Ray of Light, which won a Grammy, is the ashtanga vinyasa yoga chant.
The lyrics include the mantra Om shanti.
Composer John Williams featured choirs singing in Sanskrit for Indiana Jones and the Temple of Doom and in Star Wars: Episode I - The Phantom Menace.
The theme song of Battlestar Galactica 2004 is the Gayatri Mantra, taken from the Rigveda.
The lyrics of "The Child In Us" by Enigma also contains Sanskrit verses.
