Thunder is the sound caused by lightning.
Depending on the distance from and nature of the lightning, it can range from a sharp, loud crack to a long, low rumble (brontide).
The sudden increase in pressure and temperature from lightning produces rapid Thermal expansion|expansion within and surrounding the path of a lightning strike.
In turn, this expansion of air creates a sonic shock wave, often referred to as a "thunderclap" or "peal of thunder".
Etymology
The d in Modern English thunder (from earlier Old English þunor) is epenthetic, and is now found as well in Modern Dutch donder (cp Middle Dutch donre, and Old Norse þorr, Old Frisian þuner, Old High German donar descended from Proto-Germanic *þunraz).
In Latin the term was tonare "to thunder".
The name of the Nordic god Thor comes from the Old Norse word for thunder.
The shared Proto-Indo-European root is .
Cause
The cause of thunder has been the subject of centuries of speculation and scientific inquiry.
Early thinking was that it was made by deities but the ancient Greek philosophers attributed it to natural causes, such as wind striking clouds (Anaximander, Aristotle) and movement of air within clouds (Democritus).
The Roman philosopher, Lucretius held it was from the sound of hail colliding within clouds.
This heating causes a rapid outward expansion, impacting the surrounding cooler air at a speed faster than sound would otherwise travel.
The resultant outward-moving pulse is a shock wave,
similar in principle to the shock wave formed by an explosion, or at the front of a supersonic aircraft.
Experimental studies of simulated lightning have produced results largely consistent with this model, though there is continued debate about the precise physical mechanisms of the process.
Consequences
The shock wave in thunder is sufficient to cause property damage Thunder can rupture the eardrums of people nearby, leading to permanently impaired hearing.
Cloud-ground lightning typically consist of two or more return strokes, from ground to cloud.
Later return strokes have greater acoustic energy than the first.
Perception
The most noticeable aspect of lightning and thunder is that the lightning is seen before the thunder is heard.
This is a consequence of the much greater speed of light than of speed of sound.
Sound in dry air is approximately 343 m s or at 20 °C (68 °F).
This translates to approximately 3 seconds per kilometre (5 seconds per mile); saying "one thousand and one... one thousand and two..." is a useful method of counting the seconds from the perception of a given lightning flash to the perception of its thunder (which can be used to gauge the proximity of lightning for the sake of safety).
A very bright flash of lightning and an almost simultaneous sharp "crack" of thunder, a thundercrack, therefore indicates that the lightning strike was very near.
Close-in lightning has been described first as a clicking or cloth-tearing sound, then a cannon shot sound or loud crack/snap, followed by continuous rumbling.
The early sounds are from the leader parts of lightning, then the near parts of the return stroke, then the distant parts of the return stroke.
