Antigua and Barbuda (; ) is a sovereign state in the West Indies in the Americas, lying between the Caribbean Sea and the Atlantic Ocean.
It consists of two major islands, Antigua and Barbuda, and a number of smaller islands (including Great Bird, Green, Guiana, Long, Maiden and York Islands and further south, the island of Redonda).
The permanent population numbers about 95,900 (2018 est.), with 97% being resident on Antigua.
Antigua was colonized by Britain in 1632; Barbuda island was first colonized in 1678.
With the breakup of the federation, it became one of the West Indies Associated States in 1967.
Following by self-governing on its internal affairs, independence was granted from United Kingdom on 1 November 1981.
Antigua and Barbuda remains a member of the Commonwealth and Elizabeth II is the country's queen and head of state.
In September 2017, Hurricane Irma damaged or destroyed 95% of Barbuda's buildings and infrastructure and as a result, all the island's inhabitants were evacuated to Antigua, leaving Barbuda empty for the first time in modern history.
Etymology
is Spanish for "ancient" and is Spanish for "bearded".
Carbon dating has established the earliest settlements started around 3100 BC.
They were succeeded by the ceramic age pre-Columbian Arawak-speaking Saladoid people who migrated from the lower Orinoco River.
They introduced agriculture, raising, among other crops, the famous Antigua black pineapple (Ananas comosus), corn, sweet potatoes, chiles, guava, tobacco, and cotton.
Later on the more bellicose Caribs also settled the island, possibly by force.
European arrival and settlement
Christopher Columbus was the first European to sight the islands in 1493.
The English settled on Antigua in 1632; Slavery was abolished in the British Empire in 1834, affecting the economy.
Part of the Leeward Islands colony, Antigua and Barbuda became part of the short-lived West Indies Federation from 1958 to 1962.
In 1995 Hurricane Luis caused severe damage on Barbuda.
The ALP's dominance of Antiguan politics ended with the 2004 Antiguan general election, which was won by Baldwin Spencer's United Progressive Party (UPP).
Most of Barbuda was devastated in early September 2017 by Hurricane Irma, which brought winds with speeds reaching 295 km/h (185 mph).
The storm damaged or destroyed 95% of the island's buildings and infrastructure, leaving Barbuda "barely habitable" according to Prime Minister Gaston Browne.
Nearly everyone on the island was evacuated to Antigua.
Geography
Antigua and Barbuda both are generally low-lying islands whose terrain has been influenced more by limestone formations than volcanic activity.
The highest point on Antigua is Boggy Peak, the remnant of a volcanic crater rising .
Some 1,800 people were evacuated to Antigua.
An estimate published by Time indicated that over $100 million would be required to rebuild homes and infrastructure.
Philmore Mullin, Director of Barbuda's National Office of Disaster Services, said that "all critical infrastructure and utilities are non-existent - food supply, medicine, shelter, electricity, water, communications, waste management".
He summarised the situation as follows: "Public utilities need to be rebuilt in their entirety...
It is optimistic to think anything can be rebuilt in six months ...
In my 25 years in disaster management, I have never seen something like this."
Ecology
Demographics
Ethnic groups
Antigua has a population of , mostly made up of people of West African, British, and Madeiran descent.
The ethnic distribution consists of 91% Black & Mulatto, 4.4% mixed race, 1.7% White, and 2.9% other (primarily East Indian and other Asian).
Most Whites are of Irish or British descent.
Christian Levantine Arabs, and a small number of Asians and Sephardic Jews make up the remainder of the population.
An increasingly large percentage of the population lives abroad, most notably in the United Kingdom (Antiguan Britons), United States and Canada.
A minority of Antiguan residents are immigrants from other countries, particularly from Dominica, Guyana and Jamaica, and, increasingly, from the Dominican Republic, St. Vincent and the Grenadines and Nigeria.
An estimated 4,500 American citizens also make their home in Antigua and Barbuda, making their numbers one of the largest American populations in the English-speaking Eastern Caribbean.
Languages
English is the official language.
The Barbudan accent is slightly different from the Antiguan.
In the years before Antigua and Barbuda's independence, Standard English was widely spoken in preference to Antiguan Creole.
Generally, the upper and middle classes shun Antiguan Creole.
The educational system dissuades the use of Antiguan Creole and instruction is done in Standard (British) English.
Many of the words used in the Antiguan dialect are derived from British as well as African languages.
This can be easily seen in phrases such as: "Ent it?" meaning "Ain't it?" which is itself dialectal and means "Isn't it?".
Common island proverbs can often be traced to Africa.
Spanish is spoken by around 10,000 inhabitants.
Religion
A majority (77%) Elizabeth II is the present Queen of Antigua and Barbuda, having served in that position since the islands' independence from the United Kingdom in 1981.
The Queen is currently represented by Governor General Sir Rodney Williams.
A council of ministers is appointed by the governor general on the advice of the prime minister, currently Gaston Browne (2014-).
The prime minister is the head of government.
Executive power is exercised by the government while legislative power is vested in both the government and the two Chambers of Parliament.
The bicameral Parliament consists of the Senate , and the House of Representatives (17 members elected by first past the post) to serve five-year terms.
The current Leader of Her Majesty's Loyal Opposition is the United Progressive Party Member of Parliament (MP), the Honourable Baldwin Spencer.
Elections
The last elections held were on 12 June 2014, during which the Antigua Labour Party won 14 seats, and the United Progressive Party 3 seats.
Since 1949, elections have been won by the populist Antigua Labour Party.
However, in the Antigua and Barbuda legislative election of 2004 saw the defeat of the longest-serving elected government in the Caribbean.
Prime Minister Lester Bryant Bird, who had succeeded his father Vere Cornwall Bird Sr., and Deputy Robin Yearwood had been in office since 1976.
The elder Bird was Prime Minister from 1981 to 1994 and Chief Minister of Antigua from 1960 to 1981, except for the 1971-1976 period when the Progressive Labour Movement (PLM) defeated his party.
Vere Cornwall Bird, the nation's first Prime Minister, is credited with having brought Antigua and Barbuda and the Caribbean into a new era of independence.
Party elections
Gaston Browne defeated his predecessor Lester Bryant Bird at the Antigua Labour Party's biennial convention in November 2012 held to elect a political leader and other officers.
The party then altered its name from the Antigua Labour Party (ALP) to the Antigua and Barbuda Labour Party (ABLP).
This was done to officially include the party's presence on the sister island of Barbuda in its organisation, the only political party on the mainland to have a physical branch in Barbuda.
Judiciary
The Judicial branch is the Eastern Caribbean Supreme Court (based in Saint Lucia; one judge of the Supreme Court is a resident of the islands and presides over the High Court of Justice).
Antigua is also a member of the Caribbean Court of Justice.
The Judicial Committee of the Privy Council serves as its Supreme Court of Appeal.
Foreign relations
Antigua and Barbuda is a member of the United Nations, the Bolivarian Alliance for the Americas, the Commonwealth of Nations, the Caribbean Community, the Organization of Eastern Caribbean States, the Organization of American States, the World Trade Organization and the Eastern Caribbean's Regional Security System.
Antigua and Barbuda is also a member of the International Criminal Court .
In 2013, Antigua and Barbuda called for reparations for slavery at the United Nations.
Prime Minister Baldwin Spencer said "We have recently seen a number of leaders apologising", and that they should now "match their words with concrete and material benefits."
Military
The Royal Antigua and Barbuda Defence Force has around 260 members dispersed between the line infantry regiment, service and support unit and coast guard.
There is also the Antigua and Barbuda Cadet Corps made up of 200 teenagers between the ages of 12 to 18.
In 2018, Antigua and Barbuda signed the UN treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons.
Administrative divisions
Antigua and Barbuda is divided into six parishes and two dependencies:
Note: Though Barbuda and Redonda are called dependencies they are integral parts of the state, making them essentially administrative divisions.
Dependency is simply a title.
Human rights
Same-sex sexual activity is illegal in Antigua and Barbuda and punishable by prison time.
Economy
Tourism dominates the economy, accounting for more than half of the gross domestic product (GDP).
The twin-island nation's agricultural production is focused on its domestic market and constrained by a limited water supply and a labour shortage stemming from the lure of higher wages in tourism and construction work.
Manufacturing is made up of enclave-type assembly for export, the major products being bedding, handicrafts and electronic components.
Prospects for economic growth in the medium term will continue to depend on income growth in the industrialised world, especially in the United States, from which about one-third of all tourists come.
Following the opening of the American University of Antigua College of Medicine by investor and attorney Neil Simon in 2003, a new source of revenue was established.
The university employs many local Antiguans and the approximate 1000 students consume a large amount of the goods and services.
Antigua and Barbuda also utilizes an economic citizenship program to spur investment into the country.
Education
Antigua and Barbuda has a greater than 90% literacy rate.
In 1998, Antigua and Barbuda adopted a national mandate to become the pre-eminent provider of medical services in the Caribbean.
As part of this mission, Antigua and Barbuda built the most technologically advanced hospital in the Caribbean, the Mt. St. John Medical Centre.
The island of Antigua currently has two foreign-owned for-profit offshore medical schools, the American University of Antigua (AUA), founded in 2004, and The University of Health Sciences Antigua (UHSA), founded in 1982.
The island's medical schools cater mostly to foreign students but contribute to the local economy and health care.
There is also the government-run Antigua State College as well as the Antigua and Barbuda Institute of Information Technology (ABIIT) and the Antigua and Barbuda Hospitality Training Institute (ABHTI).
The University of the West Indies Open Campus has a branch in Antigua for local students to pursue university studies.
Antigua has two international primary/secondary schools: CCSET International, which offers the Ontario Secondary School Diploma, and Island Academy, which offers the International Baccalaureate.
There are also many other private schools but these institutions tend to follow the same local curriculum (CXCs) as government schools.
Transportation
Culture
The culture is predominantly a mixture of West African and British cultural influences.
Cricket is the national sport.
Other popular sports include football, boat racing and surfing.
(Antigua Sailing Week attracts locals and visitors from all over the world).
Calypso and soca music, both originating primarily out of Trinidad, are important in Antigua and Barbuda.
Festivals
The national Carnival held each August commemorates the abolition of slavery in the British West Indies, although on some islands, Carnival may celebrate the coming of Lent.
Its festive pageants, shows, contests and other activities are a major tourist attraction.
Cuisine
Corn and sweet potatoes play an important role in Antiguan cuisine.
For example, a popular Antiguan dish, Dukuna is a sweet, steamed dumpling made from grated sweet potatoes, flour and spices.
One of the Antiguan staple foods, fungi , is a cooked paste made of cornmeal and water.
Media
There are two daily newspapers: the Daily Observer and Caribbean Times.
The local television channel ABS TV 10 is available (it is the only station that shows exclusively local programmes).
There are also several local and regional radio stations, such as V2C-AM 620, ZDK-AM 1100, VYBZ-FM 92.9, ZDK-FM 97.1, Observer Radio 91.1 FM, DNECA Radio 90.1 FM, Second Advent Radio 101.5 FM, Abundant Life Radio 103.9 FM, Crusader Radio 107.3 FM, Nice FM 104.3.
Literature
Antiguan author Jamaica Kincaid has published over 20 works of literature.
Sports
The Antigua and Barbuda national cricket team represented the country at the 1998 Commonwealth Games, but Antiguan cricketers otherwise play for the Leeward Islands cricket team in domestic matches and the West Indies cricket team internationally.
The 2007 Cricket World Cup was hosted in the West Indies from 11 March to 28 April 2007.
Antigua hosted eight matches at the Sir Vivian Richards Stadium, which was completed on 11 February 2007 and can hold up to 20,000 people.
Antigua is a Host of Stanford Twenty20 - Twenty20 Cricket, a version started by Allen Stanford in 2006 as a regional cricket game with almost all Caribbean islands taking part.
Rugby and netball are popular as well.
Association football, or soccer, is also a very popular sport.
Antigua has a national football team which entered World Cup qualification for the 1974 tournament and for 1986 and onwards.
A professional team was formed in 2011, Antigua Barracuda FC, which played in the USL Pro, a lower professional league in the USA.
The nation's team had a major achievement in 2012, getting out of its preliminary group for the 2014 World Cup, notably due to a victory over powerful Haiti.
In its first game in the next CONCACAF group play on 8 June 2012 in Tampa, FL, Antigua and Barbuda, comprising 17 Barracuda players and 7 from the lower English professional leagues, scored a goal against the United States.
However, the team lost 3:1 to the US.
Notables
*Brian Lara, cricketer, twice scored the World Test Record at the Antigua Recreation Ground.
*Claudette Peters, is an Antiguan soca and soul singer-songwriter.
*Viv Richards, cricketer, scored the fastest Test Century
*Cricketers Vivian Richards, Andy Roberts, Curtly Ambrose and Richie Richardson
*Runners Sonia Williams and Heather Samuel represented Antigua and Barbuda at the Olympic Games.
Symbols
The national bird is the frigate bird, and the national tree is the Talipariti elatum (blue mahoe tree).
Clare Waight Keller included agave karatto to represent Antigua and Barbuda in Meghan Markle's wedding veil, which included the distinctive flora of each Commonwealth country.
