Nice (, ; Niçard , classical norm, or , nonstandard, ; ; ; ) is the seventh most populous urban area in France and the capital of the Alpes-Maritimes department.
The metropolitan area of Nice extends beyond the administrative city limits, with a population of about 1 million on an area of .
Through the ages, the town has changed hands many times.
Its strategic location and port significantly contributed to its maritime strength.
For centuries it was a dominion of Savoy, and was then part of France between 1792 and 1815, when it was returned to the Kingdom of Piedmont-Sardinia until its re-annexation by France in 1860.
The natural environment of the Nice area and its mild Mediterranean climate came to the attention of the English upper classes in the second half of the 18th century, when an increasing number of aristocratic families took to spending their winters there.
The city's main seaside promenade, the Promenade des Anglais ("Walkway of the English") owes its name to visitors to the resort.
The clear air and soft light have particularly appealed to notable painters, such as Marc Chagall, Henri Matisse, Niki de Saint Phalle and Arman.
Their work is commemorated in many of the city's museums, including Musée Marc Chagall, Musée Matisse and Musée des Beaux-Arts.
Nice has the second largest hotel capacity in the country and it is one of its most visited cities, receiving 4 million tourists every year.
It also has the third busiest airport in France, after the two main Parisian ones.
It is the historical capital city of the County of Nice (Comté de Nice).
the Terra Amata archeological site shows one of the earliest uses of fire, construction of houses, and flint findings dated to around 230,000 years ago.
Nice was probably founded around 350 BC by the Greeks Phoceans of Phocaea in Anatolia, and was given the name of Nikaia (Νίκαια) in honour of a victory over the neighbouring Ligurians (Italic peoples in north west of Italy, probably the Vediantii kingdom);
Nike (Νίκη) was the Greek goddess of victory.
The city soon became one of the busiest trading ports on the Ligurian coast; but it had an important rival in the Roman town of Cemenelum, which continued to exist as a separate city until the time of the Lombard invasions.
In 1543, Nice was attacked by the united Franco-Ottoman forces of Francis I and Barbarossa Hayreddin Pasha, in the Siege of Nice; though the inhabitants repulsed the assault which followed the terrible bombardment, they were ultimately compelled to surrender, and Barbarossa was allowed to pillage the city and to carry off 2,500 captives.
Pestilence appeared again in 1550 and 1580.
giving rise to a local branch of the movement of the Italian irredentists which considered the re-acquisition of Nice to be one of their nationalist goals.
In 1900, the Tramway de Nice electrified its horse-drawn streetcars and spread its network to the entire département from Menton to Cagnes-sur-Mer.
By the 1930s more bus connections were added in the area.
In the 1930s, Nice hosted international car racing in the Formula Libre (predecessor to Formula One) on the so-called Circuit Nice.
The circuit started along the waterfront just south of the Jardin Albert I, then headed westward along the Promenade des Anglais followed by a hairpin turn at the Hotel Negresco to come back eastward and around the Jardin Albert
I before heading again east along the beach on the Quai des Etats-Unis.
As war broke out in September 1939, Nice became a city of refuge for many displaced foreigners, notably Jews fleeing the Nazi progression into Eastern Europe.
From Nice many sought further shelter in the French colonies, Morocco and North and South America.
After July 1940 and the establishment of the Vichy Regime, antisemitic aggressions accelerated the exodus, starting in July 1941 and continuing through 1942.
On 26 August 1942, 655 Jews of foreign origin were rounded up by the Laval government and interned in the Auvare barracks.
Of these, 560 were deported to Drancy internment camp on 31 August 1942.
Due to the activity of the Jewish banker Angelo Donati and of the Capuchin friar Père Marie-Benoît the local authorities hindered the application of anti-Jewish Vichy laws.
The first résistants to the new regime were a group of High School seniors of the Lycée de Nice, now , in September 1940, later arrested and executed in 1944 near Castellane.
The first public demonstrations occurred on 14 July 1942 when several hundred protesters took to the streets along the Avenue de la Victoire and in the Place Masséna.
In November 1942 German troops moved into most of unoccupied France, but Italian troops moved into a smaller zone including Nice.
A certain ambivalence remained among the population, many of whom were recent immigrants of Italian ancestry.
However, the resistance gained momentum after the Italian surrender in 1943 when the German army occupied the former Italian zone.
Reprisals intensified between December 1943 and July 1944, when many partisans were tortured and executed by the local Gestapo and the French Milice.
Nice was also heavily bombarded by American aircraft in preparation for the Allied landing in Provence (1000 dead or wounded and more than 5600 people homeless) and famine ensued during summer 1944.
American paratroopers entered the city on 30 August 1944 and Nice was finally liberated.
The consequences of the war were heavy: the population decreased by 15% and economic life was totally disrupted.
In the second half of the 20th century, Nice enjoyed an economic boom primarily driven by tourism and construction.
Two men dominated this period: Jean Médecin, mayor for 33 years from 1928 to 1943 and from 1947 to 1965, and his son Jacques, mayor for 24 years from 1966 to 1990.
Under their leadership, there was extensive urban renewal, including many new constructions.
These included the convention centre, theatres, new thoroughfares and expressways.
The arrival of the Pieds-Noirs, refugees from Algeria after 1962 independence, also gave the city a boost and somewhat changed the make-up of its population and traditional views.
By the late 1980s, rumors of political corruption in the city government surfaced; and eventually formal accusations against Jacques Médecin forced him to flee France in 1990.
Later arrested in Uruguay in 1993, he was extradited back to France in 1994, convicted of several counts of corruption and associated crimes and sentenced to imprisonment.
On 16 October 1979, a landslide and an undersea slide caused two tsunamis that hit the western coast of Nice; these events killed between 8 and 23 people.
In February 2001, European leaders met in Nice to negotiate and sign what is now the Treaty of Nice, amending the institutions of the European Union.
In 2003, local Chief Prosecutor Éric de Montgolfier alleged that some judicial cases involving local personalities had been suspiciously derailed by the local judiciary, which he suspected of having unhealthy contacts through Masonic lodges with the defendants.
A controversial official report stated later that Montgolfier had made unwarranted accusations.
On 14 July 2016, a truck was deliberately driven into a crowd of people by Mohamed Lahouaiej-Bouhlel on the Promenade des Anglais.
The crowd was watching a fireworks display in celebration of Bastille Day.
Eighty-seven people were killed, including the perpetrator, who was shot dead by police.
Another 202 were injured, with 52 in critical care and 25 in intensive care, according to the Paris prosecutor.
Administration
Located in the Provence-Alpes-Côte d'Azur region, Nice is a commune and the prefecture (administrative capital) of the Alpes-Maritimes département.
However, it is also the largest city in France that is not a regional capital; the much larger Marseille is its regional capital.
Christian Estrosi was elected as mayor in 2008.
He was reelected for a second term in April 2014 ( that will end in 2020).
He is a member of the Republicans (formerly the Union for a Popular Movement), the party supporting former President Nicolas Sarkozy.
He resigned in June 2016.
Philippe Pradal replaced him as mayor on 13 June 2016.
On 16 May 2017, he became mayor again after resigning from his seat as president of the regional council.
The city is divided over 9 cantons: Nice-1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8 and 9.
Coat of arms
The coat of arms of Nice appeared for the first time in a copy of the Regulations of Amadeus VIII, probably written around 1430.
The Nice is symbolised by a red eagle on silver background, placed on three mountains, which can be described in French heraldic language as "d'argent à une aigle de gueule posée sur trois coupeaux".
Nice also received a dusting of snow in 2005, 2009 and 2010.
Spring starts cool and rainy in late March, and Nice becomes increasingly warm and sunny around June.
Economy and tourism
Nice is the seat of the Chambre de commerce et d'industrie Nice Côte d'Azur, which manages the Port of Nice.
Investors from France and abroad can benefit from the assistance of the Côte d'Azur Economic Development Agency Team Côte d'Azur.
Nice has one conference centre: the Palais des Congrès Acropolis.
The city also has several business parks, including l'Arenas, Nice the Plain, Nice Méridia, Saint Isidore, and the Northern Forum.
In addition, the city features several shopping centres such as Nicetoile, Nice TNL, Nice Lingostière, Northern Forum, St-Isidore, the Trinity (around the Auchan hypermarket), in Saint-Laurent-du-Var and Polygone Riviera in Cagnes-sur-Mer.
Sophia Antipolis is a technology park northwest of Antibes.
Much of the park is within the commune of Valbonne.
Established between 1970 and 1984, it primarily houses companies in the fields of computing, electronics, pharmacology and biotechnology.
Several institutions of higher learning are also located here, along with the European headquarters of W3C.
The Nice metropolitan area had a GDP amounting to $47.7 billion, and $34,480 per capita, slightly lower than the French average.
Transport
Port
The main port of Nice is also known as Lympia port.
This name comes from the Lympia spring which fed a small lake in a marshy zone where work on the port was started in 1745.
Today this is the principal harbour installation of Nice - there is also a small port in the Carras district.
The port is the first port cement manufacturer in France, linked to the treatment plants of the rollers of the valley of Paillon.
Fishing activities remain but the number of professional fishermen is now less than 10.
Nice, being the point of continental France nearest to Corsica, has ferry connections with the island developed with the arrival of NGV (navires à grande vitesse) or high-speed craft.
The connections are provided by Corsica Ferries - Sardinia Ferries.
Located in front of the port, the Place Cassini has been renamed Place of Corsica.
Airport
Nice Côte d'Azur Airport is the third busiest airport in France after Charles de Gaulle Airport and Orly Airport, both in Paris.
It is on the Promenade des Anglais, near l'Arénas and has two terminals.
Due to its proximity to the Principality of Monaco, it also serves as that city-state's airport.
A helicopter service provided by Heli Air Monaco and Monacair links the city and airport.
It is run by the ACA (Aéroports Côte d'Azur), which includes Cannes - Mandelieu Airport and La Môle - Saint-Tropez Airport.
Public transportation into the city proper is serviced by the Tramway line 2 (T2).
Rail
The main railway station is Nice-Ville, served both by high speed TGV trains connecting Paris and Nice in less than 6 hours and by local commuter TER services.
Marseille is reached in 2.5 hours.
Nice also has international connections to Italy, Switzerland, Belgium, and Russia.
Nice is also served by several suburban stations including Nice St-Augustin , Nice St-Roch and Nice Riquier.
Nice is also the southern terminus of the independently run Chemins de Fer de Provence railway line which connects the city with Digne in approximatively 4 hours.
A metro-like suburban service is also provided on the southern part of the line.
Tram
Tramway de Nice began operating horse-drawn trams in 1879.
Electrified in 1900, the combined length of the network reached by 1930.
The replacement of trams with trolleybuses began in 1948 and was completed in 1953.
In 2007, the new Tramway de Nice linked the northern and eastern suburbs via the city centre.
Two other lines are currently under construction and partly operating.
The second line runs east-west from Jean Médecin to the Nice Côte d'Azur Airport (and will reach the Port at the end of 2019), while the third line will provide a connection to the future TGV Nice Saint-Augustin and to Lingostière railway station.
A fourth line is set to run from the future TGV Nice Saint-Augustin to Cagnes-sur-Mer.
Road
The A8 autoroute and the Route nationale 7 pass through the Nice agglomeration.
Sights
The Promenade des Anglais ("Promenade of the English") is a promenade along the Baie des Anges ("Bay of the Angels"), which is a bay of the Mediterranean, in Nice.
Before Nice was urbanised, the coastline at Nice was just bordered by a deserted stretch of shingle beach (covered with large pebbles).
The first houses were located on higher ground well away from the sea, as wealthy tourists visiting Nice in the 18th century did not come for the beach, but for the gentle winter weather.
The areas close to the water were home to Nice's dockworkers and fishermen.
In the second half of the 18th century, many wealthy English people took to spending the winter in Nice, enjoying the panorama along the coast.
When a particularly harsh winter up north brought an influx of beggars to Nice, some of the rich Englishmen proposed a useful project for them: the construction of a walkway (chemin de promenade) along the sea.
The city of Nice, intrigued by the prospect of a pleasant promenade, greatly increased the scope of the work.
The Promenade was first called the Camin dei Anglès (the English Way) by the Niçois in their native dialect, Nissart.
After the annexation of Nice by France in 1860 it was rechristened La Promenade des Anglais, replacing the former Nissart name with its French translation.
The Hotel Negresco on the Promenade des Anglais was named after Henri Negresco (1868-1920) who had the palatial hotel constructed in 1912.
In keeping with the conventions of the time, when the Negresco first opened in 1913 its front opened on the side opposite the Mediterranean.
Another place worth mentioning is the small street parallel to the Promenade des Anglais, leading from Nice's downtown, beginning at Place Masséna and running parallel to the promenade in the direction of the airport for a short distance of about 4 blocks.
This section of the city is referred to as the "Zone Pietonne", or "Pedestrian Zone".
Cars are not allowed (with exception to delivery trucks), making this avenue a popular walkway.
Old Nice is also home to the Opéra de Nice.
It was constructed at the end of the 19th century under the design of François Aune, to replace King Charles Félix's Maccarani Theater.
Today, it is open to the public and provides a regular program of performances.
Other sights include:
* Jardin botanique de la Ville de Nice (botanical garden)
Squares
Place Masséna
The Place Masséna is the main square of the city.
Before the Paillon River was covered over, the Pont-Neuf was the only practicable way between the old town and the modern one.
The square was thus divided into two parts (North and South) in 1824.
With the demolition of the Masséna Casino in 1979, the Place Masséna became more spacious and less dense and is now bordered by red ochre buildings of Italian architecture.
The recent rebuilding of the tramline gave the square back to the pedestrians, restoring its status as a real Mediterranean square.
It is lined with palm trees and stone pines, instead of being the rectangular roundabout of sorts it had become over the years.
Since its construction, the Place Masséna has always been the spot for great public events.
It is used for concerts, and particularly during the summer festivals, the Corso carnavalesque (carnival parade) in February, the military procession of 14 July (Bastille Day) or other traditional celebrations and banquets.
The Place Masséna is a two-minute walk from the Promenade des Anglais, old town, town centre, and Albert I Garden (Jardin Albert Ier).
It is also a large crossroads between several of the main streets of the city: avenue Jean Médecin, avenue Félix Faure, boulevard Jean Jaurès, avenue de Verdun and rue Gioffredo.
Place Garibaldi
The Place Garibaldi also stands out for its architecture and history.
It is named after Giuseppe Garibaldi, hero of the Italian unification .
The square was built at the end of the 18th century and served as the entry gate to the city and end of the road to Turin.
It took several names between 1780 and 1870 (Plaça Pairoulièra, Place de la République, Place Napoléon, Place d'Armes, Place Saint-Augustin, Piazza Vittorio) and finally Place Garibaldi in September 1870.
A statue of Garibaldi, who was fiercely in favour of the union of Nice with Italy, stands in the centre of the square.
The recent rebuilding of the area to accommodate the new tramway line gave mostly the entire square to pedestrians.
The architecture is in line with the Turin model, which was the norm of urban renewal throughout the entire realm of the House of Savoy.
It is a crossroads between the Vieux Nice (old town) and the town centre.
Place Garibaldi is close to the eastern districts of Nice, Port Lympia (Lympia Harbour), and the TNL commercial centre.
This square is also a junction of several important streets: the boulevard Jean-Jaurès, the avenue de la République, the rue Cassini and the rue Catherine-Ségurane.
Place Rossetti
Entirely enclosed and pedestrianised, this square is located in the heart of the old town.
With typical buildings in red and yellow ochres surrounding the square, the cathédrale Sainte-Réparate and the fountain in the centre, place Rossetti is a must-see spot in the old town.
By day, the place is invaded by the terraces of traditional restaurants and the finest ice-cream makers.
By night, the environment changes radically, with tourists and youths flocking to the square, where music reverberates on the walls of the small square.
The square's lighting at night gives it a magical aspect.
Place Rossetti is in the centre of the old town, streets Jesus, Rossetti, Mascoïnat and the Pont-vieux (old bridge)
Cours Saleya
The Cours Saleya is situated parallel to the Quai des États-Unis.
In the past, it belonged to the upper classes.
It is probably the most traditional square of the town, with its daily flower market.
The Cours Saleya also opens on the Palais des Rois Sardes (Palace of the Kings of Sardinia).
In the present, the court is mostly a place of entertainment.
Place du Palais
As its name indicates, the Place du Palais is where the Palais de la Justice (Law courts) of Nice is located.
On this square, there also is the Palais Rusca, which also belongs to the justice department (home of the tribunal de grande instance).
The square is also notable due to the presence of the city clock.
Today, the Place du Palais is alive day and night.
Often, groups of youths will hangout on the steps leading to the Palais de la Justice.
Concerts, films, and other major public events frequently occur in this space.
It is situated halfway between the Cours Saleya and Place Masséna.
Religious
Sports and entertainment
Sport
The city's major football club is OGC Nice.
They play in Ligue 1 (the top division in France).
The Olympic Nice swimming club () is also notable; Camille Muffat and Yannick Agnel used to train there for example.
Nice hosts the finish of the annual cycling race Paris-Nice.
The Nice hockey Côte d'Azur Club play in Ligue Magnus, the top men's division of the French ice hockey pyramid.
The Stade Niçois is an rugby club playing in Fédérale 1.
Population
The metropolitan area of Nice, defined by INSEE, is home to 888,784 inhabitants (fifth most populous in France) and its urban area totals 933,080 inhabitants, which makes it the sixth largest in France.
Since the 1970s, the number of inhabitants has not changed significantly; the relatively high migration to Nice is balanced by a natural negative growth of the population.
Observatory
The Observatoire de Nice (Nice Observatory) is located on the summit of Mont Gros.
The observatory was established in 1879 by the banker Raphaël Bischoffsheim.
The architect was Charles Garnier; Gustave Eiffel designed the main dome.
The 76-cm (30-inch) refractor telescope that became operational in 1888 was at that time the world's largest telescope.
Culture
Terra-Amata, an archaeological site dating from the Lower Palaeolithic age, is situated near Nice.
Nice itself was established by the ancient Greeks.
There was also an independent Roman city, Cemenelum, near Nice, where the hill of Cimiez is located.
It is an archaeological site with treasures, of which only a small part has been excavated.
The excavated site includes thermal baths, arenas and Roman road.
Since the 2nd century AD, the light of the city has attracted painters and sculptors such as Chagall, Matisse, Niki de Saint Phalle, Klein, Arman and Sosno.
Nice inspired many composers and intellectuals in different countries e.g. Berlioz, Rossini, Nietzsche, etc.
Nice also has numerous museums of all kinds: Musée Marc Chagall, Musée Matisse (arenas of Cimiez containing Roman ruins), Musée des Beaux-Arts, Musée international d'Art naïf Anatole Jakovsky, Musée Terra-Amata, Museum of Asian Art, Musée d'art moderne et d'art contemporain which devotes much space to the well-known École of Nice ”), Museum of Natural History, Musée Masséna, Naval Museum and Galerie des Ponchettes.
Being a vacation resort, Nice hosts many festivals throughout the year, such as the Nice Carnival and the Nice Jazz Festival.
Nice has a distinct culture due to its unique history.
The local language Niçard is an Occitan dialect (but some Italian scholars argue that it is a Ligurian dialect).
It is still spoken by a substantial minority .
Strong Italian and (to a lesser extent) Corsican influences make it more intelligible to speakers of Italian than to other extant Provençal dialects.
In the past, Nice welcomed many immigrants from Italy (who continue to make up a large proportion of the population), as well as Spanish and Portuguese immigrants.
However, in the past few decades immigration has been opened to include immigrants from all over the world, particularly those from former Northern and Western African colonies, as well as southeast Asia.
Traditions are still alive, especially in folk music and dances, including the farandole - an open-chain community dance.
Since 1860 a cannon (based at the Château east of Old Nice) is shot at twelve o'clock sharp.
The detonation can be heard almost all over the city.
This tradition goes back to Sir Thomas Coventry, who intended to remind the citizens of having lunch on time.
Cuisine
The cuisine of Nice is especially close to those of Provence but also Liguria and Piedmont and uses local ingredients (olive oil, anchovies, fruit and vegetables) but also those from more remote regions, in particular from Northern Europe, because ships which came to pick up olive oil arrived full of food products, such as dried haddock.
Nice has a few local dishes.
There is a local tart made with onions and anchovies (or anchovy paste), named "Pissaladière".
Socca is a type of pancake made from chickpea flour.
Farcis niçois is a dish made from vegetables stuffed with a mixture of breadcrumbs, meat (generally sausage and ground beef), and herbs; and salade niçoise is a tomato salad with green peppers of the "Corne" variety, baked eggs, tuna or anchovies, and olives.
Local meat comes from neighbouring valleys, such as the sheep of Sisteron.
Local fish, such as mullets, bream, sea urchins, and anchovies (alevins) are used to a great extent, so much so that it has given birth to a proverb: "fish are born in the sea and die in oil".
Examples of Niçois specialties include:
Education
* École pour l'informatique et les nouvelles technologies
* Institut supérieur européen de formation par l'action
International relations
Twin towns - Sister cities
Nice is twinned with:
Notable people
* Albert Calmette - physician, bacteriologist and immunologist
* René Cassin - jurist, law professor and judge, former student of Nice's Lycée Massena, he received the Nobel Peace Prize in 1968
* Henry Cavendish - British scientist noted for his discovery of hydrogen
* Giuseppe Garibaldi - Italian general, politician and patriot
* James C Harris - 19th century British consul at Nice; painted many scenes in and around the city
* Alexis Kossenko - classical flautist and conductor
* Georges Lautner - director born in Nice, buried in the cemetery of the Castle
* Jean-Pierre Mocky - film director, actor, screenwriter and producer
* Amedeo Modigliani lived for a few months in Nice with his companion Jeanne Hébuterne; she gave birth to their daughter Giovanna in 1918.
* Jacques Ochs (1883-1971) - artist and Olympic fencing champion
* Pino Presti - Italian bassist, arranger, composer, conductor and record producer, has lived in Nice since 2004
* Auguste Renoir - had his studio in Nice from 1911 to 1919 at the corner of the Rue Alfred Mortier and the Quai St Jean Baptiste.
A commemorative plaque is affixed to it.
* Simone Veil - lawyer and politician who served as Minister of Health, President of the European Parliament and member of the Constitutional Council of France; survivor of the Auschwitz-Birkenau concentration camp
* Joann Sfar - comics artist, comic book creator and film director
* J. M. G. Le Clézio - author and professor, was awarded the 2008 Nobel Prize in Literature
André Masséna - 1st Duc de Rivoli, 1st Prince d'Essling, one of the original 18 Marshals of the Empire, French military commander during the Revolutionary and Napoleonic Wars, his nickname was l'Enfant chéri de la Victoire ("the Dear Child of Victory")
* Dominic Howard - drummer for Muse currently lives in Nice
* Dick Rivers - born Hervé Forneri, rock singer, born in Nice in 1945
* Christian Estrosi - born in Nice in 1955 and the city's mayor from 2008 until 2016
* Queen Victoria - Queen of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland, stayed many winters in Nice
* Jean Behra (1921-1959) - racing driver, born in Nice
* Elton John - singer, owned a house in Mont Boron on the hills of Nice
* Mohammed VI, king of Morocco, obtained the title of Doctor of Law at the University of Nice Sophia Antipolis
* Robert W. Service - poet and writer of the Klondike Gold Rush lived in Nice during the summers from 1916 to 1940
*Aimé Teisseire (1914-2008) - French Army officer, lived in Nice after his retirement from the military until his death at the age of 93
* Michael Sinterniklaas (born 1972) - American voice actor
* Marc Duret (born 1957, Nice) - French-American actor and director, starring in The Big Blue, Nikita, La haine, Borgia, Outlander, etc.
Honorary citizens
People awarded the honorary citizenship of Nice are:
Further reading
* Sykes, Colonel.
"Statistics of Nice Maritime."
Journal of the Statistical Society of London 18.1 (1855): 34-73.
https:/ stable/2338123 online
