An atom is the smallest constituent unit of ordinary matter that constitutes a chemical element.
Every solid, liquid, gas, and plasma is composed of neutral or ionized atoms.
Atoms are extremely small; typical sizes are around 100 picometers (, a ten-millionth of a millimeter, or 1/254,000,000 of an inch).
They are so small that accurately predicting their behavior using classical physics - as if they were billiard balls, for example - is not possible.
This is due to quantum effects.
Current atomic models now use quantum principles to better explain and predict this behavior.
Every atom is composed of a nucleus and one or more electrons bound to the nucleus.
The nucleus is made of one or more protons and a number of neutrons.
Only the most common variety of hydrogen has no neutrons.
Protons and neutrons are called nucleons.
More than 99.94% of an atom's mass is in the nucleus.
The protons have a positive electric charge whereas the electrons have a negative electric charge.
The neutrons have no electric charge.
If the number of protons and electrons are equal, then the atom is electrically neutral.
If an atom has more or fewer electrons than protons, then it has an overall negative or positive charge, respectively.
These atoms are called ions.
The electrons of an atom are attracted to the protons in an atomic nucleus by the electromagnetic force.
The protons and neutrons in the nucleus are attracted to each other by the nuclear force.
This force is usually stronger than the electromagnetic force that repels the positively charged protons from one another.
Under certain circumstances, the repelling electromagnetic force becomes stronger than the nuclear force.
In this case, the nucleus shatters and leaves behind different elements.
This is a kind of nuclear decay.
All electrons, nucleons, and nuclei alike are subatomic particles.
The behavior of electrons in atoms is closer to a wave than a particle.
The number of protons in the nucleus, called the atomic number, defines to which chemical element the atom belongs.
For example, each copper atom contains 29 protons.
The number of neutrons defines the isotope of the element.
Atoms can attach to one or more other atoms by chemical bonds to form chemical compounds such as molecules or crystals.
The ability of atoms to associate and dissociate is responsible for most of the physical changes observed in nature.
Chemistry is the discipline that studies these changes.
History of atomic theory
Atoms in philosophy
The idea that matter is made up of discrete units is a very old idea, appearing in many ancient cultures such as Greece and India.
The word atomos, meaning "uncuttable", was coined by the ancient Greek philosophers Leucippus and his pupil Democritus ( 460 - 370 BC).
Democritus taught that atoms were infinite in number, uncreated, and eternal, and that the qualities of an object result from the kind of atoms that compose it.
Dalton also believed atomic theory could explain why water absorbs different gases in different proportions.
For example, he found that water absorbs carbon dioxide far better than it absorbs nitrogen.
Dalton hypothesized this was due to the differences between the masses and configurations of the gases' respective particles, and carbon dioxide molecules (CO2) are heavier and larger than nitrogen molecules (N2).
Brownian motion
In 1827, botanist Robert Brown used a microscope to look at dust grains floating in water and discovered that they moved about erratically, a phenomenon that became known as "Brownian motion".
This was thought to be caused by water molecules knocking the grains about.
In 1905, Albert Einstein proved the reality of these molecules and their motions by producing the first statistical physics analysis of Brownian motion.
Chemical bonding explained
Chemical bonds between atoms were now explained, by Gilbert Newton Lewis in 1916, as the interactions between their constituent electrons.
in 1919 the American chemist Irving Langmuir suggested that this could be explained if the electrons in an atom were connected or clustered in some manner.
Groups of electrons were thought to occupy a set of electron shells about the nucleus.
This model was able to explain observations of atomic behavior that previous models could not, such as certain structural and spectral patterns of atoms larger than hydrogen.
Thus, the planetary model of the atom was discarded in favor of one that described atomic orbital zones around the nucleus where a given electron is most likely to be observed.
It was the lightest particle with a positive rest mass measured, until the discovery of neutrino mass.
Under ordinary conditions, electrons are bound to the positively charged nucleus by the attraction created from opposite electric charges.
If an atom has more or fewer electrons than its atomic number, then it becomes respectively negatively or positively charged as a whole; a charged atom is called an ion.
Electrons have been known since the late 19th century, mostly thanks to J.J. Thomson; see history of subatomic physics for details.
Protons have a positive charge and a mass 1,836 times that of the electron, at .
The number of protons in an atom is called its atomic number.
Ernest Rutherford (1919) observed that nitrogen under alpha-particle bombardment ejects what appeared to be hydrogen nuclei.
By 1920 he had accepted that the hydrogen nucleus is a distinct particle within the atom and named it proton.
Neutrons have no electrical charge and have a free mass of 1,839 times the mass of the electron, or .
Neutrons are the heaviest of the three constituent particles, but their mass can be reduced by the nuclear binding energy.
Neutrons and protons (collectively known as nucleons) have comparable dimensions-on the order of -although the 'surface' of these particles is not sharply defined.
The neutron was discovered in 1932 by the English physicist James Chadwick.
In the Standard Model of physics, electrons are truly elementary particles with no internal structure.
However, both protons and neutrons are composite particles composed of elementary particles called quarks.
There are two types of quarks in atoms, each having a fractional electric charge.
Protons are composed of two up quarks (each with charge +) and one down quark (with a charge of −).
Neutrons consist of one up quark and two down quarks.
This distinction accounts for the difference in mass and charge between the two particles.
This is much smaller than the radius of the atom, which is on the order of 105 fm.
The nucleons are bound together by a short-ranged attractive potential called the residual strong force.
At distances smaller than 2.5 fm this force is much more powerful than the electrostatic force that causes positively charged protons to repel each other.
Atoms of the same element have the same number of protons, called the atomic number.
Within a single element, the number of neutrons may vary, determining the isotope of that element.
The total number of protons and neutrons determine the nuclide.
The number of neutrons relative to the protons determines the stability of the nucleus, with certain isotopes undergoing radioactive decay.
The fusion of two nuclei that create larger nuclei with lower atomic numbers than iron and nickel-a total nucleon number of about 60-is usually an exothermic process that releases more energy than is required to bring them together.
Properties
Nuclear properties
By definition, any two atoms with an identical number of protons in their nuclei belong to the same chemical element.
Atoms with equal numbers of protons but a different number of neutrons are different isotopes of the same element.
For example, all hydrogen atoms admit exactly one proton, but isotopes exist with no neutrons (hydrogen-1, by far the most common form,
For 80 of the chemical elements, at least one stable isotope exists.
As a rule, there is only a handful of stable isotopes for each of these elements, the average being 3.2 stable isotopes per element.
Twenty-six elements have only a single stable isotope, while the largest number of stable isotopes observed for any element is ten, for the element tin.
Elements 43, 61, and all elements numbered 83 or higher have no stable isotopes.
Stability of isotopes is affected by the ratio of protons to neutrons, and also by the presence of certain "magic numbers" of neutrons or protons that represent closed and filled quantum shells.
These quantum shells correspond to a set of energy levels within the shell model of the nucleus; filled shells, such as the filled shell of 50 protons for tin, confers unusual stability on the nuclide.
Of the 254 known stable nuclides, only four have both an odd number of protons and odd number of neutrons: hydrogen-2 (deuterium), lithium-6, boron-10 and nitrogen-14.
Also, only four naturally occurring, radioactive odd-odd nuclides have a half-life over a billion years: potassium-40, vanadium-50, lanthanum-138 and tantalum-180m. Most odd-odd nuclei are highly unstable with respect to beta decay, because the decay products are even-even, and are therefore more strongly bound, due to nuclear pairing effects.
Shape and size
Atoms lack a well-defined outer boundary, so their dimensions are usually described in terms of an atomic radius.
This is a measure of the distance out to which the electron cloud extends from the nucleus.
However, this assumes the atom to exhibit a spherical shape, which is only obeyed for atoms in vacuum or free space.
Atomic radii may be derived from the distances between two nuclei when the two atoms are joined in a chemical bond.
The radius varies with the location of an atom on the atomic chart, the type of chemical bond, the number of neighboring atoms (coordination number) and a quantum mechanical property known as spin.
When subjected to external forces, like electrical fields, the shape of an atom may deviate from spherical symmetry.
The deformation depends on the field magnitude and the orbital type of outer shell electrons, as shown by group-theoretical considerations.
Aspherical deviations might be elicited for instance in crystals, where large crystal-electrical fields may occur at low-symmetry lattice sites.
Significant ellipsoidal deformations have been shown to occur for sulfur ions and chalcogen ions in pyrite-type compounds.
Atomic dimensions are thousands of times smaller than the wavelengths of light (400-700 nm) so they cannot be viewed using an optical microscope.
However, individual atoms can be observed using a scanning tunneling microscope.
To visualize the minuteness of the atom, consider that a typical human hair is about 1 million carbon atoms in width.
A single carat diamond with a mass of contains about 10 sextillion (1022) atoms of carbon.
If an apple were magnified to the size of the Earth, then the atoms in the apple would be approximately the size of the original apple.
Radioactive decay
Every element has one or more isotopes that have unstable nuclei that are subject to radioactive decay, causing the nucleus to emit particles or electromagnetic radiation.
Radioactivity can occur when the radius of a nucleus is large compared with the radius of the strong force, which only acts over distances on the order of 1 fm.
Energy levels
The potential energy of an electron in an atom is negative, its dependence of its position reaches the minimum (the most absolute value) inside the nucleus, and vanishes when the distance from the nucleus goes to infinity, roughly in an inverse proportion to the distance.
In the quantum-mechanical model, a bound electron can only occupy a set of states centered on the nucleus, and each state corresponds to a specific energy level; see time-independent Schrödinger equation for theoretical explanation.
An energy level can be measured by the amount of energy needed to unbind the electron from the atom, and is usually given in units of electronvolts (eV).
The lowest energy state of a bound electron is called the ground state, i.e. stationary state, while an electron transition to a higher level results in an excited state.
Each element has a characteristic spectrum that can depend on the nuclear charge, subshells filled by electrons, the electromagnetic interactions between the electrons and other factors.
If a bound electron is in an excited state, an interacting photon with the proper energy can cause stimulated emission of a photon with a matching energy level.
For this to occur, the electron must drop to a lower energy state that has an energy difference matching the energy of the interacting photon.
The emitted photon and the interacting photon then move off in parallel and with matching phases.
That is, the wave patterns of the two photons are synchronized.
This physical property is used to make lasers, which can emit a coherent beam of light energy in a narrow frequency band.
The outermost electron shell of an atom in its uncombined state is known as the valence shell, and the electrons in
that shell are called valence electrons.
The number of valence electrons determines the bonding
behavior with other atoms.
Atoms tend to chemically react with each other in a manner that fills (or empties) their outer valence shells.
Within a state, a material can also exist in different allotropes.
An example of this is solid carbon, which can exist as graphite or diamond.
The Sun is believed to be inside the Local Bubble, so the density in the solar neighborhood is only about 103 atoms/m3.
the remainder of the mass is an unknown dark matter.
and thus identifiable quantities of these elements have long since decayed, with the exception of traces of plutonium-244 possibly deposited by cosmic dust.
Natural deposits of plutonium and neptunium are produced by neutron capture in uranium ore.
Rare and theoretical forms
Superheavy elements
While isotopes with atomic numbers higher than lead (82) are known to be radioactive, an "island of stability" has been proposed for some elements with atomic numbers above 103.
These superheavy elements may have a nucleus that is relatively stable against radioactive decay.
The most likely candidate for a stable superheavy atom, unbihexium, has 126 protons and 184 neutrons.
Exotic matter
Each particle of matter has a corresponding antimatter particle with the opposite electrical charge.
Thus, the positron is a positively charged antielectron and the antiproton is a negatively charged equivalent of a proton.
When a matter and corresponding antimatter particle meet, they annihilate each other.
Because of this, along with an imbalance between the number of matter and antimatter particles, the latter are rare in the universe.
The first causes of this imbalance are not yet fully understood, although theories of baryogenesis may offer an explanation.
As a result, no antimatter atoms have been discovered in nature.
However, in 1996 the antimatter counterpart of the hydrogen atom (antihydrogen) was synthesized at the CERN laboratory in Geneva.
Other exotic atoms have been created by replacing one of the protons, neutrons or electrons with other particles that have the same charge.
For example, an electron can be replaced by a more massive muon, forming a muonic atom.
These types of atoms can be used to test the fundamental predictions of physics.
Notes
Sources
Further reading
