French fries, or simply fries (North American English), chips (British and Commonwealth English), finger chips (Indian English), or french-fried potatoes, are batonnet or allumette-cut deep-fried potatoes.
French fries are served hot, either soft or crispy, and are generally eaten as part of lunch or dinner or by themselves as a snack, and they commonly appear on the menus of diners, fast food restaurants, pubs, and bars.
They are usually salted and, depending on the country, may be served with ketchup, vinegar, mayonnaise, tomato sauce, or other local specialties.
Fries can be topped more heavily, as in the dishes of poutine or chili cheese fries.
Chips can be made from kumara or other sweet potatoes instead of potatoes.
A baked variant, oven chips, uses less oil or no oil.
One very common fast food dish is fish and chips.
Preparation
French fries are prepared by first cutting the potato (peeled or unpeeled) into even strips, which are then wiped off or soaked in cold water to remove the surface starch, and thoroughly dried.
They may then be fried in one or two stages.
Chefs generally agree that the two-bath technique produces better results.
Potatoes fresh out of the ground can have too high a water content-resulting in soggy fries-so preference is for those that have been stored for a while.
Most chains that sell fresh cut fries use the Idaho Russet Burbank variety of potatoes.
It has been the standard for french fries in the United States.
The usual fat for making french fries is vegetable oil.
In the past, beef suet was recommended as superior, The expression "french fried potatoes" first occurred in print in English in the 1856 work Cookery for Maids of All Work by E. Warren: "French Fried Potatoes.
Cut new potatoes in thin slices, put them in boiling fat, and a little salt; fry both sides of a light golden brown colour; drain."
This account referred to thin, shallow-fried slices of potato (French cut) - it is not clear where or when the now familiar deep-fried batons or fingers of potato were first prepared.
In the early 20th century, the term "french fried" was being used in the sense of "deep-fried" for foods like onion rings or chicken.
By country or region
Latin America
As the place of origin of the potato, the earliest records of fries are found in Latin America.
One of the first documented mentions is given by Chilean criollo Francisco Núñez de Pineda y Bascuñán in his work Cautiverio feliz (1673), where he says that Mapuche women "sent fried and stewed potatoes" in a dinner while he stayed in the Fort Nativity during 1629.
Currently, fries are a common side dish in Latin American cuisine or part of larger preparations like the salchipapas in Peru or chorrillana in Chile.
Belgium and the Netherlands
The French and Belgians have an ongoing dispute about where fries were invented, with both countries claiming ownership.
From the Belgian standpoint the popularity of the term "french fries" is explained as a "French gastronomic hegemony" into which the cuisine of Belgium was assimilated because of a lack of understanding coupled with a shared language and geographic proximity of the countries.
Gérard has not produced the manuscript that supports this claim due to the fact that it is unrelated to the later history of the French fry, as the potato did not arrive in the region until around 1735.
Also, given 18th century economic conditions: "It is absolutely unthinkable that a peasant could have dedicated large quantities of fat for cooking potatoes.
At most they were sautéed in a pan...".
At least one source says that "french fries" for deep-fried potato batons was also introduced when American, Canadian, and British soldiers arrived in Belgium during World War I.
The Belgians had previously been catering to the British soldiers' love of chips and continued to serve them to the other troops when they took over the western end of the front.
The Belgians served them, and since French was the language of the Belgian Army, the name "French" was associated with the food.
However, other sources disagree.
Some other sources refer to the old-English verb to french, meaning to cut lengthwise, as the origin of the name.
At that time, the term "french fries" was growing in popularity - the term was already used in the United States as early as 1899 - although it isn't clear whether this referred to batons (chips) or slices of potato e.g. in an item in Good Housekeeping which specifically references "Kitchen Economy in France": "The perfection of french fries is due chiefly to the fact that plenty of fat is used".
"Pommes frites" or just "frites" (French), "frieten" (a word used in Flanders and the southern provinces of the Netherlands) or "patat" became the national snack and a substantial part of several national dishes, such as Moules-frites or Steak-frites.
Fries are very popular in Belgium, where they are known as frieten (in Dutch) or frites (in French), and the Netherlands, where among the working classes they are known as patat in the north and, in the south, friet (en).
fritzak (Dutch/Flemish), or Frittentüte (German), a white cardboard cone, then wrapped in paper, with a spoonful of sauce (often mayonnaise) on top.
Friteries and other fast food establishments tend to offer a number of different sauces for the fries and meats.
In addition to ketchup and mayonnaise, popular options include: aioli, sauce andalouse, sauce Americaine, joppiesaus, Bicky Dressing (Gele Bicky-sauce), curry mayonnaise, mammoet-sauce, peanut sauce, samurai-sauce, sauce "Pickles", pepper-sauce, tartar sauce, zigeuner sauce, and à la zingara.
Spain
In Spain, fried potatoes are called patatas fritas or papas fritas.
Another common form, involving larger irregular cuts, is patatas bravas.
The potatoes are cut into big chunks, partially boiled and then fried.
They are usually seasoned with a spicy tomato sauce, and the dish is one of the most preferred tapas by Spaniards.
Fries may have been invented in Spain, the first European country in which the potato appeared from the New World colonies, and assume fries' first appearance to have been as an accompaniment to fish dishes in Galicia, from which it spread to the rest of the country and then further away, to the "Spanish Netherlands", which became Belgium more than a century later.
Professor Paul Ilegems, curator of the Frietmuseum in Bruges, Belgium, believes that Saint Teresa of Ávila of Spain cooked the first french fries, and refers also to the tradition of frying in Mediterranean cuisine as evidence.
France
In France and other French-speaking countries, fried potatoes are formally pommes de terre frites, but more commonly pommes frites, patates frites, or simply frites.
The words aiguillettes ("needle-ettes") or allumettes ("matchsticks") are used when the french fries are very small and thin.
One enduring origin story holds that french fries were invented by street vendors on the Pont Neuf bridge in Paris in 1789, just before the outbreak of the French Revolution.
However, a reference exists in France from 1775 to "a few pieces of fried potato" and to "fried potatoes".
Eating potatoes for sustenance was promoted in France by Antoine-Augustin Parmentier, but he did not mention fried potatoes in particular.
Many Americans attribute the dish to France and offer as evidence a notation by U.S. President Thomas Jefferson: "Pommes de terre frites à cru, en petites tranches" ("Potatoes deep-fried while raw, in small slices") in a manuscript in Thomas Jefferson's hand (circa 1801-1809) and the recipe almost certainly comes from his French chef, Honoré Julien.
In addition, from 1813 on, recipes for what can be described as "french fries" occur in popular American cookbooks.
By the late 1850s, a cookbook was published that used the term French Fried Potatoes.
The thick-cut fries are called Pommes Pont-Neuf or simply pommes frites (about 10 mm); thinner variants are pommes allumettes (matchstick potatoes; about 7 mm), and pommes paille (potato straws; 3-4 mm).
Pommes gaufrettes are waffle fries.
A popular dish in France is steak-frites, which is steak accompanied by thin french fries.
Canada
The town of Florenceville-Bristol, New Brunswick, headquarters of McCain Foods, calls itself "the French fry capital of the world" and also hosts a museum about potatoes called "Potato World".
It is also one of the world's largest manufacturers of frozen french fries and other potato specialties.
French fries are the main ingredient in the Canadian/Québécois dish known (in both Canadian English and Canadian French) as poutine, a dish consisting of fried potatoes covered with cheese curds and brown gravy.
Poutine has a growing number of variations but is generally considered to have been developed in rural Québec sometime in the 1950s, although precisely where in the province it first appeared is a matter of contention.
Canada is also responsible for providing 22% of China's french fries.
Germany and Austria
French fries migrated to the German-speaking countries during the 19th century.
In Germany, they are usually known by the French words , or only or (derived from the French words but pronounced as German words).
Often served with ketchup or mayonnaise, they are popular as a side dish in restaurants, or as a street-food snack purchased at an (snack stand).
Since the 1950s, currywurst has become a widely-popular dish that is commonly offered with fries.
Currywurst is a sausage (often bratwurst or bockwurst) in a spiced ketchup-based sauce, dusted with curry powder.
South Africa
Whilst eating 'regular' crispy french fries is common in South Africa, a regional favorite, particularly in Cape Town, is a soft soggy version doused in white vinegar called "slap-chips" (pronounced "slup-chips" in English or "slaptjips" in Afrikaans).
These chips are typically thicker and fried at a lower temperature for a longer period of time than regular french fries.
A blue plaque in Oldham marks the origin of the fish-and-chip shop, and thus the start of the fast food industry in Britain.
In Scotland, chips were first sold in - the chip - was first sold by Belgian immigrant Edward De Gernier in the city's Greenmarket".
In Ireland the first chip shop was "opened by Giuseppe Cervi", an Italian immigrant, "who arrived there in the 1880s".
It is estimated that in the UK, 80% of households buy frozen chips each year.
United States
Although french fries were a popular dish in most British Commonwealth countries, the "thin style" french fries have been popularized worldwide in large part by the large American fast food chains such as McDonald's, Burger King, Wendy's, and White Castle.
In the United States, the J. R. Simplot Company is credited with successfully commercializing french fries in frozen form during the 1940s.
Subsequently, in 1967, Ray Kroc of McDonald's contracted the Simplot company to supply them with frozen fries, replacing fresh-cut potatoes.
In 2004, 29% of the United States' potato crop was used to make frozen fries - 90% consumed by the food services sector and 10% by retail.
The United States is also known for supplying China with most of their french fries as 70% of China's french fries are imported.
Some varieties of french fries that appeared later have been battered and breaded, and many fast food chains in the U.S. dust the potatoes with kashi, dextrin, and other flavor coatings for crispier fries with particular tastes.
French fries are one of the most popular dishes in the United States, commonly being served as a side dish to entrees and being seen in fast food restaurants.
The average American eats around 30 pounds of french fries a year.
Variants
French fries come in multiple variations.
A partial list, in alphabetical order:
* Carne asada fries - fries covered with carne asada, guacamole, sour cream and cheese.
* Cheese fries (UK - cheesy chips) - fries covered with cheese.
* Chile fries - (not to be confused with chili fries) fries topped with green chile peppers, common in the US state of New Mexico.
* Chili fries - (not to be confused with chile fries) fries covered with chili con carne.
* Chili cheese fries - fries covered with chili and cheese.
* Chorrillana - a Chilean dish consisting of a plate of french fries topped with different types of sliced meat, sausages and other ingredients.
* Crinkle-cut fries - also known as "wavy fries", these are cut in a corrugated, ridged fashion.
- such as the chip butty and the Mitraillette.
* Oven fries - fries that are cooked in the oven as a final step in the preparation (having been coated with oil during preparation at the factory), often sold frozen.
* Potato wedges - Thick-cut, elongated wedge-shaped fries
Health aspects
French fries primarily contain carbohydrates (mostly in the form of starch) and protein from the potato, and fat absorbed during the deep-frying process.
Salt, which contains sodium, is almost always applied as a surface seasoning.
For example, a large serving of french fries at McDonald's in the United States is 154 grams.
The 510 calories come from 66 g of carbohydrates, 24 g of fat, 7 g of protein and 350 mg of sodium.
Experts have criticized french fries for being very unhealthy.
According to Jonathan Bonnet, MD, in a TIME magazine article, "fries are nutritionally unrecognizable from a spud" because they "involve frying, salting, and removing one of the healthiest parts of the potato: the skin, where many of the nutrients and fiber are found."
Kristin Kirkpatrick, RD, calls french fries "...an extremely starchy vegetable dipped in a fryer that then loads on the unhealthy fat, and what you have left is a food that has no nutritional redeeming value in it at all."
Starting in 2008, many restaurant chains and manufacturers of pre-cooked frozen french fries for home reheating phased out trans fat containing vegetable oils.
French fries contain some of the highest levels of acrylamides of any foodstuff, and experts have raised concerns about the effects of acrylamides on human health.
According to the American Cancer Society, it is not clear whether acrylamide consumption affects people's risk of getting cancer.
Legal issues
In June 2004, the United States Department of Agriculture (USDA), with the advisement of a federal district judge from Beaumont, Texas, classified batter-coated french fries as a vegetable under the Perishable Agricultural Commodities Act.
This was primarily for trade reasons; french fries do not meet the standard to be listed as a processed food.
This classification, referred to as the "French fry rule", was upheld in the United States Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit case Fleming Companies, Inc. v. USDA.
In the United States, in 2002, the McDonald's Corporation agreed to donate to Hindus and other groups to settle lawsuits filed against the chain for mislabeling french fries and hash browns as vegetarian even though beef extract flavoring was added in their production.
Bibliography
tmpgmxqou4c6z4g69038rbhzg6nvhra
