A banana is an edible fruit - botanically a berry primarily for their fruit, and to a lesser extent to make fiber, banana wine, and banana beer and as ornamental plants.
The world's largest producers of bananas in 2017 were India and China, which together accounted for approximately 38% of total production.
Worldwide, there is no sharp distinction between "bananas" and "plantains".
Especially in the Americas and Europe, "banana" usually refers to soft, sweet, dessert bananas, particularly those of the Cavendish group, which are the main exports from banana-growing countries.
By contrast, Musa cultivars with firmer, starchier fruit are called "plantains".
In other regions, such as Southeast Asia, many more kinds of banana are grown and eaten, so the binary distinction is not useful and is not made in local languages.
The term "banana" is also used as the common name for the plants that produce the fruit.
which is one of several isotopes of potassium.
Etymology
The word banana is thought to be of West African origin, possibly from the Wolof word , and passed into English via Spanish or Portuguese.
These ancient introductions resulted in the banana subgroup now known as the "true" plantains, which include the East African Highland bananas and the Pacific plantains (the Iholena and Maoli-Popo'ulu subgroups).
East African Highland bananas originated from banana populations introduced to Madagascar probably from the region between Java, Borneo, and New Guinea; while Pacific plantains were introduced to the Pacific Islands from either eastern New Guinea or the Bismarck Archipelago.
However, there is evidence that bananas were known to the Indus Valley Civilisation from phytoliths recovered from the Kot Diji archaeological site in Pakistan (although they are absent in other contemporary sites in South Asia).
This may be a possible indication of very early dispersal of bananas by Austronesian traders by sea from as early as 2000 BCE.
But this is still putative, as they may have come from local wild Musa species used for fiber or as ornamentals, not food.
Banana crops are vulnerable to destruction by high winds, such as tropical storms or cyclones.
Modern cultivation
All widely cultivated bananas today descend from the two wild bananas Musa acuminata and Musa balbisiana.
While the original wild bananas contained large seeds, diploid or polyploid cultivars (some being hybrids) with tiny seeds are preferred for human raw fruit consumption.
Cavendish
In global commerce in 2009, by far the most important cultivars belonged to the triploid AAA group of Musa acuminata, commonly referred to as Cavendish group bananas.
They accounted for the majority of banana exports,
Ripening
Export bananas are picked green, and ripen in special rooms upon arrival in the destination country.
These rooms are air-tight and filled with ethylene gas to induce ripening.
The vivid yellow color consumers normally associate with supermarket bananas is, in fact, caused by the artificial ripening process.
A 2008 study reported that ripe bananas fluoresce when exposed to ultraviolet light.
This property is attributed to the degradation of chlorophyll leading to the accumulation of a fluorescent product in the skin of the fruit.
The chlorophyll breakdown product is stabilized by a propionate ester group.
Banana-plant leaves also fluoresce in the same way.
Green (under-ripe) bananas do not fluoresce.
To obtain maximum shelf life, harvest comes before the fruit is mature.
The fruit requires careful handling, rapid transport to ports, cooling, and refrigerated shipping.
The goal is to prevent the bananas from producing their natural ripening agent, ethylene.
This technology allows storage and transport for 3-4 weeks at .
On arrival, bananas are held at about and treated with a low concentration of ethylene.
After a few days, the fruit begins to ripen and is distributed for final sale.
Ripe bananas can be held for a few days at home.
If bananas are too green, they can be put in a brown paper bag with an apple or tomato overnight to speed up the ripening process.
Ecuador and the Philippines were the leading exporters with 5.4 and 3.3 million tonnes, respectively, and the Dominican Republic was the leading exporter of plantains with 210,350 tonnes.
Pests, diseases, and natural disasters
While in no danger of outright extinction, the most common edible banana cultivar Cavendish (extremely popular in Europe and the Americas) could become unviable for large-scale cultivation in the next 10-20 years.
Its predecessor 'Gros Michel', discovered in the 1820s, suffered this fate.
Like almost all bananas, Cavendish lacks genetic diversity, which makes it vulnerable to diseases, threatening both commercial cultivation and small-scale subsistence farming.
and its quality compared to Gros Michel is debated.
According to current sources, a deadly form of Panama disease is infecting Cavendish.
All plants are genetically identical, which prevents evolution of disease resistance.
Researchers are examining hundreds of wild varieties for resistance.
As the soil-based fungi can easily be carried on boots, clothing, or tools, the wilt spread to the Americas despite years of preventive efforts.
Experts state the need to enrich banana biodiversity by producing diverse new banana varieties, not just having a focus on the Cavendish.
Banana bunchy top disease (BBTD) symptoms include dark green streaks of variable length in leaf veins, midribs and petioles.
Leaves become short and stunted as the disease progresses, becoming 'bunched' at the apex of the plant.
Infected plants may produce no fruit or the bunch may not emerge from the pseudostem.
The virus is transmitted by the banana aphid Pentalonia nigronervosa and is widespread in SE Asia, Asia, the Philippines, Taiwan, Oceania and parts of Africa.
There is no cure for BBTD, but it can be effectively controlled by the eradication of diseased plants and the use of virus-free planting material.
No resistant cultivars have been found, but varietal differences in susceptibility have been reported.
The commercially important Cavendish subgroup is severely affected.
Banana germplasm is conserved in many national and regional gene banks, and at the world's largest banana collection, the International Musa Germplasm Transit Centre (ITC), managed by Bioversity International and hosted at KU Leuven in Belgium.
Musa cultivars are usually seedless, and options for their long-term conservation are constrained by the vegetative nature of the plant's reproductive system.
Consequently, they are conserved by three main methods: in vivo (planted in field collections), in vitro (as plantlets in test tubes within a controlled environment), and by cryopreservation (meristems conserved in liquid nitrogen at -196 °C).
Nutrition
Raw bananas (not including the peel) are 75% water, 23% carbohydrates, 1% protein, and contain negligible fat.
A 100-gram reference serving supplies 89 Calories, 31% of the US recommended Daily Value (DV) of vitamin B6, and moderate amounts of vitamin C, manganese and dietary fiber, with no other micronutrients in significant content (see table).
Potassium
Although bananas are commonly thought to contain exceptional potassium content, their actual potassium content is not high per typical food serving, having only 8% of the US recommended Daily Value for potassium (considered a low level of the DV, see nutrition table), and their potassium-content ranking among fruits, vegetables, legumes, and many other foods is relatively moderate.
Vegetables with higher potassium content than raw dessert bananas (358 mg per 100 grams) include raw spinach (558 mg per 100 grams), baked potatoes without skin (391 mg per 100 grams), cooked soybeans (539 mg per 100 grams), grilled portabella mushrooms (437 mg per 100 grams), and processed tomato sauces (413-439 mg per 100 grams).
Raw plantains contain 499 mg potassium per 100 grams.
Dehydrated dessert bananas or banana powder contain 1491 mg potassium per 100 grams.
in South Asian and Southeast Asian cuisine, either raw or steamed with dips or cooked in soups, curries and fried foods.
The flavor resembles that of artichoke.
As with artichokes, both the fleshy part of the bracts and the heart are edible.
Leaves
Banana leaves are large, flexible, and waterproof.
They are often used as ecologically friendly disposable food containers or as "plates" in South Asia and several Southeast Asian countries.
In Indonesian cuisine, banana leaf is employed in cooking methods like pepes and botok; banana leaf packages containing food ingredients and spices are cooked in steam or in boiled water, or are grilled on charcoal.
When used so for steaming or grilling, the banana leaves protect the food ingredients from burning and add a subtle sweet flavor.
Fiber
Textiles
Banana fiber harvested from the pseudostems and leaves of the plant has been used for textiles in Asia since at least the 13th century.
Both fruit-bearing and fibrous varieties of the banana plant have been used.
In the Japanese system Kijōka-bashōfu, leaves and shoots are cut from the plant periodically to ensure softness.
Harvested shoots are first boiled in lye to prepare fibers for yarn-making.
These banana shoots produce fibers of varying degrees of softness, yielding yarns and textiles with differing qualities for specific uses.
For example, the outermost fibers of the shoots are the coarsest, and are suitable for tablecloths, while the softest innermost fibers are desirable for kimono and kamishimo.
This traditional Japanese cloth-making process requires many steps, all performed by hand.
In India, a banana fiber separator machine has been developed, which takes the agricultural waste of local banana harvests and extracts strands of the fiber.
Paper
Banana fiber is used in the production of banana paper.
Banana paper is made from two different parts: the bark of the banana plant, mainly used for artistic purposes, or from the fibers of the stem and non-usable fruits.
The paper is either hand-made or by industrial process.
Cultural roles
Arts
The song "Yes!
We Have No Bananas" was written by Frank Silver and Irving Cohn and originally released in 1923; for many decades, it was the best-selling sheet music in history.
Since then the song has been rerecorded several times and has been particularly popular during banana shortages.
A person slipping on a banana peel has been a staple of physical comedy for generations.
An American comedy recording from 1910 features a popular character of the time, "Uncle Josh", claiming to describe his own such incident:
: QTEMPLATE |Now I don't think much of the man that throws a banana peelin' on the sidewalk, and I don't think much of the banana peel that throws a man on the sidewalk neither ...
my foot hit the bananer peelin' and I went up in the air, and I come down ker-plunk, jist as I was pickin' myself up a little boy come runnin' across the street ...
he says, "Oh mister, won't you please do that agin?
My little brother didn't see you do it."
The poet Bashō is named after the Japanese word for a banana plant.
The "bashō" planted in his garden by a grateful student became a source of inspiration to his poetry, as well as a symbol of his life and home.
The cover artwork for the debut album of The Velvet Underground features a banana made by Andy Warhol.
On the original vinyl LP version, the design allowed the listener to "peel" this banana to find a pink, peeled phallic banana on the inside.
Religion and popular beliefs
In India, bananas serve a prominent part in many festivals and occasions of Hindus.
In South Indian weddings, particularly Tamil weddings, banana trees are tied in pairs to form an arch as a blessing to the couple for a long-lasting, useful life.
In Thailand, it is believed that a certain type of banana plants may be inhabited by a spirit, Nang Tani, a type of ghost related to trees and similar plants that manifests itself as a young woman.
Often people tie a length of colored satin cloth around the pseudostem of the banana plants.
In Malay folklore, the ghost known as Pontianak is associated with banana plants (pokok pisang), and its spirit is said to reside in them during the day.
Racist symbol
There is a long racist history of describing people of African descent as being more like monkeys than humans, and due to the assumption in popular culture that monkeys like bananas, bananas have been used in symbolic acts of hate speech.
Particularly in Europe, bananas have long been commonly thrown at black footballers by racist spectators.
In April 2014, during a match at Villarreal's stadium, El Madrigal, Dani Alves was targeted by Villareal supporter David Campaya Lleo, who threw a banana at him.
Alves picked up the banana, peeled it and took a bite, and the meme went viral on social media in support of him.
Racist taunts are an ongoing problem in football.
Bananas were hung from nooses around the campus of American University in May 2017 after the student body elected its first black woman student government president.
Unicode
The Unicode standard includes the emoji character .
Other uses
* Banana peel may have capability to extract heavy metal contamination from river water, similar to other purification materials.
In 2007, banana peel powder was tested as a means of filtration for heavy metals and radionuclides occurring in water produced by the nuclear and fertilizer industries (cadmium contaminant is present in phosphates).
When added and thoroughly mixed for 40 minutes, the powder can remove roughly 65% of heavy metals, and this can be repeated.
* United Brands Company v Commission of the European Communities
Bibliography
Further reading
* Harriet Lamb, "Fighting The Banana Wars and other Fairtrade Battles",
