The Parliament of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, commonly known internationally as the UK Parliament, British Parliament, or Westminster Parliament, and domestically simply as Parliament or Westminster, is the supreme legislative body of the United Kingdom, the Crown dependencies and the British Overseas Territories.
It alone possesses legislative supremacy and thereby ultimate power over all other political bodies in the UK and the overseas territories.
Parliament is bicameral but has three parts, consisting of the Sovereign (Queen-in-Parliament), the House of Lords, and the House of Commons (the primary chamber).
The two houses meet in the Palace of Westminster in the City of Westminster, one of the inner boroughs of the capital city, London.
The House of Lords includes two different types of members: the Lords Spiritual, consisting of the most senior bishops of the Church of England, and the Lords Temporal, consisting mainly of life peers, appointed by the Sovereign on the advice of the Prime Minister, and of 92 hereditary peers, sitting either by virtue of holding a royal office, or by being elected by their fellow hereditary peers.
Prior to the opening of the Supreme Court in October 2009, the House of Lords also performed a judicial role through the Law Lords.
The House of Commons is an elected chamber with elections to 650 single member constituencies held at least every five years under the first-past-the-post system.
The two Houses meet in separate chambers in the Palace of Westminster (commonly known as the Houses of Parliament) in London.
By constitutional convention, all government ministers, including the Prime Minister, are members of the House of Commons or, less commonly, the House of Lords and are thereby accountable to the respective branches of the legislature.
Most cabinet ministers are from the Commons, whilst junior ministers can be from either House.
However, the Leader of the House of Lords must be a peer.
The Parliament of Great Britain was formed in 1707 following the ratification of the Treaty of Union by Acts of Union passed by the Parliament of England and the Parliament of Scotland, both Acts of Union stating, "That the United Kingdom of Great Britain be represented by one and the same Parliament to be styled The Parliament of Great Britain."
At the start of the 19th century, Parliament was further enlarged by Acts of Union ratified by the Parliament of Great Britain and the Parliament of Ireland that abolished the latter and added 100 Irish MPs and 32 Lords to the former to create the Parliament of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland.
The Royal and Parliamentary Titles Act 1927 formally amended the name to the "Parliament of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland," five years after the secession of the Irish Free State in 1922.
With the global expansion of the British Empire, the UK Parliament has shaped the political systems of many countries as ex-colonies and so it has been called the "Mother of Parliaments."
However, John Brightwho coined the epithetused it in reference to the political culture of "England" rather than just the parliamentary system.
In theory, the UK's supreme legislative power is officially vested in the Crown-in-Parliament.
However, the Crown normally acts on the advice of the Prime Minister and the powers of the House of Lords are limited to only delaying legislation; thus power is de facto vested in the House of Commons.
History
Parliament of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland
The United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland was created on 1 January 1801, by the merger of the Kingdoms of Great Britain and Ireland under the Acts of Union 1800.
The principle of ministerial responsibility to the lower House did not develop until the 19th century-the House of Lords was superior to the House of Commons both in theory and in practice.
Members of the House of Commons (MPs) were elected in an antiquated electoral system, under which constituencies of vastly different sizes existed.
Thus, the borough of Old Sarum, with seven voters, could elect two members, as could the borough of Dunwich, which had almost completely disappeared into the sea due to land erosion.
Many small constituencies, known as pocket or rotten boroughs, were controlled by members of the House of Lords, who could ensure the election of their relatives or supporters.
During the reforms of the 19th century, beginning with the Reform Act 1832, the electoral system for the House of Commons was progressively regularised.
No longer dependent on the Lords for their seats, MPs grew more assertive.
The supremacy of the British House of Commons was reaffirmed in the early 20th century.
In 1909, the Commons passed the so-called "People's Budget," which made numerous changes to the taxation system which were detrimental to wealthy landowners.
The House of Lords, which consisted mostly of powerful landowners, rejected the Budget.
On the basis of the Budget's popularity and the Lords' consequent unpopularity, the Liberal Party narrowly won two general elections in 1910.
Using the result as a mandate, the Liberal Prime Minister, H. H. Asquith, introduced the Parliament Bill, which sought to restrict the powers of the House of Lords.
When the Lords refused to pass the bill, Asquith countered with a promise extracted from the King in secret before the second general election of 1910 and requested the creation of several hundred Liberal peers, so as to erase the Conservative majority in the House of Lords.
In the face of such a threat, the House of Lords narrowly passed the bill.
The Parliament Act 1911, as it became, prevented the Lords from blocking a money bill (a bill dealing with taxation), and allowed them to delay any other bill for a maximum of three sessions (reduced to two sessions in 1949), after which it could become law over their objections.
However, regardless of the Parliament Acts of 1911 and 1949, the House of Lords has always retained the unrestricted power to veto any bill outright which attempts to extend the life of a parliament.
Parliament of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
The Government of Ireland Act 1920 created the parliaments of Northern Ireland and Southern Ireland and reduced the representation of both parts at Westminster.
The number of Northern Ireland seats was increased again after the introduction of direct rule in 1973.
The Irish Free State became independent in 1922, and in 1927 parliament was renamed the Parliament of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland.
Further reforms to the House of Lords were made in the 20th century.
The Life Peerages Act 1958 authorised the regular creation of life peerage dignities.
By the 1960s, the regular creation of hereditary peerage dignities had ceased; thereafter, almost all new peers were life peers only.
The House of Lords Act 1999 removed the automatic right of hereditary peers to sit in the House of Lords, although it made an exception for 92 of them to be elected to life-terms by the other hereditary peers, with by-elections upon their death.
The House of Lords is now a chamber that is subordinate to the House of Commons.
Additionally, the Constitutional Reform Act 2005 led to abolition of the judicial functions of the House of Lords with the creation of the new Supreme Court of the United Kingdom in October 2009.
Composition and powers
The legislative authority, the Crown-in-Parliament, has three separate elements: the Monarch, the House of Lords, and the House of Commons.
No individual may be a member of both Houses, and members of the House of Lords are legally barred from voting in elections for members of the House of Commons.
Formerly, no-one could be a member of Parliament while holding an office of profit under the Crown, thus maintaining the separation of powers, but the principle has been gradually eroded.
Until 1919, Members of Parliament who were appointed to ministerial office lost their seats in the House of Commons and had to seek re-election; the rule was abolished in 1926.
Holders of offices are ineligible to serve as a Member of Parliament under the House of Commons Disqualification Act 1975.
Royal Assent of the Monarch is required for all Bills to become law, and certain delegated legislation must be made by the Monarch by Order in Council.
The Crown also has executive powers which do not depend on Parliament, through prerogative powers, including the power to make treaties, declare war, award honours, and appoint officers and civil servants.
In practice these are always exercised by the monarch on the advice of the Prime Minister and the other ministers of HM Government.
The Prime Minister and government are directly accountable to Parliament, through its control of public finances, and to the public, through the election of members of parliament.
The Monarch also appoints the Prime Minister, who then forms a government from members of the Houses of Parliament.
This must be someone who could command a majority in a confidence vote in the House of Commons.
In the past the monarch has occasionally had to make a judgment, as in the appointment of Alec Douglas-Home in 1963 when it was thought that the incumbent Prime Minister, Harold Macmillan, had become ill with terminal cancer.
However, today the monarch is advised by the outgoing Prime Minister as to whom he or she should offer the position next.
The House of Lords is formally styled "The Right Honourable The Lords Spiritual and Temporal in Parliament Assembled," the Lords Spiritual being bishops of the Church of England and the Lords Temporal being Peers of the Realm.
The Lords Spiritual and Lords Temporal are considered separate "estates," but they sit, debate and vote together.
Since the Parliament Acts 1911 and 1949, the powers of the House of Lords have been very much less than those of the House of Commons.
All bills except money bills are debated and voted upon in the House of Lords; however, by voting against a bill, the House of Lords can only delay it for a maximum of two parliamentary sessions over a year.
After that time, the House of Commons can force the Bill through without the Lords' consent, under the Parliament Acts.
The House of Lords can also hold the government to account through questions to government ministers and the operation of a small number of select committees.
The highest court in England & Wales and in Northern Ireland used to be a committee of the House of Lords, but it became an independent supreme court in 2009.
The Lords Spiritual formerly included all of the senior clergymen of the Church of England-archbishops, bishops, abbots and mitred priors.
Upon the Dissolution of the Monasteries under Henry VIII the abbots and mitred priors lost their positions in Parliament.
All diocesan bishops continued to sit in Parliament, but the Bishopric of Manchester Act 1847, and later Acts, provide that only the 26 most senior are Lords Spiritual.
These always include the incumbents of the "five great sees," namely the Archbishop of Canterbury, the Archbishop of York, the Bishop of London, the Bishop of Durham and the Bishop of Winchester.
The remaining 21 Lords Spiritual are the most senior diocesan bishops, ranked in order of consecration, although the Lords Spiritual (Women) Act 2015 makes time-limited provision for vacancies to be filled by women who are bishops.
The Lords Temporal are life peers created under the Appellate Jurisdiction Act 1876 and the Life Peerages Act 1958, in addition to 92 hereditary peers under the House of Lords Act 1999.
Formerly, the Lords Temporal were exclusively hereditary peers.
The right of some hereditary peers to sit in Parliament was not automatic: after Scotland and England united into Great Britain in 1707, it was provided that all peers whose dignities had been created by English kings could sit in Parliament, but those whose dignities had been created by Scottish kings were to elect a limited number of "representative peers."
A similar arrangement was made in respect of Ireland when it was united with Great Britain in 1801, but when southern Ireland left the United Kingdom in 1922 the election of Irish representative peers ceased.
By the Peerage Act 1963, the election of Scottish representative peers also ended, and all Scottish peers were granted the right to sit in Parliament.
Under the House of Lords Act 1999, only life peerages (that is to say, peerage dignities which cannot be inherited) automatically entitle their holders to seats in the House of Lords.
Of the hereditary peers, only 92-the Earl Marshal, the Lord Great Chamberlain and the 90 elected by other peers-retain their seats in the House.
The Commons, the last of the "estates" of the Kingdom, are represented in the House of Commons, which is formally styled "The Honourable The Commons in Parliament Assembled" ("commons" coming not from the term "commoner," but from , the old French term for a district).
In 2016, the House consists of 650 members.
Each Member of Parliament (MP) is chosen by a single constituency by the First-Past-the-Post electoral system.
Universal adult suffrage exists for those 18 and over; citizens of the United Kingdom, and those of the Republic of Ireland and Commonwealth nations resident in the United Kingdom, are qualified to vote, unless they are in prison at the time of the election.
The term of members of the House of Commons depends on the term of Parliament, a maximum of five years; a general election, during which all the seats are contested, occurs after each dissolution (see below).
All legislation must be passed by the House of Commons to become law and it controls taxation and the supply of money to the government.
Government ministers (including the Prime Minister) must regularly answer questions in the House of Commons and there are a number of select committees that scrutinise particular issues and the workings of the government.
There are also mechanisms that allow members of the House of Commons to bring to the attention of the government particular issues affecting their constituents.
State Opening of Parliament
The State Opening of Parliament is an annual event that marks the commencement of a session of the Parliament of the United Kingdom.
It is held in the House of Lords Chamber.
Before 2012, it took place in November or December, or, in a general election year, when the new Parliament first assembled.
From 2012 onwards, the ceremony has taken place in May or June.
Upon the signal of the Monarch, the Lord Great Chamberlain raises their wand of office to signal to Black Rod, who is charged with summoning the House of Commons and has been waiting in the Commons lobby.
Black Rod turns and, under the escort of the Door-keeper of the House of Lords and an inspector of police, approaches the doors to the Chamber of the Commons.
In 1642, King Charles I stormed into the House of Commons in an unsuccessful attempt to arrest the Five Members, who included the celebrated English patriot and leading Parliamentarian John Hampden.
This action sparked the English Civil War.
The wars established the constitutional rights of Parliament, a concept legally established in the Glorious Revolution in 1688 and the subsequent Bill of Rights 1689.
Since then, no British monarch has entered the House of Commons when it is in session.
On Black Rod's approach, the doors are slammed shut against them, symbolising the rights of parliament and its independence from the monarch.
Since the first-past-the-post electoral system is employed in elections, the governing party tends to enjoy a large majority in the Commons; there is often limited need to compromise with other parties.
Modern British political parties are so tightly organised that they leave relatively little room for free action by their MPs.
In many cases, MPs may be expelled from their parties for voting against the instructions of party leaders.
During the 20th century, the Government has lost confidence issues only three times-twice in 1924, and once in 1979.
Parliamentary questions
In the United Kingdom, question time in the House of Commons lasts for an hour each day from Monday to Thursday (2:30 to 3:30 pm on Mondays, 11:30 am to 12:30 pm on Tuesdays and Wednesdays, and 9:30 to 10:30 am on Thursdays).
Each Government department has its place in a rota which repeats every five weeks.
The exception to this sequence are the Business Questions (Questions to the Leader of House of Commons), in which questions are answered each Thursday about the business of the House the following week.
Also, Questions to the Prime Minister takes place each Wednesday from noon to 12:30 pm.
In addition to government departments, there are also questions to the Church commissioners.
Parliamentary sovereignty
Several different views have been taken of Parliament's sovereignty.
According to the jurist Sir William Blackstone, "It has sovereign and uncontrollable authority in making, confirming, enlarging, restraining, abrogating, repealing, reviving, and expounding of laws, concerning matters of all possible denominations, ecclesiastical, or temporal, civil, military, maritime, or criminal ... it can, in short, do every thing that is not naturally impossible."
A different view has been taken by the Scottish judge Thomas Cooper, 1st Lord Cooper of Culross.
When he decided the 1953 case of MacCormick v. Lord Advocate as Lord President of the Court of Session, he stated, "The principle of unlimited sovereignty of Parliament is a distinctively English principle and has no counterpart in Scottish constitutional law."
He continued, "Considering that the Union legislation extinguished the Parliaments of Scotland and England and replaced them by a new Parliament, I have difficulty in seeing why the new Parliament of Great Britain must inherit all the peculiar characteristics of the English Parliament but none of the Scottish."
Nevertheless, he did not give a conclusive opinion on the subject.
Thus, the question of Parliamentary sovereignty appears to remain unresolved.
Parliament has not passed any Act defining its own sovereignty.
A related possible limitation on Parliament relates to the Scottish legal system and Presbyterian faith, preservation of which were Scottish preconditions to the creation of the unified Parliament.
Since the Parliament of the United Kingdom was set up in reliance on these promises, it may be that it has no power to make laws that break them.
Parliament's power has often been eroded by its own Acts.
Acts passed in 1921 and 1925 granted the Church of Scotland complete independence in ecclesiastical matters.
More recently, its power has been restricted by membership of the European Union, which has the power to make laws enforceable in each member state.
In the Factortame case, the European Court of Justice ruled that British courts could have powers to overturn British legislation contravening European law.
Parliament has also created national devolved parliaments and assemblies with differing degrees of legislative authority in Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland.
Parliament still has the power over areas for which responsibility lies with the devolved institutions, but would gain the agreement of those institutions to act on their behalf.
Similarly, it has granted the power to make regulations to Ministers of the Crown, and the power to enact religious legislation to the General Synod of the Church of England.
In every case aforementioned, authority has been conceded by Act of Parliament and may be taken back in the same manner.
It is entirely within the authority of Parliament, for example, to abolish the devolved governments in Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland or to leave the EU.
However, Parliament also revoked its legislative competence over Australia and Canada with the Australia and Canada Acts: although the Parliament of the United Kingdom could pass an Act reversing its action, it would not take effect in Australia or Canada as the competence of the Imperial Parliament is no longer recognised there in law.
One well-recognised exception to Parliament's power involves binding future Parliaments.
No Act of Parliament may be made secure from amendment or repeal by a future Parliament.
For example, although the Act of Union 1800 states that the Kingdoms of Great Britain and Ireland are to be united "forever," Parliament permitted southern Ireland to leave the United Kingdom in 1922.
Privileges
Each House of Parliament possesses and guards various ancient privileges.
The House of Lords relies on inherent right.
In the case of the House of Commons, the Speaker goes to the Lords' Chamber at the beginning of each new Parliament and requests representatives of the Sovereign to confirm the Lower House's "undoubted" privileges and rights.
The ceremony observed by the House of Commons dates to the reign of King Henry VIII.
Each House is the guardian of its privileges, and may punish breaches thereof.
The extent of parliamentary privilege is based on law and custom.
Sir William Blackstone states that these privileges are "very large and indefinite," and cannot be defined except by the Houses of Parliament themselves.
The foremost privilege claimed by both Houses is that of freedom of speech in debate; nothing said in either House may be questioned in any court or other institution outside Parliament.
Another privilege claimed is that of freedom from arrest; at one time this was held to apply for any arrest except for high treason, felony or breach of the peace but it now excludes any arrest on criminal charges; it applies during a session of Parliament, and 40 days before or after such a session.
Members of both Houses are no longer privileged from service on juries.
Both Houses possess the power to punish breaches of their privilege.
Contempt of Parliament-for example, disobedience of a subpoena issued by a committee-may also be punished.
The House of Lords may imprison an individual for any fixed period of time, but an individual imprisoned by the House of Commons is set free upon prorogation.
The punishments imposed by either House may not be challenged in any court, and the Human Rights Act does not apply.
Until at least 2015, members of the House of Commons also had the privilege of a separate seating area in the Palace of Westminster canteen, protected by a false partition labelled "MPs only beyond this point," so that they did not have to sit with canteen staff taking a break.
This provoked mockery from a newly elected 20-year-old MP who described it as "ridiculous" snobbery.
Emblem
The quasi-official emblem of the Houses of Parliament is a crowned portcullis.
The portcullis was originally the badge of various English noble families from the 14th century.
It went on to be adopted by the kings of the Tudor dynasty in the 16th century, under whom the Palace of Westminster became the regular meeting place of Parliament.
The crown was added to make the badge a specifically royal symbol.
The portcullis probably first came to be associated with the Palace of Westminster through its use as decoration in the rebuilding of the Palace after the fire of 1512.
However, at the time it was only one of many symbols.
The widespread use of the portcullis throughout the Palace dates from the 19th century, when Charles Barry and Augustus Pugin used it extensively as a decorative feature in their designs for the new Palace built following the disastrous 1834 fire.
The crowned portcullis came to be accepted during the 20th century as the emblem of both houses of parliament.
This was simply a result of custom and usage rather than a specific decision.
The emblem now appears on official stationery, publications and papers, and is stamped on various items in use in the Palace of Westminster, such as cutlery, silverware and china.
Various shades of red and green are used for visual identification of the House of Lords and the House of Commons.
Broadcast media
UK Parliament debates can be viewed in the related YouTube channel.
They are also broadcast live by the independent Euronews English channel.
* Acts of Parliament of the United Kingdom relating to the European Communities and the European Union
* List of Acts of the Parliament of the United Kingdom
* Parliamentary Information and Communication Technology Service
* Records of members of parliament of the United Kingdom
Lists of MPs elected:
* List of MPs elected in the 1966 United Kingdom general election
* List of MPs elected in the 1970 United Kingdom general election
* List of MPs elected in the February 1974 United Kingdom general election
* List of MPs elected in the October 1974 United Kingdom general election
* List of MPs elected in the 1979 United Kingdom general election
* List of MPs elected in the 1983 United Kingdom general election
* List of MPs elected in the 1987 United Kingdom general election
* List of MPs elected in the 1992 United Kingdom general election
* List of MPs elected in the 1997 United Kingdom general election
* List of MPs elected in the 2001 United Kingdom general election
* List of MPs elected in the 2005 United Kingdom general election
* List of MPs elected in the 2010 United Kingdom general election
* List of MPs elected in the 2015 United Kingdom general election
* List of MPs elected in the 2017 United Kingdom general election
Notes
