Baffin Island ( , ), in the Canadian territory of Nunavut, is the largest island in Canada and the fifth-largest island in the world.
Its area is and its population is about 13,148 (2016 census).
It is located in the region of 70° N and 75° W. Historians believe it is likely that Pre-Columbian Norse explorers from Greenland and Iceland knew of the island.
They believe it is the site of Helluland, referred to in the Icelandic sagas (Saga of the Greenlanders and the Saga of Erik the Red).
Geography
Iqaluit, the capital of Nunavut, is located on the southeastern coast.
Until 1987, the town was called Frobisher Bay, after the English name for the bay on which it is located and was named for Martin Frobisher.
That year the community voted to restore the Inuktitut name.
To the south lies Hudson Strait, separating Baffin Island from mainland Quebec.
South of the western end of the island is the Fury and Hecla Strait which separates the island from the Melville Peninsula on the mainland.
To the east are Davis Strait and Baffin Bay, with Greenland beyond.
the Gulf of Boothia and Lancaster Sound separate Baffin Island from the rest of the Arctic Archipelago to the west and north.
The Baffin Mountains run along the northeastern coast of the island and are a part of the Arctic Cordillera.
The highest peak is Mount Odin, with an elevation of at least , although some sources say .
Another peak of note is Mount Asgard, located in Auyuittuq National Park, with an elevation of .
Mount Thor, with an elevation of , is said to have the greatest purely vertical drop (a sheer cliff face) of any mountain on Earth, at .
The two largest lakes on the island lie in the south-central part of the island: Nettilling Lake () and Amadjuak Lake () further south.
The Barnes Ice Cap, in the middle of the island, has been retreating since at least the early 1960s, when the Geographical Branch of the then Department of Mines and Technical Surveys sent a three-man survey team to the area to measure isostatic rebound and cross-valley features of the Isortoq River.
Conversely, in the 1970s parts of Baffin Island failed to have the usual ice-free period in the summer.
History
Baffin Island has been inhabited for over 3,000 years, first by the pre-Dorset, followed by the Dorset, and then the Thule people, ancestors of the Inuit who have lived on the island for the last thousand years.
formed three settlements near the southwestern tip of Greenland.
In late 985 or 986, Bjarni Herjólfsson, sailing from Iceland to Greenland, was blown off course and sighted land southwest of Greenland.
Bjarni appears to be the first European to see Baffin Island, and the first European to see North America beyond Greenland.
The Saga of Erik the Red, 1880 translation into English by J. Sephton from the original Icelandic 'Eiríks saga rauða':
QTEMPLATE |They sailed away from land; then to the Vestribygd and to Bjarneyjar (the Bear Islands).
Thence they sailed away from Bjarneyjar with northerly winds.
They were out at sea two half-days.
Then they came to land, and rowed along it in boats, and explored it, and found there flat stones, many and so great that two men might well lie on them stretched on their backs with heel to heel.
Polar-foxes were there in abundance.
This land they gave name to, and called it Helluland (stone-land).
What the source of this Old World contact may have been is unclear and controversial;
In 2018, Michele Hayeur Smith of Brown University, who specializes in the study of ancient textiles, wrote that she does not think the ancient Arctic people, the Dorset and Thule, needed to be taught how to spin yarn
"It's a pretty intuitive thing to do."
William W. Fitzhugh, Director of the Arctic Studies Center at the Smithsonian Institution, and a Senior Scientist at the National Museum of Natural History, wrote that there is insufficient published evidence to support Sutherland's claims, and that the Dorset were using spun cordage by the 6th century.
In 1992, Elizabeth Wayland Barber wrote that a piece of three-ply yarn that dates to the Paleolithic era, that ended about 10,000 BP, was found at the Lascaux caves in France.
This yarn consisted of three s-twist strands that were z-plied, much like the way a three-ply yarn is made now, the Baffin Island yarn was a simple two-ply yarn.
Administration
Baffin Island is part of the Qikiqtaaluk Region.
Communities by population
The hamlets of Cape Dorset and Qikiqtarjuaq do not lie on Baffin Island proper.
Cape Dorset is situated on Dorset Island, which is located a few kilometres from the south eastern tip of the Foxe Peninsula.
Similarly, Qikiqtarjuaq is situated on Broughton Island, which is located near the northern coast of the Cumberland Peninsula.
The Mary River Mine, an iron ore mine with an estimated 21-year life, at Mary River, it may include building a railway and a port to transport the ore.
This may create a temporary mining community there.
Wildlife
Baffin Island has both year-round and summer visitor wildlife.
On land, examples of year-round wildlife are barren-ground caribou, polar bear, Arctic fox, Arctic hare, lemming and Arctic wolf.
Barren-ground caribou herds migrate in a limited range from northern Baffin Island down to the southern part in winter, even to the Frobisher Bay peninsula, next to Resolution Island and migrate back north in the summer.
In 2012, a survey of caribou herds found that the local population was only about 5,000, a decrease of as much as 95% from the 1990s.
Arctic hares are found throughout Baffin Island.
Their fur is pure white in winter and moults to a scruffy dark grey in summer.
Arctic hares and lemmings are a primary food source for Arctic foxes and Arctic wolves.
Lemmings are also found throughout the island, and are a major food source for Arctic foxes, Arctic wolves and the snowy owl.
In the winter, lemmings dig complicated tunnel systems through the snow drifts to get to their food supply of dry grasses and lichens.
Predators
Polar bears can be found all along the coast of Baffin Island, but are most prevalent where the sea ice takes the form of pack ice, where their major food sources - ringed seals (jar seal) and bearded seals - live.
Polar bears mate approximately every year, and one to three cubs are born around March.
Female polar bears may travel inland to find a large snow bank where they dig a den in which to spend the winter and later give birth.
The polar bear population here is one of 19 genetically distinct demes of the circumpolar region.
Arctic foxes can usually be found where polar bears venture on the fast ice close to land in their search for seals.
Arctic foxes are scavengers, and often follow polar bears to get their leavings.
On Baffin Island, Arctic foxes are sometimes trapped by Inuit, but there is no longer a robust fur industry.
The Arctic wolf, and the Baffin Island wolf, a grey wolf subspecies, are also year-round residents of Baffin Island.
Unlike the grey wolf in southern climes, Arctic wolves often do not hunt in packs, although a male-female pair may hunt together.
Birds
Nesting birds are summer land visitors to Baffin Island.
Baffin Island is one of the major nesting destinations from the Eastern and Mid-West flyways for many species of migrating birds.
Waterfowl include Canada goose, snow goose and brant goose (brent goose).
Shore birds include the phalarope, various waders (commonly called sandpipers), murres including Brünnich's guillemot, and plovers.
Three gull species also nest on Baffin Island: glaucous gull, herring gull and ivory gull.
Long-range travellers include the Arctic tern, which migrates from Antarctica every spring.
The varieties of water birds that nest here include coots, loons, mallards, and many other duck species.
Marine mammals
In the water (and under the ice) the main year-round species is the ringed seal.
It lives offshore within of land.
In winter, it makes a number of breathing holes in the ice, up to thick.
It visits each one often, and keeps the hole open and free from ice.
In March, when a female is ready to whelp, she will enlarge one of the breathing holes that has snow over it, and create a small "igloo" where she whelps one or two pups.
Within three weeks the pups are in the water and swimming.
In summer, ringed seals keep to a narrow territory about along the shoreline.
If pack ice moves in, they may venture out and follow the pack ice, dragging themselves up on an ice floe to take advantage of the sun.
Summer visitors
Water species that visit Baffin Island in the summer are:
Harp seals (or saddle-backed seals), which migrate from major breeding grounds off the coast of Labrador and the southeast coast of Greenland to Baffin Island for the summer.
Migrating at speeds of , they all come up to breathe at the same time, then dive and swim up to before surfacing again.
They migrate in large pods consisting of a hundred or more seals, to within of the shoreline, which they then follow, feeding on crustaceans and fish.
Walruses, which do not migrate far off land in the winter.
They merely follow the "fast ice", or ice that is solidly attached to land, and stay ahead of it as the ice hardens further and further out to sea.
As winter progresses, they will always remain where there is open water free of ice.
When the ice melts, they move in to land and can be found basking on rocks close to shore.
One of the largest walrus herds can be found in the Foxe Basin on the western side of Baffin Island.
Beluga or white whales migrate along the coast of Baffin Island; some head north to the feeding grounds in the Davis Strait between Greenland and Baffin Island, or into the Hudson Strait or any of the bays and estuaries in between.
Usually travelling in pods of two or more, they can often be found very close to shore (, or less).
They come up to breathe every 30 seconds or so as they make their way along the coastline eating crustaceans.
Narwhals, which are known for their long, spiralling single tusk (males only), can also be found along the coast of Baffin Island in the summer.
Much like their beluga cousins they may be found in pairs or even in a large pod of ten or more males, females and newborns.
They also can be often found close to the shoreline, gracefully pointing their tusks skyward as they come up for air.
When they first arrive, the males arrive a few weeks ahead of the females and young.
The largest summer visitor to Baffin Island is the bowhead whale.
Found throughout the Arctic range, one group of bowhead whales is known to migrate to the Foxe Basin, a bay on the western side of Baffin Island.
It is still not known whether they visit for the lush sea bounty or to calve in the Foxe Basin.
Climate
Baffin Island lies in the path of a generally northerly airflow all year round, so, like much of northeastern Canada, it has an extremely cold climate.
This brings very long, cold winters and foggy, cloudy summers, which have helped to add to the remoteness of the island.
Spring thaw arrives much later than normal for a position straddling the Arctic Circle; around early June at Iqaluit in the south-east to early/mid-July on the north coast where glaciers run right down to sea level.
Snow, even heavy snow, can occur at any time of the year, although it is least likely in July and early August.
Average annual temperatures at Iqaluit are around , compared with Reykjavík, around , which is at a similar latitude.
Sea ice surrounds the island for most of the year, and only disappears completely from the north coast for short, unpredictable periods from mid- to late June until the end of September.
Most of Baffin Island lies above the Arctic Circle and all the communities from Pangnirtung northwards have polar night in winter and the midnight sun in summer.
The eastern community of Clyde River has twilight instead of night from April 26 until May 13, continuous sunlight for 2½ months from May 14 to July 28, then twilight instead of night from July 29 until August 16.
This gives the community just over 3½ months without true night.
In the winter the sun sets on November 22 and does not rise again until January 19 of the next year.
Pond Inlet has civil twilight lasts from December 16 to December 26.
However, there is twilight for at least 4 hours a day, unlike places such as Eureka.
Maps
Further reading
* Boas, Franz, and Ludger Müller-Wille.
Franz Boas
Among the Inuit of Baffin Island, 1883-1884 Journals and Letters.
Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 1998.
* Kuhnlein HV, R Soueida, and O Receveur. 1996.
"Dietary Nutrient Profiles of Canadian Baffin Island Inuit Differ by Food Source, Season, and Age".
Journal of the American Dietetic Association.
96, no. 2: 155-62.
*Lee, Alastair.
Baffin Island: the Ascent of Mount Asgard.
London: Frances Lincoln, 2011.
* Matthiasson, John S. Living on the Land Change Among the Inuit of Baffin Island.
Peterborough, Canada: Broadview Press, 1992.
* Maxwell, Moreau S. Archaeology of the Lake Harbour District, Baffin Island.
Mercury series.
Ottawa: Archaeological Survey of Canada, National Museum of Man, National Museums of Canada, 1973.
* Sabo, George.
Long Term Adaptations Among Arctic Hunter-Gatherers A Case Study from Southern Baffin Island.
The Evolution of North American Indians.
New York: Garland Pub, 1991.
* Sergy, Gary A.
The Baffin Island Oil Spill Project.
Edmonton, Alta: Environment Canada, 1986.
* Stirling, Ian, Wendy Calvert, and Dennis Andriashek.
Population Ecology Studies of the Polar Bear in the Area of Southeastern Baffin Island.
Ottawa: Canadian Wildlife Service, 1980.
* Utting, D. J. Report on ice-flow history, deglacial chronology, and surficial geology, Foxe Peninsula, southwest Baffin Island, Nunavut.
Ottawa: Geological Survey of Canada, 2007.
http:/ collection%5F2007 M44-2007-C2E.pdf.
