Shekel or sheqel (, plural or shekels; šiqlu or siqlu) is an ancient Near Eastern unit of weight.
It was a currency in ancient Israel under the Maccabees and in ancient Carthage.
The modern currency unit used in the State of Israel today is officially known as the Israeli new shekel (, sign: ₪), which replaced the Old Israeli shekel in 1985.
Name
The Hebrew word is based on the Semitic verbal root for "weighing" (Š-Q-L), cognate to the Akkadian or , a unit of weight equivalent to the Sumerian .
Use of the word was first attested in during the Akkadian Empire under the reign of Naram-Sin, and later in in the Code of Hammurabi.
The Š-Q-L root is found in the Hebrew words for "to weigh" (), "weight" () and "consideration" (), and is related to the T-Q-L root in Aramaic and the Θ-Q-L root in Arabic, such as the words (the weight) or (unit of weight).
The famous writing on the wall in the Biblical Book of Daniel includes a cryptic use of the word in Aramaic: "".
The word shekel came into the English language via the Hebrew Bible, where it is first used in the Book of Genesis.
History
The earliest shekels were a unit of weight, used as other units such as grams and troy ounces for trading before the advent of coins.
The shekel was common among western Semitic peoples.
Moabites, Edomites, and Phoenicians used the shekel, although proper coinage developed very late.
Carthaginian coinage was based on the shekel and may have preceded its home town of Tyre in issuing proper coins.
issued by the Persian Empire and the silver Athenian obol and drachma.
Early coins were money stamped with an official seal to certify their weight.
Silver ingots, some with markings were issued.
Later authorities decided who designed coins.
As with many ancient units, the shekel had a variety of values depending on era, government and region; weights between 7 14, and 17 grams are common.
When used to pay laborers, recorded wages in the ancient world range widely.
The Code of Hammurabi (circa 1800 BC) sets the value of unskilled labor at approximately ten shekels per year of work.
Later, records within the Persian Empire (539-333 BC) give ranges from a minimum of two shekels per month for unskilled labor, to as high as seven to ten shekels per month in some records.
A survival wage for an urban household during the Persian period would require at least 22 shekels of income per year.
and at for the offerings of the leaders of the tribes of Israel), suggesting that there were other common measures of shekel in use, or at least that the Temple authorities defined a standard for the shekel to be used for Temple purposes.
According to Jewish law, whenever a census of the Jewish people was to be conducted, every person that was counted was required to pay the half-Shekel for his atonement ().
The Aramaic , similar to the Hebrew , used in the writing on the wall during the feast of Belshazzar according to the Book of Daniel and defined as weighed, shares a common root with the word shekel and may even additionally attest to its original usage as a weight.
Second Temple period half-Shekel Temple tax
During the Second Temple period, it was customary among Jews to annually offer the half-Shekel into the Temple treasury, for the upkeep and maintenance of the Temple precincts, as also used in purchasing public animal-offerings.
This practice not only applied to Jews living in the Land of Israel, but also to Jews living outside the Land of Israel.
Archaeological excavations conducted at Horvat 'Ethry in Israel from 1999 to 2001 by Boaz Zissu and Amir Ganor of the Israeli Antiquities Authority (IAA) have yielded important finds, the most-prized of which being a half-Shekel coin minted in the 2nd century CE, upon which are embossed the words "Half-Shekel" in paleo-Hebrew (), and which same coin possesses a silver content of 6.87 grams.
According to the Jewish historian Josephus, the annual monetary tribute of the half-Shekel to the Temple at Jerusalem was equivalent to two Athenian drachmæ, each Athenian or Attic drachma weighing a little over 4.3 grams.
First and Second Jewish Revolt
The Jerusalem shekel was issued from AD 66 to 70 amid the First Jewish Revolt as a means of emphasizing the independence of Judaea from Roman rule.
The Bar Kochba shekel was issued from AD 132 to 135 amid the Bar Kokhba Revolt for similar reasons.
Carthage
The Carthaginian or Punic shekel was typically around 7.2 grams in silver and 7.5 grams in gold (suggesting an exchange rate of 12:1).
They were apparently first developed on Sicily during the mid-4th century BC.
They were particularly associated with the payment of Carthage's mercenary armies and were repeatedly debased over the course of each of the Punic Wars, although the Carthaginian Empire's expansion into Spain under the Barcids before the Second and recovery under Hannibal before the Third permitted improving the amount and quality of the currency.
Throughout, it was more common for Carthage's holdings in North Africa to employ bronze or no coinage except when paying mercenary armies and for most of the specie to circulate in Spain, Sardinia, and Sicily.
Present
Israel
The Israeli shekel (properly ) replaced the Israeli lira or pound in 1980.
Its currency sign was {{angle bracketsand was quickly replaced.
The new shekel replaced it in 1985.
Its currency sign is although it is often denominated as ש״ח or NIS.
It is subdivided into 100 agoras or agorot.
Both Israeli shekels are purely units of currency and not weight.
With the 2014 series of notes, the Bank of Israel abandoned the transcriptions and in favor of the standard English forms Shekel and Shekels.
Bibliography
skerfhbkipax47xp6364y5ql1ibfxda
