The cheetah (Acinonyx jubatus; ) is a large cat of the subfamily Felinae that occurs in North, Southern and East Africa, and a few localities in Iran.
It inhabits a variety of mostly arid habitats like dry forests, scrub forests, and savannahs.
The species is IUCN Red Listed as Vulnerable, as it suffered a substantial decline in its historic range in the 20th century due to habitat loss, poaching for the illegal pet trade, and conflict with humans.
By 2016, the global cheetah population has been estimated at approximately 7,100 individuals in the wild.
Several African countries have taken steps to improve cheetah conservation measures.
The cheetah was formally described by Johann Christian Daniel von Schreber in 1775 and is the only extant member of the genus Acinonyx.
Its yellowish tan or rufous to greyish white coat is uniformly covered with nearly 2,000 solid black spots.
Its body is slender with a small rounded head, black tear-like streaks on the face, deep chest, long thin legs and long spotted tail.
It reaches at the shoulder, and weighs .
The cheetah breeds throughout the year, and is an induced ovulator.
Gestation lasts nearly three months, resulting in a litter of typically three to five, in rare cases up to eight cubs.
They are weaned at the age of about six months.
After siblings become independent from their mother, they usually stay together for some time.
It is active mainly during the day, with hunting its major activity.
It is a carnivore and preys mainly upon antelopes.
It stalks its prey to within , charge towards it and kill it by tripping it during the chase and biting its throat to suffocate it to death.
Female cheetahs are solitary or live with their offspring in home ranges.
Adult males are sociable despite their territoriality, forming groups called coalitions.
African cheetahs may achieve successful hunts running at a speed of only while hunting due to their exceptional ability to accelerate, but are capable of accelerating up to on short distances of .
The cheetah is therefore the fastest land animal.
Because of its prowess at hunting, the cheetah was tamed as early as the 16th century BC in Egypt to kill game at hunts.
Cheetahs have been widely depicted in art, literature, advertising and animation.
Etymology
The vernacular name "cheetah" is derived from cītā (), which in turn comes from the Sanskrit word (चित्रय) meaning "variegated, adorned, painted”.
The generic name Acinonyx is derived from the combination of two Greek words: ἁκινητος (akinitos) meaning 'unmoved, motionless', and ὄνυξ (onyx) meaning 'nail, hoof'.
A rough translation of the word would be "immobile nails", a reference to the cheetah's limited ability to retract its claws.
The Latin word jubatus means 'having a mane or crest, crested'.
Taxonomy
Felis jubatus was the scientific name used by Johann Christian Daniel von Schreber in 1777 who based his description of the species on earlier descriptions by Comte de Buffon and Thomas Pennant.
The generic name Acinonyx was proposed by Joshua Brookes in 1828.
Subspecies
In the 19th and 20th centuries, several cheetah specimens were described and proposed as subspecies.
The following table is based on the classification of the species provided in Mammal Species of the World.
It also reflects the classification used by IUCN Red List assessors and the revision by the Cat Classification Task Force: These three species together form the Puma lineage, one of the eight lineages of Felidae.
The sister group of the Puma lineage is a clade of smaller Old World cats that includes the genera Felis, Otocolobus and Prionailurus.
They possibly diverged from this ancestor 8.25 million years ago.
A genome study suggests that cheetahs experienced two genetic bottlenecks in their history, the first about 100,000 years ago and the second about 12,000 years ago, greatly lowering their genetic variability.
These bottlenecks may have been associated with migrations across Asia and into Africa (with the current African population founded about 12,000 years ago), and/or with a depletion of prey species at the end of the Pleistocene.
Evolution
Cheetah fossils found in the lower beds of the Olduvai Gorge site in northern Tanzania date back to the Pleistocene.
The extinct species of Acinonyx are older than the cheetah, with the oldest known from the late Pliocene; these fossils are about three million years old.
These species include Acinonyx pardinensis (Pliocene epoch), notably larger than the modern cheetah, and A.intermedius (mid-Pleistocene period).
Extinct North American cats resembling the cheetah had historically been assigned to Felis, Puma or Acinonyx.
However, a phylogenetic analysis in 1990 placed these species under the genus Miracinonyx.
Miracinonyx exhibited a high degree of similarity with the cheetah.
However, in 1998, a DNA analysis showed that Miracinonyx inexpectatus, M.studeri, and M.trumani (early to late Pleistocene epoch), found in North America, are more closely related to the cougar than modern cheetahs.
Genetics
The diploid number of chromosomes in the cheetah is 38, the same as in most other felids.
as illustrated by skin grafts, electrophoretic evidence and reproductive surveys.
The consequences of such genetic uniformity might include a low sperm count, decreased sperm motility, deformed flagella, difficulty in captive breeding and susceptibility to disease.
In 1926 Major A.Cooper wrote about an animal he had shot near modern-day Harare.
Describing the animal, he noted its remarkable similarity to the cheetah, but the body of this individual was covered with fur as thick as that of a snow leopard and the spots merged to form stripes.
He suggested that it could be a cross between a leopard and a cheetah.
After further similar animals were discovered, it was established that they had non-retractable clawsa characteristic feature of the cheetah.
However, he changed his position on its species status in 1939.
English hunter-naturalist Abel Chapman considered it to be a colour morph of the spotted cheetah.
Since 1927 the king cheetah has been reported five more times in the wild; an individual was photographed in 1975.
In May 1981 two spotted sisters gave birth at the De Wildt Cheetah and Wildlife Centre (South Africa), and each litter contained one king cheetah.
Each sister had mated with a wild male from the Transvaal region (where king cheetahs had been recorded).
Further king cheetahs were later born at the Centre.
They have been known to exist in Zimbabwe, Botswana and northern Transvaal.
In 2012 the cause of this alternative coat pattern was found to be a mutation in the gene for transmembrane aminopeptidaseQ (Taqpep), the same gene responsible for the striped "mackerel" versus blotchy "classic" patterning seen in tabby cats.
Hence, genetically the king cheetah is simply a variety of the common cheetah and not a separate species.
This case is similar to that of the black panthers.
Its lightly built, slender form is in sharp contrast with the robust build of the big cats.
It is taller than the leopard, which stands nearly at the shoulder.
The weight range of the cheetah overlaps with that of the leopard, which weighs .
On the other hand, the cheetah is significantly shorter than the lion, whose average height is nearly .
Moreover, it is much lighter than the lion, among which females weigh and the much heavier males weigh .
The head is small and rounded compared to other big cats.
Saharan cheetah have narrow canine faces.
The whiskers, shorter and fewer in number than those of other felids, are fine and inconspicuous.
The pronounced tear streaks are unique to the cheetah.
These streaks originate from the corner of the eyes and run down the nose to the mouth.
The tear streaks role is obscurethey may be serving as a shield for the eyes against the sun's glare, a helpful feature as the cheetah hunts mainly during the day; another purpose could be to define facial expressions.
Every cheetah has a unique pattern of spots on its coat; hence, this serves as a distinct identity for each individual.
Black cheetah have been observed in Kenya and Zambia.
In 1877-1878, English zoologist Philip Sclater described two partially albino specimens from South Africa.
Juveniles are typically dark with long, loose, blue to grey hair.
in addition, the leopard lacks the tear streaks of the cheetah.
The cougar possesses neither the tear streaks nor the spotted coat pattern of the cheetah.
Anatomy
Being in the genus Acinonyx, the morphology of the cheetah differs notably from the big cats (genus Panthera).
A 2001 study of felid morphology stated that the truncation of the development of the middle phalanx bone in the cheetah at a relatively younger age than other felids could be a major reason for the peculiar morphology of the cheetah.
In the 2001 study, it was observed that the claws of cheetah have features intermediate between those of felids and the wolf.
In the Puma lineage, the cheetah's skull morphology is similar to that of the pumaboth have short, wide skullswhile that of the jaguarundi is different.
The cheetah has a total of 30 teeth; the dental formula is .
The deciduous dentition is .
The sharp, narrow cheek teeth help in tearing flesh, whereas the small and flat canine teeth bite the throat of the prey to suffocate it.
Males have slightly bigger heads with wider incisors and longer mandibles than females.
The paws of the cheetah are narrower than those of other felids.
Ecology and behaviour
Cheetahs are diurnal (active mainly during the day), diurnality allows better observation and monitoring of the animal.
These social groups typically keep away from one another.
However, if a cub is the only male in the litter, then two or three lone males may form a small group, or a lone male may join an existing group.
Males in coalitions establish territories that ensure maximum access to females.
Solitary males may or may not be territorial.
Some males alternate between solitude and coalitions, whichever ensures encounters with a greater number of females.
In the Serengeti, only 4% of the solitary males hold territories, while those who joined coalitions were far more successful.
The average period for which territories are held is four months for singletons, seven-and-a-half months for pairs, and 22 months for trios.
A wide variety of cheetah vocalisations have been identified by several terms, but most of these lack a detailed acoustic description, which makes it difficult to assess reliably which term denotes which sound.
The cheetah purrs when content, or greeting known individuals.
A characteristic of purring is that it is realised on both egressive and ingressive airstreams.
Other vocalisations identified include:
* Growling: Often accompanied by hissing and spitting, the cheetah growls to show its annoyance, or when faced with danger.
A study showed that growls consist of numerous short pulses with a combined duration of up to five seconds.
* Moaning or yowling: This is an escalated version of growling and is often combined with it.
It is typically displayed when the danger increases.
A study found that yowls could last as long as two seconds.
Hunting and competitors
The cheetah is a carnivore that prefers medium-sized prey with a body mass ranging from .
Preferred species in Africa include Thomson's gazelle, Grant's gazelle, springbok, impala and blesbok.
Larger prey, such as ostrich, warthog, wildebeest, zebra and buffalo are typically avoided.
A study showed that a major proportion of the diet of Asiatic cheetahs consists of livestock; local species such as chinkara, desert hare, goitered gazelle, ibex, rodents, and wild sheep are also hunted.
Generally, only groups of cheetahs will attempt to kill larger animals, Cheetahs hunt by vision rather than by scent.
Prey is located from observation points or while roaming.
Animals toward the edges of the herd are preferred.
The cheetah will stalk their prey to within ; it will try to approach it as closely as possible while concealing itself in cover, sometimes even up to within of the prey.
The cheetah will crouch and move slowly while stalking, occasionally becoming motionless.
Cheetahs kill their prey by tripping it during the chase; the cheetah can use its strong dewclaw to knock the prey off its balance.
To kill medium- to large-sized prey, the cheetah bites the prey's throat to suffocate it.
A bite on the back of the neck or the snout is enough to kill smaller prey.
Cheetahs move their heads from side to side so that the sharp carnassial teeth effectively tear the flesh, which can then be swallowed without chewing.
They typically begin with the hindquarters, and then progress toward the abdomen and the spine.
Rib bones are chewed on at the ends, and the limbs are not generally torn apart while eating.
In Africa, the cheetah surrenders its kill to sturdier carnivores such as lions, leopards, spotted and brown hyenas, and wild dogs.
In Central Asia, the cheetah competed with grey wolf, and to a lesser extent also with striped hyena, leopard and caracal.
Speed and acceleration
Adaptations
The cheetah's thin and light body makes it well-suited to short, explosive bursts of speed, rapid acceleration, and an ability to execute extreme changes in direction while moving at high speed.
Research has indicated that the cheetah's athleticism is critical to the cat's predatory success rate.
These adaptations account for much of the cheetah's ability to catch fast-moving prey.
The cheetah is the fastest land animal.
It was called the "felid version of the greyhound", as both have similar morphology and the ability to reach tremendous speeds in a shorter time than other mammals.
The large nasal passages ensure fast flow of sufficient air, and the enlarged heart and lungs allow the enrichment of blood with oxygen in a short time.
This allows cheetahs to rapidly regain their stamina after a chase.
While running, in addition to having good traction due to their semi-retractable claws, cheetahs use their tail as a rudder-like means of steering that enables them to make sharp turns, necessary to outflank antelopes that often change direction to escape during a chase.
During more than half of the time of the sprint, the animal has all four limbs in the air; this also contributes to the stride length.
The cheetah runs no more than at the speed of ; it very rarely runs at this high speed as most chases are within .
By 1973, cheetah sprinting distance was thought to be limited by the building up of excessive body heat.
A biologging study with six free-living cheetahs in Namibia revealed that their elevated body temperature did not compromise their chasing prey.
After successful hunts, they had a 0.6 to 0.8 °C higher body temperature than after unsuccessful chases.
Recorded values
In general, the speed of a hunting cheetah averages during a chase, However, this value of the maximum speed measured in 1957 is disputed.
Measurements using solar-powered GPS collars in 367 hunts show a maximum speed of while hunting.
The speeds attained by the cheetah may be only slightly greater than those achieved by the pronghorn and the springbok .
Yet the cheetah has a greater probability of succeeding in the chase due to its exceptional accelerationit can attain a speed of in just two seconds.
Cheetahs typically walk at .
A study of five wild cheetahs (three females, two males) during hunting reported a maximum speed of , with an average of .
Speed can be increased by almost in a single stride.
The average chase is and the maximum ranges from .
each oestrus lasting one to three days.
A female can give birth again after 17 to 20 months; however, on the loss of a whole litter mothers can mate again.
One male eventually wins dominance over the others.
Mating, observed mainly at night, begins with the male approaching the female, who lies down on the ground.
No courtship behaviour is observed; the male immediately secures hold of the female's nape and copulation takes place.
The pair then ignore each other and part ways.
However, they meet and copulate a few more times within the next few days.
Polyandrous, females can mate with several males.
The mean number of motile sperm in a single ejaculation is nearly 25.3million.
Gestation lasts nearly three months.
The number of cubs born can vary from one to eight, though the common number is three to five.
Birth takes place in a sheltered place such as thick vegetation.
Each cub weighs nearly at birth; the eyes, shut at birth, open in fourto 11 days.
Newborn cubs can crawl and spit; they start walking by the age of two weeks.
Their nape, shoulders and back are thickly covered with long bluish grey hair.
This downy underlying fur, called a "mantle", gives them a Mohawk-type appearance; this fur is shed as the cheetah grows older.
Cheetah cubs are highly vulnerable during the first few weeks of their life; mothers keep their cubs hidden in dense vegetation for the first month.
Cubs start following their mothers at six weeks.
The mother frequently shifts the cubs to new locations.
Weaning occurs at three to six months of age.
The mother brings kills to her cubs; the cubs might purr as the mother licks them clean after the meal.
Cubs as young as six months try to capture small prey like hares and juvenile gazelles.
However, they may have to wait until as long as 15 months of age to make a successful kill on their own.
The lifespan of wild cheetahs is 14 to 15 years for females; their reproductive cycle typically ends by 12 years of age.
Males generally live as long as 10 years.
Cheetah cubs face higher mortality than most other large mammals.
It has been suggested that the significant lack of genetic diversity in cheetahs is a cause of poor quality and production of sperm, and birth defects such as cramped teeth, kinked tails, and bent limbs.
Cheetahs do have low fertility rates, but they appear to have flourished for thousands of years with these low levels of genetic variance.
Cheetah expert Laurie Marker points out that the high level of genetic uniformity would mean that if an infectious disease surfaced in a population, all of them have (or lack) the same level of immunity.
In 1982, 60% of the cheetah population in the Wildlife Safari (Oregon, United States) died due to a peritonitis epidemic.
Distribution and habitat
The cheetah inhabits a variety of habitats.
In Africa, it has been observed in dry forests, scrub forests, and savannahs.
The range has not reduced as much in the southern part of the continent, where it occurs in an area of , 22% of its original range.
Significant populations thrive in south-western Angola, Botswana, Malawi, Although they do not prefer montane regions, cheetahs can occur at elevations as high as .
An open area with some cover, such as diffused bushes, is probably ideal for the cheetah because it needs to stalk and pursue its prey over a distance, exploiting its speed.
This also minimises the risk of encountering larger carnivores.
Complete lack of cover, however, can be a cause of prey loss and mortality.
Asia
In the past, the cheetah ranged across vast stretches in Asia, from the Arabian Peninsula in the west to the Indian subcontinent in the east, and as far north as the Caspian and Aral Seas.
Status and threats
The cheetah has been classified as Vulnerable by the IUCN; it is listed under AppendixI of the Convention on the Conservation of Migratory Species of Wild Animals (CMS) and AppendixI of CITES (Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species).
In 2014 the CITES Standing Committee recognised the cheetah as a "species of priority" in their strategies in northeastern Africa to counter wildlife trafficking.
, the IUCN gives the total number of surviving individuals as nearly 6,700.
Human interference disturbs hunting and feeding of cheetah.
Game hunters may also try to harm cheetahs as they deprive them of valuable game.
Roadkill is another threat, especially in areas where roads have been constructed near natural habitat or protected areas.
Cases of roadkill involving cheetahs have been reported from Kalmand, Iran, Touran National Park, and Bafq.
The threat posed by infectious diseases may be minor, given the low population densities and hence the reduced chance of infection.
Conservation measures
The IUCN has recommended co-operation between countries across the cheetah's range to minimise the conflict between cheetahs and human beings.
Additionally, the financial benefits accrued and the awareness generated can further aid the cause of the cheetah.
In a 2007 publication, Durant emphasised the role of land management and improvement in connectivity across the range in cheetah conservation, in the lack of which the populations might face severe fragmentation.
National action plans for cheetah conservation have been developed in Kenya (2007),
South Africa (2009),
Zimbabwe (2009)
South Sudan (2009),
Zambia (2009),
Ethiopia (2010),
Mozambique (2010),
Niger (2012),
Benin (2014),
and Chad (2015).
In Asia
In the 20th century, the populations of cheetah in India saw a drastic fall.
The last physical evidence of the cheetah in India was thought to be three individuals, all shot by the Maharajah of Surguja (a man also noted for holding a record for shooting 1,360 tigers), in 1947 in eastern Madhya Pradesh, but a female was sighted in Koriya district, present-day Chhattisgarh, in 1951.
During the early 2000s, scientists from the Centre for Cellular and Molecular Biology (CCMB), Hyderabad, proposed a plan to clone Asiatic cheetahs obtained from Iran.
India asked Iran to transport one live pair to India, or, if that was not possible, allow them to collect sperm and eggs of the cheetah pair in Iran itself.
However, Iran rejected both proposals.
In September 2009, the then Minister of Environment and Forests, Jairam Ramesh, assigned the Wildlife Trust of India and the Wildlife Institute of India with the task of examining the potential of cheetah reintroduction in the nation.
The report, submitted in 2010, showed that the Kuno Wildlife Sanctuary and Nauradehi Wildlife Sanctuary in Madhya Pradesh, and Shahgarh Landscape and Desert National Park in Rajasthan have a high potential to support reintroduced cheetah populations.
These areas were found to be spacious; of these four areas, the Kuno Wildlife Sanctuary had the largest available area, .
Moreover, these were rich in prey availability.
The Sanjay National Park, though comprising an area of and having supported cheetah populations before the independence of India in 1947, is no longer suitable for the cheetah due to low prey density and risks of poaching.
In 2001 the Iranian government collaborated with the Cheetah Conservation Fund, the IUCN, Panthera, United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), and the Wildlife Conservation Society on the Conservation of Asiatic Cheetah Project (CACP) to protect the natural habitat of the Asiatic cheetah and its prey, to ensure that development projects do not hamper its survival, and to highlight the plight of the Asiatic cheetah.
Iran declared 31August as National Cheetah Day in 2006.
Interaction with human beings
Taming
The cheetah shows little aggression toward human beings, and can be easily tamed, as it has been since antiquity.
A Sumerian seal dating back to nearly 3000BC, featuring a leashed animal resembling a cheetah, has fuelled speculation that the cheetah might have been first domesticated and used for hunting in Sumer (Mesopotamia).
However, Thomas T. Allsen argues that the depicted animal might not be a cheetah given its largely dog-like features; moreover, the background gives an impression of a montane area, which the cheetah does not typically inhabit.
In the third centuryAD, Roman author Claudius Aelianus wrote of tame panthers in India and "smaller lions" that would be used for tracking and hunting; the account cannot be very reliable as Roman, as well as Greek, literature is not generally clear in its references to different types of cats.
The Romans may have referred to the Cheetah as the Leopardos (λεοπάρδος) or Leontopardos (λεοντόπαρδος), believing it to be the result of hybridization between a Leopard and a Lion due to the manes they possess as cubs and the difficulty of breeding them in captivity.
A Roman hunting Cheetah is depicted in the 4th century mosaic from Lod, Israel.
They continued use into the Byzantine period of the Roman empire, with "hunting leopards" being mentioned in the Cynegetica of Koukoules.
The 11th-century Clephane Horn, possibly of Byzantine origin, is believed to depict domesticated hunting cheetahs.
Hunting cheetahs are known in pre-Islamic Arabic art from Yemen.
Hunting with cheetahs became more prevalent toward the seventh centuryAD.
In the Middle East, the cheetah would accompany the nobility to hunts in special seats behind saddles.
Cheetahs continued to be associated with royalty and elegance in western Asia until as late as the 19th century.
The first phase of taming would take several weeks, in which the cheetah would be kept tethered and made to get accustomed to human beings.
Next, the cheetah would be tempted with food and trained to mount horses.
Finally, its hunting instincts would be aroused by slaughtering animals before it.
The whole process could take as long as a year to complete.
In eastern Asia, the records are confusing as regional names for the leopard and the cheetah may be used interchangeably.
The earliest depiction of cheetahs from eastern Asia dates back to the Tang dynasty (7th to 10th centuriesAD); paintings depict tethered cheetahs as well as cheetahs mounted on horses.
Chinese emperors would use cheetahs, as well as caracals, as gifts.
In the 13th and the 14th centuries, the Yuan rulers bought numerous caracals, cheetahs, and tigers from the western parts of the empire and Muslim merchants, in return for gold, silver, cash, and silk.
According to the Ming Shilu, the subsequent Ming dynasty (14th to 17th centuries) continued this practice.
The cheetah gradually entered Eurasia toward the 14th century, though they never became as popular as they had in the Middle East.
In captivity
Mortality under captivity is generally high; reasons include stillbirths, birth defects, cannibalism, hypothermia, neglect of cubs by mothers, and infectious diseases.
A study comparing the health of captive and wild cheetahs noted that despite having similar genetic make-up, wild cheetahs are far healthier than their captive counterparts.
The study identified possible stress factors such as restricted habitat and interaction with human beings and other carnivores, and recommended private and spacious areas for captive cheetahs.
A study of diseases suffered by captive cheetahs in the period 1989-92 in several North American zoos showed that hepatic veno-occlusive disease, a disease of the liver, had affected 82% of the deceased cheetahs, caused nine deaths, and occurred in 51% of living females.
Chronic gastritis was detected in 91% of the population.
Glomerulosclerosis, a disease of the kidneys, emerged as another significant disease, affecting 84% of the cheetahs; another renal disease, nephrosclerosis, affected 39% of the cheetahs.
Feline infectious peritonitis caused two deaths.
Pneumonia was a major cause for juvenile deaths.
Another study concluded that excess of vitaminA in their diets could result in veno-occlusive disease in their livers.
Moreover, cheetahs are poor breeders in captivity, while wild individuals are far more successful.
In a 1992 study, females in Serengeti were found to have 95% success rate in breeding.
Studies have shown that in-vitro fertilisation in cheetah poses more difficulties than are faced in the case of other cats.
On November 26, 2017, a female cheetah named Bingwa gave birth to eight cubs in the Saint Louis Zoo setting a record for the most captive births for an African cheetah.
One strategy for helping captive cheetahs breed is to pair them with a companion dog.
Janet Rose-Hinostroza, an animal training supervisor at the San Diego Zoo Safari Park, told National Geographic in 2015 that "a dominant dog is very helpful because cheetahs are quite shy instinctively, and you can't breed that out of them.
When you pair them, the cheetah looks to the dog for cues and learns to model their behavior.
It's about getting them to read that calm, happy-go-lucky vibe from the dog."
In culture
The cheetah has been widely portrayed in a variety of artistic works.
In Bacchus and Ariadne, an oil painting by the 16th-century Italian painter Titian, the chariot of the Greek god Dionysus (Bacchus) is depicted as being drawn by two cheetahs.
The cheetahs in the painting were previously considered to be leopards.
In 1764 English painter George Stubbs commemorated the gifting of a cheetah to George III by the English Governor of Madras, Sir George Pigot in his painting Cheetah with Two Indian Attendants and a Stag.
The painting depicts a cheetah, hooded and collared by two Indian servants, along with a stag it was supposed to prey upon.
The 1896 painting The Caress, by the 19th-century Belgian symbolist painter Fernand Khnopff, is a representation of the myth of Oedipus and the Sphinx.
It portrays a creature with a woman's head and a cheetah's body (often misidentified as a leopard's).
The Bill Thomas Cheetah American sports/racing car, a Chevrolet-based coupe first designed and driven in 1963, was an attempt to challenge Carroll Shelby's Shelby Cobra in American sports car competition of the 1960s era.
Due to only two dozen or fewer chassis ever being built, with only a dozen of these being complete cars, the Cheetah was never homologated for competition beyond prototype status, with its production ending in 1966.
A variety of literature mentions the cheetah.
In 1969 author Joy Adamson, of Born Free fame, wrote The Spotted Sphinx, a biography of her pet cheetah Pippa.
Hussein, An Entertainment, a novel by Patrick O'Brian set in the British Raj period in India, illustrates the practice of royalty keeping and training cheetahs to hunt antelopes.
The book How It Was with Dooms tells the true story of a family raising an orphaned cheetah cub named Dooms in Kenya.
The 2005 film Duma was loosely based on this book.
The cheetah has often been featured in marketing and animation.
In 1986 Frito-Lay introduced the Chester Cheetah, an anthropomorphic cheetah, as the mascot for their Cheetos.
The first release of Apple Inc.'s Mac OS X, the Mac OS X 10.0, was code-named "Cheetah"; the subsequent versions released before 2013 were all named after cats.
The animated series ThunderCats had a character named "Cheetara", an anthropomorphic cheetah, voiced by Lynne Lipton.
Comic book superheroine Wonder Woman's chief adversary is Dr.Barbara Ann Minerva, alias The Cheetah.
Further reading
* Great Cats, Majestic Creatures of the Wild, ed.
John Seidensticker, illus.
Frank Knight, (Rodale Press, 1991),
* Cheetah, Katherine (or Kathrine) and Karl Ammann, Arco Pub, (1985), .
