Islam (; ) is an Abrahamic, monotheistic religion teaching that there is only one God (Allah), and that Muhammad is a messenger of God.
It is the world's second-largest religion with over 1.9 billion followers or 24.4% of the world's population, commonly known as Muslims.
Muslims make up a majority of the population in 50 countries.
Islam teaches that God is merciful, all-powerful, and unique, and has guided mankind through prophets, revealed scriptures and natural signs.
The primary scriptures of Islam are the Quran, believed to be the 570 - 8 June 632 CE).
Muslims believe that Islam is the complete and universal version of a primordial faith that was revealed many times before through prophets including Adam, Abraham, Moses and Jesus, were introduced.
An important pioneer in this, Ibn al-Haytham is regarded as the father of the modern scientific method and often referred to as the "world's first true scientist".
The government paid scientists the equivalent salary of professional athletes today.
While the Abbasid Caliphate suffered a decline since the reign of Al-Wathiq (842-847) and Al-Mu'tadid (892-902), the Mongol Empire put an end to the Abbassid dynasty in 1258.
During its decline, the Abbasid Caliphate disintegrated into minor states and dynasties, such as the Tulunid and the Ghaznavid dynasty.
The Ghaznavid dynasty was an Islamic dynasty established by Turkic slave-soldiers from another Islamic empire, the Samanid Empire.
Two Turkish tribes, the Karahanids and the Seljuks, converted to Islam during the 10th century, who are later subdued by the Ottomans, who share the same origin and language.
It is important to note, that the following Islamic reign by the Ottomans was strongly influenced by a symbiosis between Ottoman rulers and Sufism since the beginning.
According to Ottoman historiography, the legitimation of a ruler is attributed to Sheikh Edebali.
Accordingly, he interpretated a dream of Osman Gazi as God's legitimation of his reign.
The Mevlevi Order and the Bektashi Order had close relation to the sultans.
The Seljuks played an important role for the revival of Sunnism, then Shia increased its influences.
The Seljuk militar leader Alp Arslan financially supported sciences and literature and established the Nezamiyeh university in Baghdad.
During this time, the Delhi Sultanate took over northern parts of the Indian subcontinent.
Religious missions converted Volga Bulgaria to Islam.
Many Muslims also went to China to trade, virtually dominating the import and export industry of the Song dynasty.
Pre-Modern era (1258-18th century)
Islam spread with Muslim trade networks, Sufi orders activity and conquests of the Gunpowder Empires that extended into Sub-Saharan Africa, Central Asia and the Malay archipelago.
Under the Ottoman Empire, Islam spread to Southeast Europe.
Throughout this expanse, Islam blended with local cultures everywhere, as illustrated when the prophet Mohammed showed up in Hindu epics and folklore.
Conversion to Islam, however, was not a sudden abandonment of old religious practices; rather, it was typically a matter of "assimilating Islamic rituals, cosmologies, and literatures into... local religious systems."
The Muslims in China who were descended from earlier immigration began to assimilate by adopting Chinese names and culture while Nanjing became an important center of Islamic study.
The Turks incorporated elements of Turkish Shamanism into their new religion and became part of a new Islamic interpretation, One major change was the status of woman.
Unlike Arabic traditions, the Turkic traditions hold woman in higher regard in society.
As a result, many (formerly) Shaman traditions were considered as genuine Islamic by average Muslims.
The majority and oldest group among Shia at that time, the Zaydis, named after the great grandson of Ali, the scholar Zayd ibn Ali, used the Hanafi jurisprudence, as did most Sunnis.
The Shia Safavid dynasty rose to power in 1501 and later conquered all of Iran.
The ensuing mandatory conversion of Iran to Twelver Shia Islam for the largely Sunni population also ensured the final dominance of the Twelver sect within Shiism over the Zaidi and Ismaili sects.
Nader Shah, who overthrew the Safavids, attempted to improve relations with Sunnis by propagating the integration of Shiism by calling it the Jaafari Madh'hab.
After the decline of the Delhi Sultanate, Deccan Sultanates, and the wealthy Bengal Sultanate, the Mughal Empire was founded by Babur, a direct descendant of Tamerlane and Gengis Khan.
The reign of Shah Jahan saw the height of Indo-Islamic architecture, with notable monuments such as Taj Mahal.
while the reign of his son Aurangzeb saw the compilation of the Fatwa Alamgiri and witnessed the peak of the Islamic rule in India and its economy surpassed Qing China to become the world's largest economy, worth 25% of world GDP, the Bengal Subah signalling the proto-industrialization and showing signs of the Industrial revolution.
After Mughal India's collapse, Tipu Sultan's Kingdom of Mysore based in South India replaced Bengal as South Asia's foremost economic territory.
Ibn Taymiyya (1263-1328) worried about the integrity of Islam and tried to establish a theological doctrine to purify Islam from its alleged alterings.
Unlike his contemporary scholarship, who relied on traditions and historical narratives from early Islam, Ibn Taymiyya's methodology was a mixture of selective use of hadith and a literal understanding of the Quran.
He rejected most philosophical approaches of Islam and proposed a clear, simple and dogmatic theology instead.
Feeling threatened by the Crusaders as well as by the Mongols, Ibn Taymiyya stated it would be obligated to Muslims to join a physical jihad against unbelievers.
This not only including the invaders, but also the heretics among the Muslims, including Shias, Asharites and "philosophers", who were blamed by Ibn Taimiya for the deterioration of Islam.
Nevertheless, his writings only played a marginal role during his lifetime.
He was repeatedly accused of blasphemy by anthropomorphizing God and his disciple Ibn Kathir distanced himself from his mentor and negated the anthropomorphizations, but simultaneously adhered to anti-rationalistic and hadith oriented methodology of his former mentor.
This probably influenced his exegesis on his Tafsir, which discounted much of the exegetical tradition since then.
However, the writings of Ibn Taimiyya became important sources for Wahhabism and 21th century Salafi theology
Modern era (18th - 20th centuries)
The Muslim world was generally in political decline starting the 1800s, especially relative to the non-Muslim European powers.
This decline was evident culturally; while Taqi al-Din founded an observatory in Istanbul and the Jai Singh Observatory was built in the 18th century, there was not a single Muslim-majority country with a major observatory by the twentieth century.
The Reconquista, launched against Muslim principalities in Iberia, succeeded in 1492.
By the 19th century the British Empire had formally ended the Mughal dynasty in India.
In the 19th century, the Deobandi and Barelwi movements were initiated.
During the 18th century Muhammad ibn Abd al-Wahhab founded a military movement opposing the Ottoman Sultanate as an illegitimate rule, advising his fellows to return to the principles of Islam based on the theology of Ahmad ibn Hanbal.
He was deeply influenced by the works of Ibn Taymiyya and Ibn al-Qayyim and condemned many traditional Islamic practises, such as visiting the grave of Muhammad or Saints, as sin.
Many Arab nationalists, such as Rashid Rida, regarded the Khalifat as an Arabic right taken away by the Turks.
Therefore, they rebelled against the Ottoman Sultanate, until the Ottoman Empire disintegrated after World War I and the Caliphate was abolished in 1924.
Concurrently Ibn Saud conquered Mekka, the "heartland of Islam", to impose Wahhabism as part of Islamic culture.
At the end of the 19th century, Muslim luminaries such as Muhammad Abduh, Rashid Rida and Jamal al-Din al-Afghani sought to reconcile Islam with social and intellectual ideas of the Age of Enlightenment by purging Islam from alleged alterations and adhering to the basic tenets held during the Rashidun era.
Due to their adherence to the Salafs they called themselves Salafiyya.
It grew from the writings of muhaddith and jurist Imam Ahmed Raza Khan Qadri, Allama Fazle Haq Khairabadi,
Shah Ahmad Noorani and Mohammad Abdul Ghafoor Hazarvi in the backdrop of an intellectual and moral decline of Muslims in British India.
The movement was a mass movement, defending popular Sufism and reforming its practices, grew in response to the radical Deobandi movement in South Asia and the Wahhabi movement elsewhere.
The movement opposed Ahmadiyya Movement and is famous for the celebration of Mawlid.
Today the movement is spread across the globe with followers in Pakistan, India, Bangladesh, Turkey, Afghanistan, Iraq, Sri Lanka, South Africa, United States, and UK among other countries.
The movement now has over 200 million followers.
Postmodern times (20th century-present)
Contact with industrialized nations brought Muslim populations to new areas through economic migration.
Many Muslims migrated as indentured servants, from mostly India and Indonesia, to the Caribbean, forming the largest Muslim populations by percentage in the Americas.
The resulting urbanization and increase in trade in sub-Saharan Africa brought Muslims to settle in new areas and spread their faith, likely doubling its Muslim population between 1869 and 1914.
Muslim immigrants began arriving, many as guest workers and largely from former colonies, in several Western European nations since the 1960s.
There are more and more new Muslim intellectuals who increasingly separate perennial Islamic beliefs from archaic cultural traditions.
Liberal Islam is a movement that attempts to reconcile religious tradition with modern norms of secular governance and human rights.
Its supporters say that there are multiple ways to read Islam's sacred texts, and they stress the need to leave room for "independent thought on religious matters".
Women's issues receive significant weight in the modern discourse on Islam.
Secular powers such as the Chinese Red Guards closed many mosques and destroyed Qurans, and Communist Albania became the first country to ban the practice of every religion.
About half a million Muslims were killed in Cambodia by communists who, it is argued, viewed them as their primary enemy and wished to exterminate them since they stood out and worshipped their own god.
In Turkey, the military carried out coups to oust Islamist governments, and headscarves were banned in official buildings, as also happened in Tunisia.
Jamal-al-Din al-Afghani, along with his acolyte Muhammad Abduh, have been credited as forerunners of the Islamic revival.
Abul A'la Maududi helped influence modern political Islam.
Islamist groups such as the Muslim Brotherhood advocate Islam as a comprehensive political solution, often in spite of being banned.
In Iran, revolution replaced a secular regime with an Islamic state.
In Turkey, the Islamist AK Party has democratically been in power for about a decade, while Islamist parties did well in elections following the Arab Spring.
The Organisation of Islamic Cooperation (OIC), consisting of Muslim-majority countries, was established in 1969 after the burning of the Al-Aqsa Mosque in Jerusalem.
Religiosity appears to be deepening worldwide.
In many places, the prevalence of the hijab is growing increasingly common and the percentage of Muslims favoring Sharia has increased.
With religious guidance increasingly available electronically, Muslims are able to access views that are strict enough for them rather than rely on state clerics who are often seen as stooges.
It is estimated that, by 2050, the number of Muslims will nearly equal the number of Christians around the world, "driven primarily by differences in fertility rates and the size of youth populations among the world's major religions, as well as by people switching faiths."
Denominations
Sunni
The largest denomination in Islam is Sunni Islam, which makes up 75-90% of all Muslims and is arguably the world's largest religious denomination.
Sunni Muslims also go by the name Ahl as-Sunnah which means "people of the tradition of Muhammad".
Sunnis believe that the first four caliphs were the rightful successors to Muhammad; since God did not specify any particular leaders to succeed him and those leaders were elected.
Further authorities regarding Sunnis believe that anyone who is righteous and just could be a caliph as long they act according to the teachings of Islam, the example of Muhammad.
Alternatively, Sunnis commonly accept the companions of Muhammad as reliable for interpretating Islamic affairs.
The Sunnis follow the Quran and the Hadith, which are recorded in sunni traditions known as Al-Kutub Al-Sittah (six major books).
For legal matters derived from the Quran or the Hadith, many follow four sunni madh'habs (schools of thought): Hanafi, Hanbali, Maliki and Shafi'i.
All four accept the validity of the others and a Muslim may choose any one that he or she finds agreeable.
Sunni schools of theology encompass Ashʿarirism founded by Al-Ashʿarī (c. 874-936), Maturidi by Abu Mansur al-Maturidi (853-944 CE) and Traditionalist theology under the leadership of Ahmad ibn Hanbal (780-855 CE).
Traditionalist theology is characterized by its adherence to a literal understanding of the Quran and the Sunnah, the belief in the Quran to be uncreated and eternal, and opposes reason (kalam) in religious and ethical matters.
On the other hand, Maturidism asserts, scripture is not needed for basic ethics and that good and evil can be understood by reason alone.
Maturidi's doctrine, based on Hanafi-law, asserted man's capacity and will alongside the supremacy of God in man's acts, providing a doctrinal framework for more flexibility, adaptability and syncretism.
Maturidism especially flourished in Central-Asia.
Nevertheless, people would rely on revelation, because reason alone could not grasp the whole truth.
Asharism holds, ethics can just derive from divine revelation, but not from human reason.
However, Asharism accepts reason in regard of exegetical matters and combined Muʿtazila approaches with traditionalistic ideas.
In the 18th century, Muhammad ibn Abd al-Wahhab led a Salafi movement, referred by outsiders as Wahhabism, in modern-day Saudi Arabia.
Originally shaped by Hanbalism, many modern followers departed from any of the established four schools of law Hanafi, Shafi, Maliki, and Hanbali.
Similarly, Ahl al-Hadith is a movement that deemphasized sources of jurisprudence outside the quran and hadith, such as informed opinion (ra'y).The Deobandi movement is a reformist movement originating in South Asia, influenced by the Wahhabi movement.
Nurcu is a Sunni movement based on the writings of Said Nursi (1877 - 1960) founded at the beginning of the twentieth century.
His philosophy is based on Hanafi law and further incorporates elements of Sufism.
Through faith by inquiry instead of faith by imitation, Muslims would reject philosophies such as positivism, materialism and atheism emerging from the Western world of his time.
His works on the Quran Risale-i Nur was translated into almost all languages of Central Asia.
From Nurcu other movements such as the Gülen movement derived.
Shia
The Shia constitute 10-20% of Islam and are its second-largest branch.
While the Sunnis believe that a Caliph should be elected by the community, Shia's believe that Muhammad appointed his son-in-law, Ali ibn Abi Talib, as his successor and only certain descendants of Ali could be Imams.
As a result, they believe that Ali ibn Abi Talib was the first Imam (leader), rejecting the legitimacy of the previous Muslim caliphs Abu Bakr, Uthman ibn al-Affan and Umar ibn al-Khattab.
Other points of contention include certain practices viewed as innovating the religion, such as the mourning practice of tatbir, and the cursing of figures revered by Sunnis.
However, Jafar al-Sadiq himself disapproved of people who disapproved of his great grand father Abu Bakr and Zayd ibn Ali revered Abu Bakr and Umar.
More recently, Grand Ayatollah Ali Khamenei and Grand Ayatollah Ali al-Sistani condemned the practice.
Shia Islam has several branches, the most prominent being the Twelvers (the largest branch), Zaidis and Ismailis.
Different branches accept different descendants of Ali as Imams.
After the death of Imam Jafar al-Sadiq who is considered the sixth Imam by the Twelvers and the Ismaili's, the Ismailis recognized his son Isma'il ibn Jafar as his successor whereas the Twelver Shia's (Ithna Asheri) followed his other son Musa al-Kadhim as the seventh Imam.
The Zaydis consider Zayd ibn Ali, the uncle of Imam Jafar al-Sadiq, as their fifth Imam, and follow a different line of succession after him.
Other smaller groups include the Bohra as well as the Alawites and Alevi.
Some Shia branches label other Shia branches that do not agree with their doctrine as Ghulat.
Other denominations
* Ahmadiyya is an Islamic reform movement (with Sunni roots) founded by Mirza Ghulam Ahmad that began in India in 1889 and is practiced by 10 to 20 million Muslims around the world.
Ahmad claimed to have fulfilled the prophecies concerning the arrival of the 'Imam Mahdi' and the 'Promised Messiah'.
* Bektashi Alevism is a syncretic and heterodox local Islamic tradition, whose adherents follow the mystical (bāṭenī) teachings of Ali and Haji Bektash Veli.
Alevism incorporates Turkish beliefs present during the 14th century, such as Shamanism and Animism, mixed with Shias and Sufi beliefs, adopted by some Turkish tribes.
The Ibadi is a sect that dates back to the early days of Islam and is a branch of Kharijite and is practiced by 1.45 million Muslims around the world.
Unlike most Kharijite groups, Ibadism does not regard sinful Muslims as unbelievers.
* Mahdavia is an Islamic sect that believes in a 15th-century Mahdi, Muhammad Jaunpuri
The Quranists are Muslims who generally reject the Hadith.
Non-denominational Muslims
Non-denominational Muslims is an umbrella term that has been used for and by Muslims who do not belong to or do not self-identify with a specific Islamic denomination.
Prominent figures who refused to identify with a particular Islamic denomination have included Jamal ad-Din al-Afghani, Muhammad Iqbal and Muhammad Ali Jinnah.
Recent surveys report that large proportions of Muslims in some parts of the world self-identify as "just Muslim", although there is little published analysis available regarding the motivations underlying this response.
The Pew Research Center reports that respondents self-identifying as "just Muslim" make up a majority of Muslims in seven countries (and a plurality in three others), with the highest proportion in Kazakhstan at 74%.
At least one in five Muslims in at least 22 countries self-identify in this way.
Sikhism, founded by Guru Nanak in late-fifteenth-century Punjab, incorporates aspects of both Islam and Hinduism.
African American Muslim movements include the Nation of Islam, Five-Percent Nation and Moorish scientists.
Demographics
A comprehensive 2019 demographic study of 232 countries and territories reported that 24.4% of the global population, or 1.9 billion people, are Muslims.
Of those, it is estimated that over 75-90% are Sunni and 10-20% are Shia with a small minority belonging to other sects.
Approximately 57 countries are Muslim-majority, and Arabs account for around 20% of all Muslims worldwide.
The number of Muslims worldwide increased from 200 million in 1900 to 551 million in 1970, and tripled to 1.9 billion by 2019.
Approximately 62% of the world's Muslims live in Asia, with over 683 million adherents in Indonesia, Pakistan, India, and Bangladesh.
In the Middle East, non-Arab countries such as Turkey and Iran are the largest Muslim-majority countries; in Africa, Egypt and Nigeria have the most populous Muslim communities.
Most estimates indicate that the China has approximately 20 to 30 million Muslims (1.5% to 2% of the population).
However, data provided by the San Diego State University's International Population Center to U.S. News & World Report suggests that China has 65.3 million Muslims.
Islam is the second largest religion after Christianity in many European countries, and is slowly catching up to that status in the Americas, with between 2,454,000, according to Pew Forum, and approximately 7 million Muslims, according to the Council on American-Islamic Relations (CAIR), in the United States.
According to the Pew Research Center, Islam is set to equal Christianity worldwide in number of adherents by the year 2050.
Islam is set to grow faster than any other major world religion, reaching a total number of 2.76 billion (an increase of 73%).
Causes of this trend involve high fertility rates as a factor, with Muslims having a rate of 3.1 compared to the world average of 2.5, and the minimum replacement level for a population at 2.1.
Another factor is also due to fact that Islam has the highest number of adherents under the age of 15 (34% of the total religion) of any major religion, compared with Christianity's 27%.
60% of Muslims are between the ages of 16 and 59, while only 7% are aged 60+ (the smallest percentage of any major religion).
Countries such as Nigeria and North Macedonia are expected to have Muslim majorities by 2050.
In India, the Muslim population will be larger than any other country.
Europe's non-Muslim population is set to decline as opposed to their Muslim population which is set to grow to 10% of Europe's total.
Culture
The term "Islamic culture" could be used to mean aspects of culture that pertain to the religion, such as festivals and dress code.
It is also controversially used to denote the cultural aspects of traditionally Muslim people.
Finally, "Islamic civilization" may also refer to the aspects of the synthesized culture of the early Caliphates, including that of non-Muslims, sometimes referred to as "".
Architecture
Perhaps the most important expression of Islamic architecture is that of the mosque.
Varying cultures have an effect on mosque architecture.
For example, North African and Spanish Islamic architecture such as the Great Mosque of Kairouan contain marble and porphyry columns from Roman and Byzantine buildings, while mosques in Indonesia often have multi-tiered roofs from local Javanese styles.
File:Djenne great mud mosque.jpg|Great Mosque of Djenné, in the west African country of Mali
File:1 great mosque xian 2011.JPG|Great
Mosque of Xi'an in Xi'an, China
File:Closeup of Mir-i-Arab Madrasa.jpg|Dome in Po-i-Kalyan, Bukhara, Uzbekistan
File:Kuppel Muhammad-Ali-Moschee.jpg|Interior of domes in the Alabaster Mosque in Cairo, Egypt
Art
Islamic art encompasses the visual arts produced from the 7th century onwards by people (not necessarily Muslim) who lived within the territory that was inhabited by Muslim populations.
It includes fields as varied as architecture, calligraphy, painting, and ceramics, among others.
While not condemned in the Quran, making images of human beings and animals is frowned on in many Islamic cultures and connected with laws against idolatry common to all Abrahamic religions, as 'Abdullaah ibn Mas'ood reported that Muhammad said, "Those who will be most severely punished by Allah on the Day of Resurrection will be the image-makers" (reported by al-Bukhaari, see al-Fath, 10/382).
However this rule has been interpreted in different ways by different scholars and in different historical periods, and there are examples of paintings of both animals and humans in Mughal, Persian and Turkish art.
The existence of this aversion to creating images of animate beings has been used to explain the prevalence of calligraphy, tessellation and pattern as key aspects of Islamic artistic culture.
File:Planets by ibrahimabutouq.jpg|Islamic calligraphy representing various planets
File:Roof hafez tomb.jpg|Geometric arabesque tiling on the underside of the dome of Hafiz Shirazi's tomb in Shiraz, Iran
File:Islamic arts museum, KL, Malaysia.jpg|The Islamic Arts Museum Malaysia, the largest museum of Islamic arts in South East Asia
Music
Poetry
Calendar
The formal beginning of the Muslim era was chosen, reportedly by Caliph Umar, to be the Hijra in 622 CE, which was an important turning point in Muhammad's fortunes.
It is a lunar calendar with days lasting from sunset to sunset.
Islamic holy days fall on fixed dates of the lunar calendar, which means that they occur in different seasons in different years in the Gregorian calendar.
The most important Islamic festivals are Eid al-Fitr () on the 1st of Shawwal, marking the end of the fasting month Ramadan, and Eid al-Adha () on the 10th of Dhu al-Hijjah, coinciding with the end of the Hajj pilgrimage.
Criticism
Criticism of Islam has existed since Islam's formative stages.
Early criticism came from Christian authors, many of whom viewed Islam as a Christian heresy or a form of idolatry and often explained it in apocalyptic terms.
Later there appeared criticism from the Muslim world itself, and also from Jewish writers and from ecclesiastical Christians.
Issues relating to the authenticity and morality of the Quran, the Islamic holy book, are also discussed by critics.
Islamic salvation optimism and its carnality was criticized by Christian writers.
Islam's sensual descriptions of paradise led many Christians to conclude that Islam was not a spiritual religion.
Although sensual pleasure was also present in early Christianity, as seen in the writings of Irenaeus, the doctrines of the former Manichaean Augustine of Hippo led to broad repudiation of bodily pleasure in both life and the afterlife.
Ali ibn Sahl Rabban al-Tabari defended the Quranic description of paradise by asserting that the Bible also implies such ideas, such as drinking wine in Gospel of Matthew.
Defamatory images of Muhammad, derived from early 7th century depictions of Byzantine Church, appear in the 14th-century epic poem Divine Comedy by Dante Alighieri.
Here, Muhammad appears in the eighth circle of hell, along with Ali.
Dante does not blame Islam as a whole, but accuses Muhammad of schism, by establishing another religion after Christianity.
Other criticisms focus on the question of human rights in modern Muslim-majority countries, and the treatment of women in Islamic law and practice.
In wake of the recent multiculturalism trend, Islam's influence on the ability of Muslim immigrants in the West to assimilate has been criticized.
Both in his public and personal life, others objected the morality of Muhammad, therefore also the sunnah as a role model.
References
Notes
Citations
Books and journals
* Siljander, Mark D. and John David Mann.
A Deadly Misunderstanding: a Congressman's Quest to Bridge the Muslim-Christian Divide.
First ed.
New York: Harper One, 2008.
Encyclopedias
Further reading
* Abdul-Haqq, Abdiyah Akbar (1980).
Sharing Your Faith with a Muslim.
Minneapolis: Bethany House Publishers.
N.B. Presents the genuine doctrines and concepts of Islam and of the Holy Qur'an, and this religion's affinities with Christianity and its Sacred Scriptures, in order to "dialogue" on the basis of what both faiths really teach.
* Cragg, Kenneth (1975).
The House of Islam, in The Religious Life of Man Series.
Second ed.
Belmont, CA: Wadsworth Publishing Co., 1975.
xiii, 145 p. .
* Hourani, Albert (1991).
Islam in European Thought.
First pbk.
ed.
Cambridge, Eng.:
Cambridge University Press, 1992, cop.
xi, 199 p. ; alternative ISBN on back cover, 0-521-42120-0.
* A. Khanbaghi (2006).
The Fire, the Star and the Cross: Minority Religions in Medieval and Early Modern Iran.
I. B. Tauris.
* Khavari, Farid A. (1990).
Oil and Islam: the Ticking Bomb.
First ed.
Malibu, Calif.: Roundtable Publications. viii, 277 p., ill. with maps and charts. .
