Sheikh Mujibur Rahman (; 17 March 1920 - 15 August 1975), shortened as Sheikh Mujib or just Mujib, was a Bangladeshi politician and statesman.
He is often called the father of Bengali nation.
He served as the first President of Bangladesh and later as the Prime Minister of Bangladesh from 17 April 1971 until his assassination on 15 August 1975.
He is considered to be the driving force behind the independence of Bangladesh.
He is popularly dubbed with the title of "Bangabandhu" ( "Friend of Bengal") by the people of Bangladesh.
He became a leading figure in and eventually the leader of the Awami League, founded in 1949 as an East Pakistan-based political party in Pakistan.
Mujib is credited as an important figure in efforts to gain political autonomy for East Pakistan and later as the central figure behind the Bangladesh Liberation Movement and the Bangladesh Liberation War in 1971.
Thus, he is regarded "Jatir Janak" or "Jatir Pita" ( or , both meaning "Father of the Nation") of Bangladesh.
His daughter Sheikh Hasina is the current leader of the Awami League and also the Prime Minister of Bangladesh.
An advocate of democracy and socialism, Mujib rose to the ranks of the Awami League and East Pakistani politics as a charismatic and forceful orator.
He became popular for his opposition to the ethnic and institutional discrimination of Bengalis in Pakistan, who comprised the majority of the state's population.
At the heightening of sectional tensions, he outlined a 6-point autonomy plan and was jailed by the regime of Field Marshal Ayub Khan for treason.
Mujib led the Awami League to win the first democratic election of Pakistan in 1970.
Despite gaining a majority, the League was not invited by the ruling military junta to form a government.
As civil disobedience erupted across East Pakistan, Mujib indirectly announced independence of Bangladesh during a landmark speech on 7 March 1971.
On 26 March 1971, the Pakistan Army responded to the mass protests with Operation Searchlight, in which Prime Minister-elect Mujib was arrested and flown to solitary confinement in West Pakistan, while Bengali civilians, students, intellectuals, politicians and military defectors were murdered as part of the 1971 Bangladesh genocide.
During Mujib's absence, many Bengalis joined the Mukti Bahini and defeated the Pakistan Armed Forces during the Bangladesh Liberation War.
After Bangladesh's independence, Mujib was released from Pakistani custody due to international pressure and returned to Dhaka in January 1972 after a short visit to Britain and India.
Sheikh Mujib became the Prime Minister of Bangladesh under a parliamentary system adopted by the new country.
He charged the provisional parliament to write a new constitution proclaiming the four fundamental principles of "nationalism, secularism, democracy, and socialism," which reflect his political views collectively known as Mujibism.
The Awami League won a huge mandate in the country's first general election in 1973.
However, Mujib faced challenges of rampant unemployment, poverty and corruption, as well as the Bangladesh famine of 1974.
The government was criticized for denying constitutional recognition to indigenous minorities and human rights violations by its security forces, notably the National Defence Force para militia.
Amid rising political agitation, Mujib initiated one party socialist rule in January 1975.
Six months later, he and most of his family were assassinated by renegade army officers during a coup.
A martial law government was subsequently established.
In a 2004 BBC poll, Mujib was voted the Greatest Bengali of all time.
Early life and education
Mujib was born in Tungipara, a village in Gopalganj District in the province of Bengal in British India, to Sheikh Lutfur Rahman, a serestadar (court clerk) of Gopalganj civil court.
He was born into a Muslim, native Bengali family as the third child in a family of four daughters and two sons.
Mujib withdrew from school in 1934 to undergo eye surgery, and returned to school only after four years, owing to the severity of the surgery and slow recovery.
Later, he passed his Matriculation from Gopalganj Missionary School in 1942, Intermediate of Arts from Islamia College (now Maulana Azad College) in 1944 and BA from the same college in 1947.
Political activism in British India
Mujib became politically active when he joined the All India Muslim Students Federation in 1940, when he was a student of Islamia College.
He joined the Bengal Muslim League in 1943.
During this period, Mujib worked actively for the League's cause of a separate Muslim state of Pakistan, and in 1946 he went on to become general secretary of the Islamia College Students Union.
M. Bhaskaran Nair describes that Mujib "emerged as the most powerful man in the party" because of his proximity to Huseyn Shaheed Suhrawardy.
After obtaining his BA degree in 1947, Mujib was one of the Muslim politicians working under Suhrawardy during the communal violence that broke out in Calcutta, in 1946, just before the partition of India.
Leader of Pakistan
Early political career
After the Partition of India, Mujib chose to stay in the newly created Pakistan.
On his return to what became known as East Pakistan, he enrolled in the University of Dhaka to study law and founded the East Pakistan Muslim Students' League.
He became one of the most prominent student political leaders in the province.
During these years, Mujib developed an affinity for socialism as the solution to mass poverty, unemployment, and poor living conditions.
Bengali language movement
Following the declaration of Muhammad Ali Jinnah on 21 March 1948, that the people of East Bengal would have to adopt Urdu as the state language, protests broke out amongst the population.
Mujib immediately decided to start a movement against this former planned decision of the Muslim League.
At the same year, 2 March, a conference was held at Dhaka University's Fazlul Haq Muslim Hall, with leaders of different political parties.
In this conference, discussions about the movement against the Muslim League were discussed.
From here on, the decision of the constitution of the All-party Parliamentary Council was decided.
The strike was celebrated in Dhaka on 11 March 1948, in the call of this council.
During the strike, some other political activists including Sheikh Mujibur Rahman were arrested in front of the secretariat building.
But due to pressure from the student protest, Mujib and other student leaders were released on 15 March.
On the occasion of their release, Rastrabhasa Sangram Parishad (National Language Action Committee) arrange a rally which took place at Dhaka University.
Police had blocked this rally.
In protest of police activities Sheikh Mujib immediately announced nationwide student strike on 17 March 1948.
On 19 March, he organized a movement aimed at securing the rights of the fourth class employees of Dhaka University.
On 11 September 1948, he was again arrested
On 21 January 1949, Sheikh Mujib was released from prison.
Out of jail, he again became involved in the demand for the demand of the fourth class employees, for which he was fined from the university.
But he refrained from acquiring these fines as illegal.
In continuation of this, on 26 April, Muslim League-backed candidate Shamsul Haq won a by-election in Tangail.
Sheikh Mujib strikes hunger strike in front of Vice Chancellor's residence for the success of his movement, for which he was again arrested.
At that time he was expelled from Dhaka University.
He was accused of leading the movement of the fourth-class workers' rights in the university.
On 23 June Suhrawardy and Maulana Bhasani East Pakistan Awami Muslim League.
After the formation, Sheikh Mujib left the Muslim League and joined this new team.
He was elected joint general secretary of party East Pakistan.
Get out of prison in late June.
After the release, he joined the movement against the food crisis.
In September of this year, he was temporarily detained for violating Section 144 but he was released immediately.
The founding of the Awami League
Mujib left the Muslim League to join Maulana Bhashani and Yar Mohammad Khan in the formation of the Awami Muslim League, the predecessor of the Awami League.
Maulana Bhashani was elected as President while Yar Mohammad Khan was the treasurer.
He was elected joint secretary of its East Bengal unit in 1949.
While Suhrawardy worked to build a larger coalition of East Bengali and socialist parties, Mujib focused on expanding the grass-roots organization.
In 1953, he was made the party's general secretary, and elected to the East Bengal Legislative Assembly on a United Front coalition ticket in 1954.
Serving briefly as the minister for agriculture during A. K. Fazlul Huq's government, Mujib was briefly arrested for organizing a protest of the central government's decision to dismiss the United Front ministry.
He was elected to the second Constituent Assembly of Pakistan and served from 1955 to 1958.
In 1956, Mujib entered a second coalition government as minister of industries, commerce, labour, anti-corruption and village aid.
He resigned in 1957 to work full-time for the party organisation.
In 1958 General Ayub Khan suspended the constitution and imposed martial law.
Mujib was arrested for organizing resistance and imprisoned till 1961.
Working with other political parties, he supported opposition candidate Fatima Jinnah against Ayub Khan in the 1964 election.
Mujib was arrested two weeks before the election, charged with sedition and jailed for a year.
Despite forming a majority of the population, the Bengalis were poorly represented in Pakistan's civil services, police and military.
There were also conflicts between the allocation of revenues and taxation.
The 1965 war between India and Pakistan also revealed the markable vulnerability of East Pakistan compared to West Pakistan.
Unrest over continuing denial of democracy spread across Pakistan and Mujib intensified his opposition to the disbandment of provinces.
In 1966, Mujib proclaimed a 6-point plan titled Our Charter of Survival at a national conference of opposition political parties at Lahore, Mujib obtained the broad support of Bengalis, including the Hindu and other religious communities in East Pakistan.
However, his demands were considered radical in West Pakistan and interpreted as thinly veiled separatism.
The proposals alienated West Pakistani people and politicians, as well as non-Bengalis and Muslim fundamentalists in East Pakistan.
Anti-Ayub movement
Mujib was arrested by the Pakistan Army and after two years in jail, an official sedition trial in a military court opened.
Widely known as the Agartala Conspiracy Case, Mujib and 34 Bengali military officers were accused by the government of colluding with Indian government agents in a scheme to divide Pakistan and threaten its unity, order and national security.
The plot was alleged to have been planned in the city of Agartala, in the Indian state of Tripura.
He was given a mass reception on 23 February, at Racecourse ground and conferred with the title Bangabandhu, meaning Friend of the Bengal.
Many scholars and observers believed the Bengali agitation emphasised the rejection of the Two-Nation Theory - the case upon which Pakistan had been created - by asserting the Ethnocultural identity of Bengalis as a nation.
Mujib was able to galvanize support throughout East Pakistan, which was home to a majority of the national population, thus making him one of the most powerful political figures in the Indian subcontinent.
It was following his 6-point plan that Mujib was increasingly referred to by his supporters as "Bangabandhu" (literally meaning "Friend of Bengal" in Bengali).
Public opinion and political parties in East Pakistan blamed the governing authorities as intentionally negligent.
The West Pakistani politicians attacked the Awami League for allegedly using the crisis for political gain.
The dissatisfaction led to divisions within the civil services, police and Pakistani Armed Forces.
In the Pakistani general elections held on 7 December 1970, the Awami League under Mujib's leadership won a massive majority in the provincial legislature, and all but two of East Pakistan's quota of seats in the new National Assembly, thus forming a clear majority.
The largest and most successful party in the western wing of the nation was the Pakistan Peoples Party headed by Zulfikar Ali Bhutto.
He was completely opposed to Mujib's demand for greater autonomy.
Bhutto threatened to boycott the assembly and oppose the government if Mujib was invited by Yahya Khan (then president of Pakistan) to form the next government and demanded inclusion of the PPP.
Much of the Pakistani military and the Islamic political parties opposed Mujib becoming Pakistan's prime minister.
At the time neither Mujib nor the Awami League had explicitly advocated political independence for East Pakistan, but smaller nationalist groups were demanding independence for Bangladesh.
Bhutto feared civil war, and sent a secret message to Mujib and his inner circle to arrange a meeting with them.
Hassan met with Mujib and persuaded him to form a coalition government with Bhutto.
They decided that Bhutto would serve as President, with Mujib as Prime minister.
These developments took place secretly and none of the Pakistan Armed Forces personnel were kept informed.
Meanwhile, Bhutto increased the pressure on Yahya Khan to take a stand on dissolving the government.
Establishment of Bangladesh
Following political deadlock, Yahya Khan delayed the convening of the assembly - a move seen by Bengalis as a plan to deny Mujib's party, which formed a majority, from taking charge.
It was on 7 March 1971 that Mujib called for independence and asked the people to launch a major campaign of civil disobedience and organized armed resistance at a mass gathering of people held at the Race Course Ground in Dhaka.
The struggle now is the struggle for our emancipation; the struggle now is the struggle for our independence.
Joy Bangla!..
Since we have given blood, we will give more blood.
God-willing, the people of this country will be liberated ...
Turn every house into a fort.
Face (the enemy) with whatever you have.
Following a last-ditch attempt to foster agreement, Yahya Khan declared martial law, banned the Awami League and ordered the Pakistan Army to arrest Mujib and other Bengali leaders and activists.
Sheikh Mujib was arrested and taken to West Pakistan after midnight from Tejgaon Airport on a PAF C-130 flight right under the noses of ATC Officer Squadron Leader Khaja, Senior Operations Officer Wing Commander Khademul Bashar and Director of Airport and Flight Security Squadron Leader M. Hamidullah Khan.
All were on duty that night due to the state of emergency.
Mujib was moved to West Pakistan and kept under heavy guard in a jail near Faisalabad (then Lyallpur).
Pakistani general Rahimuddin Khan was appointed to preside over Mujib's military court case in Faisalabad, the proceedings of which have never been made public.
The Pakistan Army's campaign to restore order soon degenerated into a rampage of terror and bloodshed.
With militias known as Razakars, the army targeted Bengali intellectuals, politicians and union leaders, as well as ordinary civilians.
Due to deteriorating situation, large numbers of Hindus fled across the border to the neighbouring Indian states of West Bengal, Assam and Tripura.
The East Bengali army and police regiments soon revolted and League leaders formed a government in exile in Kolkata under Tajuddin Ahmad, a politician close to Mujib.
A major insurgency led by the Mukti Bahini (Freedom Fighters) arose across East Pakistan.
Despite international pressure, the Pakistani government refused to release Mujib and negotiate with him.
Most of the Mujib family was kept under house arrest during this period.
General Osmani was the key military commanding officer in the Mukti Bahini, which was a part of the struggle between the state forces and the nationalist militia during the war that came to be known as the Bangladesh Liberation War.
Following Indian intervention in December 1971, the Pakistan Army surrendered to the joint force of Bengali Mukti Bahini and Indian Army, and the League leadership created a government in Dhaka which was called Mujibnagar Government.
Upon assuming the presidency after Yahya Khan's resignation, Zulfikar Ali Bhutto responded to international pressure and released Mujib on 8 January 1972.
After release from prison, Bhutto and Mujib met in Rawalpindi.
In that meeting, Bhutto proposed some links between Pakistan and Bangladesh.
However Mujib said he could not commit to anything until he visited Bangladesh and talked to his colleagues.
He was then flown to London where he met with British Prime Minister Edward Heath and addressed the international media at the Claridge's Hotel.
Mujib then flew to New Delhi on a Royal Air Force (RAF) jet aircraft provided by the British government to take him back to Dhaka.
In New Delhi, he was received by Indian President Varahagiri Venkata Giri and Prime Minister Indira Gandhi as well as the entire Indian cabinet and chiefs of armed forces.
Delhi was given a festive look as Mujib and Indira addressed a huge crowd where he publicly expressed his gratitude to Indira Gandhi and "the best friends of my people, the people of India".
"From New Delhi, Sheikh Mujib flew back to Dhaka on the RAF jet where he was received by a massive and emotional sea of people at Tejgaon Airport."
Governing Bangladesh
Struggle for national reconstruction
Mujib briefly assumed the provisional presidency and later took office as the prime minister.
A new country Bangladesh begins with a lot of 'rampage and rape of Bangladesh economy' by Pakistani occupation force.
In January 1972 Time magazine reported:
In the aftermath of the Pakistani army's rampage last March, a special team of inspectors from the World Bank observed that some cities looked "like the morning after a nuclear attack."
Since then, the destruction has only been magnified.
An estimated 6,000,000 homes have been destroyed, and nearly 1,400,000 farm families have been left without tools or animals to work their lands.
Transportation and communications systems are totally disrupted.
Roads are damaged, bridges out and inland waterways blocked.
The rape of the country continued right up until the Pakistani army surrendered a month ago.
In the last days of the war, West Pakistani-owned businesses-which included nearly every commercial enterprise in the country-remitted virtually all their funds to the West.
Pakistan International Airlines left exactly 117 rupees ($16) in its account at the port city of Chittagong.
The army also destroyed bank notes and coins, so that many areas now suffer from a severe shortage of ready cash.
Private cars were picked up off the streets or confiscated from auto dealers and shipped to the West before the ports were closed.
The politicians elected in 1970 formed the provisional parliament of the new state.
The Mukti Bahini and other militias amalgamated to form a new Bangladesh Army to which Indian forces transferred control on 17 March.
Mujib described the fallout of the war as the "biggest human disaster in the world," claiming the deaths of as many as 3 million people and the rape of more than 200,000 women.
He charged the provisional parliament in order to write a new constitution, and proclaimed the four fundamental principles of "nationalism, secularism, democracy, and socialism," which would come to be known as "Mujibism".
Mujib nationalised hundreds of industries and companies as well as abandoned land and capital and initiated land reform aimed at helping millions of poor farmers.
A constitution was proclaimed in 1973 and elections were held, which resulted in Mujib and his party gaining power with an absolute majority.
Economic policies
The Mujib government faced serious challenges, which including the rehabilitation of millions of people displaced in 1971, organising the supply of food, health aids and other necessities.
The effects of the 1970 cyclone had not worn off, and the state's economy had immensely deteriorated by the conflict.
Economically, Mujib embarked on a huge nationalization program.
By the end of the year, thousands of Bengalis arrived from Pakistan, and thousands of non-Bengalis migrated to Pakistan; and yet many thousand remained in refugee camps.
Major efforts were launched to rehabilitate an estimated 10 million refugees.
The economy began recovering and a famine was prevented.
But a famine occurred in 1974 when the price of rice rose sharply.
In that month there was "widespread starvation started in Rangpur district.
Government mismanagement had been blamed for that."
During Mujib regime the country witnessed industrial decline, growing Indian control over Bangladesh's industries and counterfeit money scandals.
Foreign policies
After Bangladesh achieved recognition from major countries, Mujib helped Bangladesh enter into the United Nations and the Non-Aligned Movement.
He travelled to the United States, the United Kingdom and other European nations to obtain humanitarian and developmental assistance for the nation.
He signed a treaty of friendship with India, which pledged extensive economic and humanitarian assistance and began training Bangladesh's security forces and government personnel.
Mujib forged a close friendship with Indira Gandhi, strongly praising India's decision to intercede, and professed admiration and friendship for India.
Mujib sought Bangladesh's membership in the Organisation of the Islamic Conference and the Islamic Development Bank and made a significant trip to Lahore in 1974 to attend the OIC summit, which helped repair relations with Pakistan to an extent.
In the Delhi Agreement of 1974, Bangladesh, India and Pakistan pledged to work for regional stability and peace.
The agreement paved the way for the return of interned Bengali officials and their families stranded in Pakistan, as well as the establishing of diplomatic relations between Dhaka and Islamabad.
Japan became a major aid provider to the new country.
Although Israel was one of early countries to recognize Bangladesh, the government in Dhaka strongly supported Egypt during the Arab-Israeli War of 1973.
In return, Egypt gifted Bangladesh's military with 44 tanks.
Many Eastern European countries, particularly Yugoslavia, East Germany and Poland, enjoyed excellent relations with Bangladesh.
The Soviet Union supplied several squadrons of Mig-21 planes for the Bangladesh Air Force.
Left wing insurgency
At the height of Mujib's power, left wing insurgents, organized by Jatiyo Samajtantrik Dal's armed wing Gonobahini, fought against Mujib's government in order to establish a Marxist government.
The government responded by forming an elite para-military force Jatiya Rakkhi Bahini on 8 February 1972, initially formed to curb the insurgency and maintain law and order.
The force began a campaign of brutal human rights abuses against the general populace, including the force became involved in numerous charges of human rights abuse including political killings, forced disappearances and rape.
Members of Jatiya Rakkhi Bahini were granted immunity from prosecution and other legal proceedings.
The force had swore an oath of loyalty to Sheikh Mujibur Rahman.
BAKSAL
Mujib's government soon began encountering increased dissatisfaction and unrest.
His programs of nationalization and industrial socialism suffered from lack of trained personnel, inefficiency, rampant corruption, and poor leadership.
Political opposition included communists as well as Islamic fundamentalists, who were angered by the declaration of a secular state.
Mujib was criticized for nepotism in appointing family members to important positions.
The party identified itself with the rural masses, farmers, and labourers and took control of all mechanisms of government.
It also launched major socialist programs.
Under this new system, Sheikh Mujib assumed the presidency and was given extraordinary powers.
According to Time magazine:
Under the new system, executive powers are vested in the President, who will be elected directly every five years, and in a Council of Ministers appointed by him.
Although an elected Parliament can pass legislation, the President has veto power and can dissolve Parliament indefinitely.
BaKSAL was protested by different groups but they were punished by Mujib.
It was known that Sheikh Mujib never accepted any criticism against him.
Mujib was widely accused of the 40,000 killings by the Jatiya Rakkhi Bahini militia.
Using government forces and his existing militia of supporters called the Jatiyo Rakkhi Bahini, Mujib oversaw the arrest of opposition activists and strict control of political activities across the country.
Assassination
On 15 August 1975, a group of junior army officers invaded the presidential residence with tanks and killed Mujib, his family and personal staff.
Lawrence Lifschultz has alleged that the CIA was involved in the coup and assassination, basing his assumption on statements by the then-U.S. ambassador in Dhaka, Eugene Booster.
Mujib's death plunged the nation into many years of political turmoil.
The coup leaders were soon overthrown and a series of counter-coups and political assassinations paralyzed the country.
Mujib's assassination and overthrow.
Personal life, family, and relatives
Sheikh Mujib was 13 years old when he got married to his paternal cousin Sheikh Fazilatunnesa who was only 3 and just lost her parents, so her (and Sheikh Mujib's) grandfather, Sheikh Abdul Hamid, had commanded his son Sheikh Lutfar Rahman to marry his son Sheikh Mujib to her.
It was 9 years later, in 1942, when Sheikh Mujib was 22 years old and Begum Fazilatunnesa was 12 years old that the marriage consummated.
Together they had two daughters-Sheikh Hasina and Sheikh Rehana-and three sons-Sheikh Kamal, Sheikh Jamal, and Sheikh Rasel.
Kamal was an organizer of the Mukti Bahini guerrilla struggle in 1971 and received wartime commission in Bangladesh Army during the Liberation War.
He was perceived to be the successor to Sheikh Mujib.
Sheikh Jamal was trained at the Royal Military Academy Sandhurst in Great Britain and later joined the Bangladesh Army as a Commissioned Officer.
The Sheikh Family was under house arrest during Bangladesh liberation war until 17 December, Sheikh Kamal and Jamal found the means to escape and cross over to a liberated zone, where they joined the struggle to free the country.
Almost entire Sheikh family was assassinated on 15 August 1975 Coup d'état .
Only Sheikh Hasina and Sheikh Rehana, who were visiting West Germany, escaped.
Sheikh Mujib is the maternal grandfather of Tulip Siddiq, British-born Labour politician, and member of parliament for Hampstead and Kilburn since the 2015 general election.
Legacy
Bangladesh
Mujib has been depicted in Bangladeshi currency, Taka and is the namesake of many Bangladesh public institutions.
During Mujib's tenure as the premier leader, Muslim religious leaders and some politicians intensely criticized Mujib's adoption of state secularism.
He alienated some segments of nationalists and those in the military who feared Bangladesh would become too dependent on India.
They worried about becoming a satellite state by taking extensive aid from the Indian government and allying with that country on many foreign and regional affairs.
Zafrullah Chowdhury asserts that Sheikh Mujibur Rahman himself was a major impediment to the fulfilment of those aspirations of the liberation, although he admits that he was a "great leader."
Following his assassination, succeeding governments offered low-key commemorations of Mujib.
Restoration of his public image awaited the election of an Awami League government in 1996, which was led by his eldest daughter, Sheikh Hasina, the leader of the party.
15 August has since been commemorated as "National Mourning Day".
The country keeps it flags lower to half-mast in this day as a sign of mourning.
In 2016, the Awami League government passed a law that criminalized any criticism of Sheikh Mujibur Rahman.
Despite controversy and disagreement among politician, Mujib remain a popular figure in Bangladesh.
In a 2004 BBC Bengali opinion poll, Mujib was voted as the "Greatest Bengali of All Time".
The waistcoat coat that Mujib used to wore during his political campaign is called Mujib Coat (Bangla: মুজিব কোট) in Bangladesh.
Worldwide
* After one year of independence and Mujib rule, Time magazine wrote:
QTEMPLATE |text=In sum, Bangladesh had little reason to enjoy a happy first birthday.
If it is not the "basket case" that Henry Kissinger once called it, neither has it become the Shonar Bangla (Golden Bengal) envisioned by Mujib.
How much this is the fault of Mujib is a moot question.
It is true that he has had little time in which to combat some of Bangladesh's immense problems.
Nevertheless, some critics contend that he has wasted some time playing the role of popular revolutionary figure (such as personally receiving virtually any of his people who call on him) when he should have been concentrating more on serious matters of state.
If, as expected, he is elected in March, Mujib will face a clear test of whether he is not only the father of Bangladesh but also its savior.
* Cuban leader Fidel Castro compared Mujib's personality with the Himalayas during the Non-Aligned Summit in 1973.
* Time Magazine USA 25 August 1975 wrote ten Days after his death:
QTEMPLATE |Mujib returned to the most tumultuous welcome Dacca had ever seen-and a staggering array of problems in probably the poorest (and most densely populated) country on earth.
There were virtually no civil servants and little industry.
Ports were clogged, railroads destroyed, the educated elite savaged.
Worse, what had not been destroyed in war was soon destroyed by a devastating drought in 1973 and floods last year that inundated three-quarters of the country.
Laudable Objectives.
Facing spreading violence-there had been at least 6,000 political murders since independence-Mujib declared a state of emergency last December.
He subsequently banned extremist parties on both the left and the right, brought the press under government control, and cracked down on corruption.
The moves met with general favor in Bangladesh, but there were those who were critical.
"Do not forget I have had only three years as a free government," he reminded critics.
"You cannot expect miracles."
Yet even he seemed impatient for miracles in the end.
No one ever doubted that his objectives were laudable.
Mujib wanted nothing less than to build a "shonar Bangla," the golden Bengal of the poem by Rabindranath Tagore that serves as the country's national anthem.
* In 2003, author David Ludden describe him as a Forgotten Hero in an article on Frontline.
* In 30 October 2017, UNESCO recognised Mujib's 7th March Speech as part of the world's documentary heritage.
Authored books
Sheikh Mujib wrote two volumes of his autobiography, where he expressed his view on politics and described his personal life.
Both books were published after his death by his daughter and current Bangladeshi Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina.
In popular culture
* Bangladeshi writer Humayun Ahmed portrayed Sheikh Mujib in two of his historical novel, 2004's Jochona O Jononir Golpo following the time during the war of independence and 2012's Deyal following the period after independence.
* Mujib has portrayed negatively by Bangladeshi-Canadian author Neamat Imam.
His novel, The Black Coat, depicts Mujib as a deadliest dictator.
In 2014 Indian film Children of War, Prodip Ganguly portrayed the character of Sheikh Mujib.
* In 2015, the Centre for Research and Information (CRI) department of Bangladesh Awami League published a four part children's comic book named "Mujib" based on the life events of Sheikh Mujib according to his two autobiographies.
* In 2018 documentary film spoke about the asassination of his father.
Bibliography
