The monarch butterfly or simply monarch (Danaus plexippus) is a milkweed butterfly (subfamily Danainae) in the family Nymphalidae.
Other common names depending on region include milkweed, common tiger, wanderer, and black veined brown.
Its wings feature an easily recognizable black, orange, and white pattern, with a wingspan of
There are three species of monarch butterflies:
* D. plexippus, described by Linnaeus in 1758, is the species known most commonly as the monarch butterfly of North America.
Its range actually extends worldwide and can be found in Hawaii, Australia, New Zealand, Spain and the Pacific Islands.
* D. erippus, the southern monarch, was described by Pieter Cramer in 1775.
This species is found in tropical and subtropical latitudes of South America, mainly in Brazil, Uruguay, Paraguay, Argentina, Bolivia, Chile and southern Peru.
The South American monarch and the North American monarch may have been one species at one time.
Some researchers believe the southern monarch separated from the monarch's population some 2 mya, at the end of the Pliocene.
Sea levels were higher, and the entire Amazonas lowland was a vast expanse of brackish swamp that offered limited butterfly habitat.
leading to articles about monarch butterflies being genetically modified organisms.
Description
Commonly and easily mistaken for the similar viceroy butterfly, the monarch's wingspan ranges from .
Monarch flight speed has been estimated by a number of researchers.
One scientist examined all prior estimates and concluded their flight speed is approximately 9 km/h or 5.5 mph.
For comparison, the average human jogs at a rate of .
Adults exhibit sexual dimorphism.
Males are slightly larger than females
The study found significant differences in overall wing size and in the physical dimensions of wings.
Males tended to have larger wings than females, and were heavier than females, on average.
Both males and females had similar thorax dimensions (wing muscles are contained in the thorax).
Female monarchs tended to have thicker wings, which is thought to convey greater tensile strength.
This would make female wings less likely to be damaged during migration.
Also, females had lower wing loading than males (wing loading is a value derived from the ratio of wing size to body weight), which would mean females require less energy to fly.
Distribution and habitat
The range of the western and eastern populations of D. plexippus plexippus expands and contracts depending upon the season.
The range differs between breeding areas, migration routes, and winter roosts.
the Philippines, and North Africa.
On the US East Coast, they have overwintered as far north as Lago Mar, Virginia Beach, Virginia.
Their wintering habitat typically provides access to streams, plenty of sunlight (enabling body temperatures that allow flight), and appropriate roosting vegetation, and is relatively free of predators.
Overwintering, roosting butterflies have been seen on basswoods, elms, sumacs, locusts, oaks, osage-oranges, mulberries, pecans, willows, cottonwoods, and mesquites.
Eggs are laid singly on the underside of a young leaf of a milkweed plant during the spring and summer months.
Females lay their eggs on the underside of the milkweed leaves; the offspring's consumption of the milkweed benefits health and helps defend them against predators.
Larvae
The caterpillar goes through five major, distinct stages of growth and after each one, it molts.
Each caterpillar, or instar, that molts is larger than the previous as it eats and stores energy in the form of fat and nutrients to carry it through the nonfeeding pupal stage.
Each instar usually lasts about 3 to 5 days, depending on various factors such as temperature and food availability.
* Sarcostemma clausa - white vine This is thought to adversely affect migration patterns, and to cause a dramatic buildup of the dangerous parasite, Ophryocystis elektroscirrha.
Adult food sources
Although larvae eat only milkweed, adult monarchs feed on the nectar of many plants including:
* Vernonia altissima - tall ironweed Captive-raised monarchs appear capable of migrating to overwintering sites in Mexico, though they have a much lower migratory success rate than wild monarchs do.
Recent discoveries have located monarch overwintering sites in Arizona.
Vision
Physiological experiments suggest that monarch butterflies view the world through a tetrachromatic system.
Like humans, their retina contain three types of opsin proteins, expressed in distinct photoreceptor cells, each of which absorbs light at a different wavelength.
Unlike humans, one of those types of photoreceptor cells corresponds to a wavelength in the ultraviolet range; the other two correspond to blue and green.
In addition to these three photoreceptors cells in the main retina, monarch butterfly eyes contain orange filtering pigments that filter the light reaching some but not all green-absorbing opsins, thereby making a fourth photoreceptor cell sensitive to longer wavelength light.
These butterflies are capable of distinguishing colors based on their wavelength only, and not based on intensity; this phenomenon is termed “true color vision.”
This is important for many butterfly behaviors, including seeking nectar for nourishment, choosing a mate, and finding milkweed to lay eggs on.
One study found that floral color is more easily recognized at a distance by butterflies searching for nectar than floral shape.
This is may be because flowers have highly contrasting colors to the green background of a vegetative landscape.
Defense against predators
In both caterpillar and butterfly form, monarchs are aposematic-warding off predators with a bright display of contrasting colors to warn potential predators of their undesirable taste and poisonous characteristics.
Large larvae are able to avoid wasp predation by dropping from the plant or by jerking their bodies.
Aposematism
Monarchs are foul tasting and poisonous due to the presence of cardenolides in their bodies, which the caterpillars ingest as they feed on milkweed.
It has been found that monarchs are able to sequester cardenolides most effectively from plants of intermediate cardenolide content rather than those of high or low content.
Additional studies have shown that different species of milkweed have different effects on growth, virulence, and transmission of parasites.
One species, Asclepias curassavica, appears to reduce the proportion of monarchs infected by parasites.
There are two possible explanations for the positive role of A. curassavica on the monarch caterpillar: that it promotes overall monarch health to boost the monarch's immune system; or that chemicals from the plant have a direct negative effect on the parasites.
Mimicry
Monarchs share the defense of noxious taste with the similar-appearing viceroy butterfly in what is perhaps one of the most well-known examples of mimicry.
Though long purported to be an example of Batesian mimicry, the viceroy is actually reportedly more unpalatable than the monarch, making this a case of Müllerian mimicry.
Human interaction
The monarch is the state insect of Alabama, Idaho, Illinois, Minnesota, Texas, Vermont, and West Virginia.
Legislation was introduced to make it the national insect of the United States, but this failed in 1989 and again in 1991.
A growing number of homeowners are establishing butterfly gardens; monarchs can be attracted by cultivating a butterfly garden with specific milkweed species and nectar plants.
Efforts are underway to establish these monarch waystations.
An IMAX film, Flight of the Butterflies, describes the story of the Urquharts, Brugger and Trail to document the then unknown monarch migration to Mexican overwintering areas.
Sanctuaries and reserves have been created at overwintering locations in Mexico and California to limit habitat destruction.
These sites can generate significant tourism revenue.
Organizations and individuals participate in tagging programs.
Tagging information is used to study migration patterns.
The 2012 novel by Barbara Kingsolver, Flight Behavior, deals with the appearance of a large population in the Appalachians.
Captive rearing
One of the most direct ways humans are interacting with monarchs is by rearing them in captivity, which has become increasingly popular, although there are risks to this activity, and this has become a controversial topic.
On one hand there are many positive aspects of captive rearing.
Monarchs are bred in schools and used for butterfly releases at hospices, memorial events and weddings.
Memorial services for the September 11 attacks include the release of captive-bred monarchs.
Monarchs are used in schools and nature centers for educational purposes.
Many homeowners raise monarchs in captivity as a hobby and for educational purposes.
On the other hand this practice becomes problematic when monarchs are "mass-reared".
Stories in the Huffington Post in 2015 and Discover magazine in 2016 have summarized the controversy around this issue.
The frequent media reports of monarch declines has empowered many homeowners to attempt to rear as many monarchs as possible in their homes and then release them to the wild in an effort to "boost the monarch population".
Some individuals have taken this practice to the extreme, with massive operations that rear thousands of monarchs at once, like one in Linn County, Iowa.
However, the practice of rearing "large" numbers of monarchs in captivity for release into the wild is not condoned by monarch scientists, because of the risks of genetic issues and disease spread.
One of the biggest concerns of mass-rearing is the potential for spreading the monarch parasite, Ophryocystis elektroscirrha, into the wild.
This parasite can rapidly build up in captive monarchs, especially if they are housed together.
The spores of the parasite also can quickly contaminate all housing equipment, so that all subsequent monarchs reared in the same containers then become infected.
One researcher stated that rearing more than 100 monarchs constitutes "mass-rearing" and should not be done.
In addition to the disease risks, researchers believe these captive-reared monarchs are not as fit as wild ones, owing to the unnatural conditions they are raised in.
Homeowners often raise monarchs in plastic or glass containers in their kitchens, basements, porches, etc., and under artificial lighting and controlled temperatures.
Such conditions would not mimic what the monarchs are used to in the wild, and may result in adult monarchs that are unsuited for the realities of their wild existence.
In support of this, a recent study by a citizen scientist found that captive-reared monarchs have a lower migration success rate than wild monarchs do.
More recently, the genetic basis of monarch migration and warning coloration has been described.
There is no genetic differentiation between the migratory populations of eastern and western North America.
A study in 2016 claimed that the long-term trend in the size of the overwintering sites is cause for concern.
After a ten-fold drop in the overwintering numbers of the eastern monarch butterfly population over the last decade, this study claimed there was an 11%-57% probability that this population will go quasi-extinct over the next 20 years.
According to Xerces Society, the monarch population in California decreased 86 percent in 2018, going from millions of butterflies to tens of thousands of butterflies.
In Ontario, Canada, the monarch butterfly is listed as a Species of Special Concern.
Threats
There is increasing concern related to the ongoing decline of monarchs at their overwintering sites; based on a 2014 twenty-year comparison, the overwintering numbers west of the Rocky Mountains have dropped more than 50 percent since 1997 and the overwintering numbers east of the Rockies have declined by more than 90 percent since 1995.
A 2016 study also attributed the last decade's ten-fold decline in overwintering numbers of the eastern monarch population to the loss of breeding habitat, namely the many species of milkweed (Asclepias species) that developing larvae require for food, however scientists believe there are other factors as well.
A number of researchers believe milkweed loss during the breeding season is the cause because declines in milkweed abundance are highly correlated with the adoption of herbicide-tolerant genetically modified corn and soybeans, which now constitute 89% and 94% of these crops, respectively, in the U.S.
Habitat loss due to herbicide use
A number of conservationists attribute the disappearance of milkweed species to agricultural practices in the Midwest, where genetically modified seeds are bred to resist herbicides that eliminate milkweed nearby.
Growers eliminate milkweed that previously grew between the rows of food crops.
Corn and soybeans are resistant to the effect of the herbicide glyphosate.
The increased use of these crop strains is correlated with the decline in monarch populations between 1999 and 2010.
Chip Taylor, director of Monarch Watch at the University of Kansas, said the Midwest milkweed habitat "is virtually gone" with 120-150 million acres lost.
To help fight this problem, Monarch Watch encourages the planting of "Monarch Waystations".
Losses during migration
While herbicide-use has been proposed as one factor causing the decline in overwintering numbers of eastern monarchs, it is not the only possibility.
Another is that the monarchs are experiencing problems reaching Mexico.
This idea has been embraced by a number of leading monarch researchers, largely because of recent evidence showing that the number of breeding (adult) monarchs has not declined in the last two decades, based on long-term citizen science data.
The lack of long-term declines in the numbers of breeding, and migratory monarchs, yet the clear declines in overwintering numbers, implies there is a disconnect between these life stages, that must be growing.
One expert has proposed that a large and growing threat to migrating monarchs is mortality from car strikes.
Predators
Larvae feed exclusively on milkweed and consume protective cardiac glycosides.
Toxin levels in Asclepias species vary.
Not all monarchs are unpalatable, but exhibit Batesian or automimics.
Cardiac glycosides levels are higher in the abdomen and wings.
Some predators can differentiate between these parts and consume the most palatable ones.
Bird predators include brown thrashers, grackles, robins, cardinals, sparrows, scrub jays, pinyon jays, The grosbeak, on the other hand, has developed an insensitivity to secondary plant poisons that allows it to ingest monarchs without vomiting.
As a result, orioles and grosbeaks will periodically have high levels of cardenolides in their bodies, and they will be forced to go on periods of reduced monarch consumption.
This cycle effectively reduces potential predation of monarchs by 50 percent and indicates that monarch aposematism has a legitimate purpose.
The Chinese mantis (Tenodera sinensis) will consume the larvae once the gut is removed thus avoiding cardenolides.
Wasps commonly consume larvae.
One monarch researcher emphasizes that predation on eggs, larvae or adults is natural, since monarchs are part of the food chain, thus people should not take steps to kill predators of monarchs.
On Oahu, a white morph of the monarch has emerged.
This is because of the introduction, in 1965 and 1966, of two bulbul species, Pycnonotus cafer and Pycnonotus jocosus.
They are now the most common insectivore birds, and probably the only ones preying on insects as large as the monarch.
Monarchs in Hawaii are known to have low cardiac glycoside levels, but the birds may also be tolerant of the chemical.
The two species hunt the larvae and some pupae from the branches and undersides of leaves in milkweed bushes.
The bulbuls also eat resting and ovipositing adults, but rarely flying ones.
Because of its color, the white morph has a higher survival rate than the orange one.
This is either because of apostatic selection (i.e. the birds have learned the orange monarchs can be eaten), because of camouflage (the white morph matches the white pubescence of milkweed or the patches of light shining through foliage), or because the white morph does not fit the bird's search image of a typical monarch, so is thus avoided.
Parasites
Parasites include the tachinid flies Sturmia convergens and Lespesia archippivora.
Lesperia-parasitized butterfly larvae suspend, but die prior to pupation.
The fly's maggot lowers itself to the ground, forms a brown puparium and then emerges as an adult.
Monarch chrysalises are parasitized by pteromalid wasps, specifically Pteromalus cassotis.
These wasps lay their eggs in the pupae while the chrysalis is still soft.
Up to 400 adults emerge from the chrysalis after 14-20 days, Infection with this parasite creates an effect known as culling whereby migrating monarchs that are infected are less likely to complete the migration.
This results in overwintering populations with lower parasite loads.
Owners of commercial butterfly breeding operations claim that they take steps to control this parasite in their practices, although this claim is doubted by most scientists who study monarchs.
Confusion of host plants
The black swallow-wort (Cynanchum louiseae) and pale swallow-wort (Cynanchum rossicum) plants are problematic for monarchs in North America.
Monarchs lay their eggs on these relatives of native vining milkweed (Cynanchum laeve) because they produce stimuli similar to milkweed.
Once the eggs hatch, the caterpillars are poisoned by the toxicity of this invasive plant from Europe.
Loss of overwintering habitat
The area of forest occupied has been declining and reached its lowest level in two decades in 2013.
The decline is continuing but is expected to increase during the 2013-2014 season.
Mexican environmental authorities continue to monitor illegal logging of the oyamel trees.
The oyamel is a major species of evergreen on which the overwintering butterflies spend a significant time during their winter diapause, or suspended development.
A 2014 study acknowledged that while "the protection of overwintering habitat has no doubt gone a long way towards conserving monarchs that breed throughout eastern North America", their research indicates that habitat loss on breeding grounds in the United States is the main cause of both recent and projected population declines.
Climate
Climate variations during the fall and summer affect butterfly reproduction.
Rainfall, and freezing temperatures affect milkweed growth.
Omar Vidal, director general of WWF-Mexico, said "The monarch's lifecycle depends on the climatic conditions in the places where they breed.
Eggs, larvae and pupae develop more quickly in milder conditions.
Temperatures above 95°F can be lethal for larvae, and eggs dry out in hot, arid conditions, causing a drastic decrease in hatch rate."
If a monarch's body temperatures is below 86 °F a monarch cannot fly.
To warm up they will sit in the sun or rapidly shiver their wings to warm themselves.
There is concern that climate change will dramatically affect the monarch migration.
A study from 2015 examined the impact of warming temperatures on the breeding range of the monarch, and showed that in the next 50 years the monarch host plant will expand its range further north into Canada, and that the monarchs will follow this.
While this will expand the breeding locations of the monarch, this will also have the effect of increasing the distance that monarchs must travel to reach their overwintering destination in Mexico, and this could result in greater mortality during the migration.
Increasing carbon dioxide levels may be making milkweed-the only food monarch caterpillars will eat-too toxic for the monarchs to tolerate.
In addition, milkweed grown at carbon dioxide levels of 760 parts per million (ppm) plants were found to produce a different mix of the toxic cardenolides, one that was less effective against monarch parasites.
Conservation efforts
There has been a major push to conserve the monarch butterfly, which has been largely fueled by reports of the declining numbers of overwintering monarchs.
Meanwhile, numbers of breeding monarchs in eastern North America have not declined.
In May 2015, the Pollinator Health Task Force issued a "National Strategy to Promote the Health of Honey Bees and Other Pollinators".
The strategy lays out current and planned federal actions to achieve three goals, two of which are:• Monarch Butterflies: Increase the Eastern population of the monarch butterfly to 225 million butterflies occupying an area of approximately 15 acres (6 hectares) in the overwintering grounds in Mexico, through domestic/international actions and public-private partnerships, by 2020.
• Pollinator Habitat Acreage: Restore or enhance 7 million acres of land for pollinators over the next 5 years through Federal actions and public/private partnerships.
Many of the priority projects that the national strategy identifies will focus on the I-35 corridor extending for from Texas to Minnesota that provides spring and summer breeding habitats in the monarch's key migration corridor.
There have been a number of national and local efforts underway to establish pollinator habitat along highways and roadways, although this effort is controversial.
Conservationists are lobbying transportation departments and utilities to reduce their use of herbicides and specifically encourage milkweed to grow along roadways and power lines.
Reducing roadside mowing and application of herbicides during the butterfly breeding season will encourage milkweed growth.
Conservationists lobby agriculture companies to set aside areas that remain unsprayed to allow the butterflies to breed.
Efforts to increase monarch populations by establishing butterfly gardens and waystations require particular attention to the butterfly's food preferences and population cycles, as well to the conditions needed to propagate milkweed.
For example, in the Washington, D.C. area and elsewhere in the northeastern United States, monarchs prefer to reproduce on common milkweed (Asclepias syriaca), especially when its foliage is soft and fresh.
As monarch reproduction in that area peaks in late summer when milkweed foliage is old and tough, A. syriaca needs to be cut back in June - August to assure that it will be regrowing rapidly when monarch reproduction reaches its peak.
In addition, milkweed seed may need a period of cold treatment before it will germinate.
