The Hammer Bro (plural: Hammer Bros. or ) is a recurring enemy in the Mario video game series.
Created by Japanese video game designer Kazuaki Morita, it is a subspecies of Koopa Troopa that walks upright and attacks by throwing hammer projectiles at the player character.
Different variations of the character, based on projectiles they throw, include Boomerang Bro., Fire Bro., Sledge Bro., Sumo Bro, and Ice Bro.
It has appeared in nearly every Super Mario game since its first appearance in Super Mario Bros., and has also appeared in various animated and printed adaptations.
Appearances
Super Mario series
The Hammer Bro first appeared in Super Mario Bros., where they would jump from platforms and throw hammers at Mario or Luigi.
In the game, they were usually found in pairs.
They later appeared in its sequel, Super Mario Bros.: The Lost Levels, where they were found more commonly.
Although they were absent in Super Mario Bros. 2, they did appear in Super Mario Bros. 3, in which they behaved in the same way as they did in the original game.
Also, more varieties of the Hammer Bro were added, including the Boomerang Bro., whose boomerangs returned to them, the Fire Bro., who spat fireballs, and the Sledge Bro., who was considerably larger and could cause an earthquake when he landed from a jump.
Super Mario Bros. 3 also featured the Hammer Bros. Suit, which granted Mario and Luigi the ability to throw hammers of their own and also conferred immunity against fire attacks while ducking.
Although the basic Hammer Bro was again absent from Super Mario World, the two new subspecies were added: the Amazing Flyin' Hammer Brother, and the Sumo Brother (later known as the Sumo Bro), both of which would later appear in New Super Mario Bros.,
New Super Mario Bros. Wii , Super Mario Galaxy 2 (the first time that the Hammer Bro appeared in a 3D Mario game), Super Mario 3D Land, New Super Mario Bros. 2, New Super Mario Bros.
U, and Super Mario Odyssey.
They reappeared in Super Mario Odyssey, where Mario can use their powers for the first time in 3D. They appear mostly in the Luncheon Kingdom, wearing chef hats and tossing frying pans instead of hammers.
Other appearances
The Hammer Bro appeared in most of the Mario spin off games, such as Super Mario RPG, the Paper Mario series, the Mario & Luigi series, the Mario Party series, even as a playable character in Mario Party 8, Dance Dance Revolution Mario Mix, the Mario sports games and Super Princess Peach.
They also appear in Super Smash Bros. Brawl and in Super Smash Bros. for Nintendo 3DS and Wii U as an Assist Trophy and an Adventure Mode enemy.
In media, Hammer Bros. have appeared in The Super Mario Bros. Super Show!
and The Adventures of Super Mario Bros. 3 television series, as well as in printed media such as Nintendo Comics System and Nintendo Adventure Books.
In the Mario role-playing games, the Hammer Bros. usually appear in pairs and reprise their role as Bowser's minions, trying to stop Mario and Luigi.
Sometimes, however, they are neutral.
Reception
The Hammer Bros. were named as one of the eight most underrated video game characters by CNET editor Nate Lanxon, who contrasted the duo in the first Super Mario Bros. from other enemies in the series who would merely wander aimlessly in the level.
Game Daily listed Hammer Bros. as the fifth best Mario enemy, citing the difficulty involved in defeating them.
Nintendo Power listed the Hammer Bros. as one of the things that they love to hate, citing the difficulty involved in defeating or avoiding them.
IGN listed Hammer Bro.
as one of the characters they wanted for the then-unreleased Mario Kart 7, saying that the "terrifying twin turtles were the most devious and dangerous foes in the original Super Mario Bros. besides Bowser himself."
The Hammer Bros. were listed as second in Nintendo 3DS Daily's list of the top ten enemies more common in recent games, claiming "Super Mario World already kind of screwed them over by sticking them on winged blocks and having them appear only ever so often, but they've technically been absent from the platformers for two whole console generations!"
Notes
s9hjf80mqw2gxx8dmwt5hxr5mm6y6fb
