The giant panda (Ailuropoda melanoleuca; ), also known as panda bear or simply panda, is a bear native to south central China.
Giant pandas in the wild will occasionally eat other grasses, wild tubers, or even meat in the form of birds, rodents, or carrion.
In captivity, they may receive honey, eggs, fish, yams, shrub leaves, oranges, or bananas along with specially prepared food.
The giant panda lives in a few mountain ranges in central China, mainly in Sichuan, but also in neighbouring Shaanxi and Gansu.
As a result of farming, deforestation, and other development, the giant panda has been driven out of the lowland areas where it once lived.
The giant panda is a conservation-reliant vulnerable species.
As of December 2014, 49 giant pandas lived in captivity outside China, living in 18 zoos in 13 different countries.
Wild population estimates vary; one estimate shows that there are about 1,590 individuals living in the wild, Some reports also show that the number of giant pandas in the wild is on the rise.
In March 2015, conservation news site Mongabay stated that the wild giant panda population had increased by 268, or 16.8%, to 1,864.
In 2016, the IUCN reclassified the species from "endangered" to "vulnerable".
While the dragon has often served as China's national symbol, internationally the giant panda has often filled this role.
As such, it is becoming widely used within China in international contexts, for example, appearing since 1982 on gold panda bullion coins and as one of the five Fuwa mascots of the Beijing Olympics.
Taxonomy
Classification
For many decades, the precise taxonomic classification of the giant panda was under debate because it shares characteristics with both bears and raccoons.
These studies show it differentiated early (about 19 million years ago)
The giant panda has been referred to as a living fossil.
Despite the shared name, habitat type, and diet, as well as a unique enlarged bone called the pseudo thumb (which helps them grip the bamboo shoots they eat) the giant panda and red panda are only distantly related.
Etymology
The word panda was borrowed into English from French, but no conclusive explanation of the origin of the French word panda has been found.
The closest candidate is the Nepali word ponya, possibly referring to the adapted wrist bone of the red panda, which is native to Nepal.
The Western world originally applied this name to the red panda.
In many older sources, the name "panda" or "common panda" refers to the lesser-known red panda, thus necessitating the inclusion of "giant" and "lesser/red" prefixes in front of the names.
Even in 2013, the Encyclopædia Britannica still used "giant panda" or "panda bear" for the bear, and simply "panda" for the red panda, despite the popular usage of the word "panda" to refer to giant pandas.
Since the earliest collection of Chinese writings, the Chinese language has given the bear 20 different names, such as huāxióng ( "spotted bear") and zhúxióng ( "bamboo bear").
The most popular names in China today is dàxióngmāo ( literally "giant bear cat"), or simply xióngmāo ( "bear cat").
The name xióngmāo ( "bear cat") was originally used to describe the red panda (Ailurus fulgens), but since the giant panda was thought to be closely related to the red panda, dàxióngmāo () was named relatively.
Subspecies
Two subspecies of giant panda have been recognized on the basis of distinct cranial measurements, colour patterns, and population genetics.
The nominate subspecies Ailuropoda m. melanoleuca consists of most extant populations of panda.
These animals are principally found in Sichuan and display the typical stark black and white contrasting colours.
The Qinling panda, A. m. qinlingensis is restricted to the Qinling Mountains in Shaanxi at elevations of 1,300-3,000 m. The typical black and white pattern of Sichuan giant pandas is replaced with a dark brown versus light brown pattern.
The skull of A. m. qinlingensis is smaller than its relatives, and it has larger molars.
A detailed study of the giant panda's genetic history from 2012 confirms that the separation of the Qinlin population occurred about 300,000 years ago, and reveals that the non-Qinlin population further diverged into two groups, named the Minshan and the Qionglai-Daxiangling-Xiaoxiangling-Liangshan group respectively, about 2,800 years ago.
Description
The giant panda has luxuriant black-and-white fur.
Adults measure around long, including a tail of about , and tall at the shoulder.
Males can weigh up to .
Females (generally 10-20% smaller than males) can weigh as little as , but can also weigh up to .
Average adult weight is .
The giant panda has a body shape typical of bears.
It has black fur on its ears, eye patches, muzzle, legs, arms and shoulders.
The rest of the animal's coat is white.
Although scientists do not know why these unusual bears are black and white, speculation suggests that the bold colouring provides effective camouflage in their shade-dappled snowy and rocky habitat.
The giant panda's thick, wooly coat keeps it warm in the cool forests of its habitat.
A 110.45 kg (243.5 lb) giant panda has a 3D canine teeth bite force of 2603.47 newtons and bite force quotient of 292.
Another study had a 117.5 kg (259 lb) giant panda bite of 1298.9 newtons (BFQ 151.4) at canine teeth and 1815.9 newtons (BFQ 141.8) at carnassial teeth.
The giant panda's paw has a "thumb" and five fingers; the "thumb" - actually a modified sesamoid bone - helps it to hold bamboo while eating.
Stephen Jay Gould discusses this feature in his book of essays on evolution and biology, The Panda's Thumb.
The giant panda's tail, measuring , is the second-longest in the bear family.
A female named Jia Jia was the oldest giant panda ever in captivity, born in 1978 and died at an age of 38 on 16 October 2016.
Pathology
A seven-year-old female named Jin Yi died in 2014 in a zoo in Zhengzhou, China, after showing symptoms of gastroenteritis and respiratory disease.
It was found that the cause of death was toxoplasmosis, a disease caused by Toxoplasma gondii and infecting most warm-blooded animals, including humans.
Genomics
The giant panda genome was sequenced in 2009 using Illumina dye sequencing.
Its genome contains 20 pairs of autosomes and one pair of sex chromosomes.
Ecology
Diet
Despite its taxonomic classification as a carnivoran, the giant panda's diet is primarily herbivorous, consisting almost exclusively of bamboo.
and thus derives little energy and little protein from consumption of bamboo.
Its ability to digest cellulose is ascribed to the microbes in its gut.
Pandas are born with sterile intestines and require bacteria obtained from their mother's feces to digest vegetation.
The giant panda is a highly specialised animal with unique adaptations, and has lived in bamboo forests for millions of years.
The average giant panda eats as much as 9 to 14 kg (20 to 30 lb) of bamboo shoots a day to compensate for the limited energy content of its diet.
Ingestion of such a large quantity of material is possible because of the rapid passage of large amounts of indigestible plant material through the short, straight digestive tract.
It is also noted, however, that such rapid passage of digesta limits the potential of microbial digestion in the gastrointestinal tract, The limited energy input imposed on it by its diet has affected the panda's behavior.
The giant panda tends to limit its social interactions and avoids steeply sloping terrain to limit its energy expenditures.
Two of the panda's most distinctive features, its large size and round face, are adaptations to its bamboo diet.
Anthropologist Russell Ciochon observed: "much like the vegetarian gorilla, the low body surface area to body volume of the giant panda is indicative of a lower metabolic rate.
This lower metabolic rate and a more sedentary lifestyle allows the giant panda to subsist on nutrient poor resources such as bamboo."
Genome sequencing of the giant panda suggests that the dietary switch could have initiated from the loss of the sole T1R1/T1R3 umami taste receptor, resulting from two frameshift mutations within the T1R1 exons.
Umami taste corresponds to high levels of glutamate as found in meat and may have thus altered the food choice of the giant panda.
Although the pseudogenisation of the umami taste receptor in Ailuropoda coincides with the dietary switch to herbivory, it is likely a result of, and not the reason for, the dietary change.
and Fargesia rufa.
Only a few bamboo species are widespread at the high altitudes pandas now inhabit.
Bamboo leaves contain the highest protein levels; stems have less.
Because of the synchronous flowering, death, and regeneration of all bamboo within a species, the giant panda must have at least two different species available in its range to avoid starvation.
While primarily herbivorous, the giant panda still retains decidedly ursine teeth and will eat meat, fish, and eggs when available.
In captivity, zoos typically maintain the giant panda's bamboo diet, though some will provide specially formulated biscuits or other dietary supplements.
Pandas will travel between different habitats if they need to, so they can get the nutrients that they need and to balance their diet for reproduction.
For six years, scientists studied six pandas tagged with GPS collars at the Foping Reserve in the Qinling Mountains.
They took note of their foraging and mating habits and analyzed samples of their food and feces.
The pandas would move from the valleys into the Qinling Mountains and would only return to the valleys in autumn.
During the summer months bamboo shoots rich in protein are only available at higher altitudes which causes low calcium rates in the pandas and during breeding season the pandas would trek back down to eat bamboo leaves rich in calcium.
Predators
Although adult giant pandas have few natural predators other than humans, young cubs are vulnerable to attacks by snow leopards, yellow-throated martens, eagles, feral dogs, and the Asian black bear.
Sub-adults weighing up to may be vulnerable to predation by leopards.
Behavior
The giant panda is a terrestrial animal and primarily spends its life roaming and feeding in the bamboo forests of the Qinling Mountains and in the hilly province of Sichuan.
Giant pandas are generally solitary.
After mating, the male leaves the female alone to raise the cub.
Pandas were thought to fall into the crepuscular category, those who are active twice a day, at dawn and dusk; however, Jindong Zhang found that pandas may belong to a category all of their own, with activity peaks in the morning, afternoon and midnight.
Due to their sheer size, pandas do not need to fear predators like other herbivores.
They can therefore be active at any time of the day.
Pandas communicate through vocalisation and scent marking such as clawing trees or spraying urine.
Pandas rely primarily on spatial memory rather than visual memory.
Though the panda is often assumed to be docile, it has been known to attack humans, presumably out of irritation rather than aggression.
Reproduction
Initially, the primary method of breeding giant pandas in captivity was by artificial insemination, as they seemed to lose their interest in mating once they were captured.
This led some scientists to try extreme methods, such as showing them videos of giant pandas mating and giving the males sildenafil (commonly known by name Viagra).
Only recently have researchers started having success with captive breeding programs, and they have now determined giant pandas have comparable breeding to some populations of the American black bear, a thriving bear species.
The normal reproductive rate is considered to be one young every two years.
The mating season is between March and May, when a female goes into estrus, which lasts for two or three days and only occurs once a year.
When mating, the female is in a crouching, head-down position as the male mounts her from behind.
Copulation time is short, ranging from 30 seconds to five minutes, but the male may mount her repeatedly to ensure successful fertilisation.
The gestation period ranges from 95 to 160 days.
If twins are born, usually only one survives in the wild.
The mother will select the stronger of the cubs, and the weaker cub will die due to starvation.
The mother is thought to be unable to produce enough milk for two cubs since she does not store fat.
The father has no part in helping raise the cub.
When the cub is first born, it is pink, blind, and toothless, weighing only 90 to 130 grams (3.2 to 4.6 ounces), or about th of the mother's weight, proportionally the smallest baby of any placental mammal.
It nurses from its mother's breast six to 14 times a day for up to 30 minutes at a time.
For three to four hours, the mother may leave the den to feed, which leaves the cub defenseless.
One to two weeks after birth, the cub's skin turns grey where its hair will eventually become black.
Slight pink colour may appear on cub's fur, as a result of a chemical reaction between the fur and its mother's saliva.
A month after birth, the colour pattern of the cub's fur is fully developed.
Its fur is very soft and coarsens with age.
The cub begins to crawl at 75 to 80 days; though mother's milk remains the primary food source for most of the first year.
Giant panda cubs weigh 45 kg (100 pounds) at one year and live with their mothers until they are 18 months to two years old.
The interval between births in the wild is generally two years.
In July 2009, Chinese scientists confirmed the birth of the first cub to be successfully conceived through artificial insemination using frozen sperm.
The technique for freezing the sperm in liquid nitrogen was first developed in 1980 and the first birth was hailed as a solution to the problem of lessening giant panda semen availability, which had led to inbreeding.
It is expected that zoos in destinations such as San Diego in the United States and Mexico City will now be able to provide their own semen to inseminate more giant pandas.
In August 2014, a rare birth of panda triplets was announced in China; it was the fourth of such births ever reported.
Attempts have also been made to reproduce giant pandas by interspecific pregnancy by implanting cloned panda embryos into the uterus of an animal of another species.
This has resulted in panda fetuses, but no live births.
Uses and human interaction
Early references
In the past, pandas were thought to be rare and noble creatures - the Empress Dowager Bo was buried with a panda skull in her vault.
The grandson of Emperor Taizong of Tang is said to have given Japan two pandas and a sheet of panda skin as a sign of goodwill.
Unlike many other animals in Ancient China, pandas were rarely thought to have medical uses.
The few known uses include the Sichuan tribal peoples' use of panda urine to melt accidentally swallowed needles, and the use of panda pelts to control menses as described in the Qin Dynasty encyclopedia Erya.
The creature named mo (貘) mentioned in some ancient books has been interpreted as giant panda.
although the older Erya describes mo simply as a "white leopard".
The interpretation of the legendary fierce creature pixiu (貔貅) as referring to the giant panda is also common.
During the reign of the Yongle Emperor (early 15th century), his relative from Kaifeng sent him a captured zouyu in the 1970s, as it marked some of the first cultural exchanges between the PRC and the West.
This practice has been termed "panda diplomacy".
By 1984, however, pandas were no longer given as gifts.
Instead, the PRC began to offer pandas to other nations only on 10-year loans, under terms including a fee of up to US$1,000,000 per year and a provision that any cubs born during the loan are the property of the PRC.
Since 1998, because of a WWF lawsuit, the United States Fish and Wildlife Service only allows a US zoo to import a panda if the zoo can ensure the PRC will channel more than half of its loan fee into conservation efforts for the giant panda and its habitat.
In May 2005, the PRC offered a breeding pair to Taiwan.
The issue became embroiled in cross-Strait relations - both over the underlying symbolism, and over technical issues such as whether the transfer would be considered "domestic" or "international", or whether any true conservation purpose would be served by the exchange.
A contest in 2006 to name the pandas was held in the mainland, resulting in the politically charged names Tuan Tuan and Yuan Yuan (from tuanyuan, meaning "reunion", i.e. "reunification").
PRC's offer was initially rejected by Chen Shui-bian, then President of Taiwan.
However, when Ma Ying-jeou assumed the presidency in 2008, the offer was accepted, and the pandas arrived in December of that year.
Biofuel
Microbes in panda waste are being investigated for their use in creating biofuels from bamboo and other plant materials.
Conservation
The giant panda is a vulnerable species, threatened by continued habitat loss and habitat fragmentation, and by a very low birthrate, both in the wild and in captivity.
The giant panda is among the world's most adored and protected rare animals, and is one of the few in the world whose natural inhabitant status was able to gain a UNESCO World Heritage Site designation.
The Sichuan Giant Panda Sanctuaries, located in the southwest province of Sichuan and covering seven natural reserves, were inscribed onto the World Heritage List in 2006.
Not all conservationists agree that the money spent on conserving pandas is well spent.
Chris Packham has argued that the breeding of pandas in captivity is "pointless" because "there is not enough habitat left to sustain them".
Packham argues that the money spent on pandas would be better spent elsewhere, though he has apologised for upsetting people who like pandas.
He said, "The panda is possibly one of the grossest wastes of conservation money in the last half century."
In 2012, Earthwatch Institute, a global nonprofit that teams volunteers with scientists to conduct important environmental research, launched a program called "On the Trail of Giant Panda".
This program, based in the Wolong National Nature Reserve, allows volunteers to work up close with pandas cared for in captivity, and help them adapt to life in the wild, so that they may breed, and live longer and healthier lives.
In zoos
Pandas have been kept in zoos as early as the Western Han Dynasty in China, where the writer Sima Xiangru noted that the panda was the most treasured animal in the emperor's garden of exotic animals in the capital Chang'an (present Xi'an).
Not until the 1950s were pandas again recorded to have been exhibited in China's zoos.
Chi Chi at the London Zoo became very popular.
This influenced the World Wildlife Fund to use a panda as its symbol.
A 2006 New York Times article outlined the economics of keeping pandas, which costs five times more than keeping the next most expensive animal, an elephant.
American zoos generally pay the Chinese government $1 million a year in fees, as part of a typical ten-year contract.
San Diego's contract with China was to expire in 2008, but got a five-year extension at about half of the previous yearly cost.
The last contract, with the Memphis Zoo in Memphis, Tennessee, ended in 2013.
Population chart
Reference in medicine
The Face of the Giant Panda Sign is an MRI sign in patients with Wilson's disease, named for the midbrain's resemblance to a giant panda's face.
;Bibliography
* AFP (via Discovery Channel) (2006, 20 June).
https:/ web http:/ news 06 panda_ani.html?category
animals&guid
20060620103030&dcitc=w19-502-ak-0000 Panda Numbers Exceed Expectations.
* Associated Press (via CNN) (2006).
https:/ web http:/ 2006 asiapcf 06 index.html Article link.
* Friends of the National Zoo (2006).
Panda Cam: A Nation Watches Tai Shan the Panda Cub Grow.
New York: Fireside Books.
* Goodman, Brenda (2006, 12 February).
https:/ 2006 12 12panda.html Pandas Eat Up Much of Zoos' Budgets.
The New York Times.
* (An earlier edition is available as The Smithsonian Book of Giant Pandas, Smithsonian Institution Press, 2002, .)
* https:/ web http:/ english htm panda_survey/q%26a.htm Panda Facts At a Glance (N.d.). .
WWF China.
* Ryder, Joanne (2001).
Little panda: The World Welcomes Hua Mei at the San Diego Zoo.
New York: Simon & Schuster.
* Warren, Lynne (July 2006).
"Panda, Inc." National Geographic.
(About Mei Xiang, Tai Shan and the Wolong Panda Research Facility in Chengdu China).
