Berlin Cathedral () is the common name for the Evangelical Supreme Parish and Collegiate Church () in Berlin, Germany.
It is located on Museum Island in the Mitte borough.
The current building was finished in 1905 and is a major work of Historicist architecture of the "Kaiserzeit".
The Dom is the parish church of the congregation Gemeinde der Oberpfarr-
und Domkirche zu Berlin, a member of the umbrella organisation Evangelical Church of Berlin-Brandenburg-Silesian Upper Lusatia.
The term Dom denotes a collegiate church (equivalent to the Italian duomo, or the English "Minster"); however, as most cathedrals are also collegiate churches, the term "Dom" has become the common term for a cathedral in German, though they are not synonymous.
Berlin Cathedral has never been a cathedral in the actual sense of that term since it has never been the seat of a bishop.
The bishop of the Evangelical Church in Berlin-Brandenburg (under this name 1945-2003) is based at St. Mary's Church and Kaiser Wilhelm Memorial Church in Berlin.
History
Berlin Cathedral has a long history starting as a Roman Catholic place of worship in the 15th century.
Establishment of a Collegiate Church in Berlin (1451-1536)
The history of today's Supreme Parish and Collegiate Church and its community dates back to 1451.
In that year Prince-Elector Frederick II Irontooth of Brandenburg moved with his residence from Brandenburg upon Havel to Cölln into the newly erected City Palace, which also housed a Catholic chapel.
In 1454 Frederick Irontooth, after having returned - via Rome - from his pilgrimage to Jerusalem, elevated the chapel to become a parish church, richly endowing it with relics and altars.
Pope Nicholas V ordered Stephan Bodecker, then Prince-Bishop of Brandenburg, to consecrate the chapel to Erasmus of Formiae.
On 7 April 1465 - at Frederick Irontooth's request - Pope Paul II attributed to St Erasmus Chapel a canon-law College named Stift zu Ehren Unserer Lieben Frauen, des heiligen Kreuzes, St. Petri und Pauli, St. Erasmi und St. Nicolai dedicated to Mary (am) of Nazareth, the Holy Cross, Simon Peter, Paul of Tarsus, Erasmus of Formiae, and Nicholas of Myra.
A collegiate church is a church endowed with revenues and earning estates, in order to provide a number of canons, called in canon law a College, with prebends.
On 20 January 1469, Dietrich IV, then Prince-Bishop of Brandenburg, invested eight clergymen, chosen by Frederick Irontooth, as collegiate canons with the prebends.
From 1545, on the electoral family of Hohenzollern used the church building also as their burial place.
In 1538, a new western façade with two towers was attached to the collegiate church, which - due to its prior status as a church of a mendicant order - had no tower before.
In the next year, Joachim II Hector converted from Catholicism to Lutheranism, as earlier had done many of his subjects.
The collegiate church thus became Lutheran too, like most of the electoral subjects and all the churches in the Electorate.
However, Joachim II Hector's ideas of Reformation were different from the modern ones.
After his conversion he enriched the collegiate church with luxuriant furnishings, such as paraments, monstrances, relics, chasubles, carpets and antependia.
was increasingly skipped.
In 1667, the dilapidated double-tower façade was torn down and in 1717 Martin Böhme erected a new baroque façade with two towers.
With effect of 1 January 1710, Cölln was united with Berlin under the latter name.
In 1747, the Supreme Parish Church was completely demolished to clear space for the baroque extension of Berlin Palace.
The Supreme Parish Church in its new Building north of the Palace (1750-1893)
On 6 September 1750, the new baroque Calvinist Supreme Parish Church was inaugurated, built by Johann Boumann the Elder in 1747-1750.
The electoral tombs were transferred to the new building.
The new structure covered a space north of the palace, which is still covered by the present building.
In 1940, the blast waves of Allied bombing blew part of the windows away.
On 24 May 1944, a bomb of combustible liquids entered the roof lantern of the dome.
The fire could not be extinguished at that unreachable section of the dome.
So the lantern burnt out and collapsed into the main floor.
Between 1949 and 1953, a temporary roof was built to enclose the building.
On 9 May 1967 the then still undivided Evangelical Church of the Union decided a committee for the reconstruction of the Supreme Parish and Cathedral Church, then located in East Berlin.
The government of the Eastern German Democratic Republic did not oppose the work of the committee due to the concomitant inflow of Deutsche Marks.
In 1975, reconstruction started, simplifying the building's original design and demolishing the northern wing, the 'Denkmalskirche' - Memorial Church.
Compared by some to the Medici Chapel, it had survived the war completely intact but was demolished for ideological reasons by the communist government due to it being a hall of honour for the Hohenzollern dynasty.
This resulted in scaffolding for restoration appearing on the church while detonation charges were applied to its undamaged rear.
The government also demanded the removal of as many crosses as possible.
The demolition and redesign cost 800,000 marks, while the restoration (done on the cheap) cost just 50,000 marks.
The Berlin Cathedral Building Society now seek to rebuild the Denkmalskirche.
In 1980, the baptistery and wedding church was reopened for services.
The restoration of the nave was begun in 1984.
On 6 June 1993, the nave was reinaugurated in an event attended by Federal Chancellor Helmut Kohl and televised nationwide in Germany.
There has been discussion to restore the dome and surrounding cupolas to their original appearance, but this has not occurred due to lack of funds.
Music
QTEMPLATE box
Main organ
QTEMPLATE box
The pipe organ, built by Wilhelm Sauer, was fully restored during reconstruction.
It has 113 stops, including three ranks of 32' pipes on the pedal division, played by a 4-manual console:
* II I, IV II, IV III, I P, III P
* 3 Freie Kombinationen, Mezzoforte, Forte, Tutti, Rohrwerke, Jalousieschweller III.
Manual, Jalousieschweller IV.
Manual, Jalousieschweller Vox humana, Handregister ab, Rückpositiv ab.
Ensembles
Contributing to the Cathedral's comprehensive concert programme is their own set of choirs (Berliner Domkantorei) and a brass ensemble (Berliner Dombläser).
The Berlin Cathedral is also the main place of activity for the renonwned boys' choir Staats-
und Domchor Berlin, an institution of the Berlin University of the Arts.
Notes
