Goofy
Artwork of Goofy
Goofy is a funny animal cartoon character created by Walt Disney in 1932.
He first appeared in Mickey's Revue as Dippy Dawg in 1932.
Goofy was first depicted as a tall, skinny, miserable Dog, his role in Mickey's Revue is when he is seen shortly clapping after a performance.
He had his Trademark Vest on, some pants, and he had bandages and scars over his upper torso and body.
In "Orphans Benifet" he is now known as Goofy.
In his color appearance He has now an orange vest and sweater, and has some pants resembling jeans and brown, beat up versions of Mickey Mouses shoes.
In 1938 "The Whalers" was released, which depectied Donald Duck and Mickey Mouse Working along with Goofy to get away from a giant whale.
In one of his earliest color appearances, "Clockwork Cleaners" he works along Mickey and Donald in order to attempt to clean a giant clock resembling Big Ben.
Goofy Appears in "The Band Concert" Working with Mickey to make a good show of "The William Tell Overture", but this time Donald just annoys the Band and plays "Turkey In The Straw" with multiple flutes throughout the episode.
Goofy is Featured in "A Goofy Movie" and "A Extremley Goofy Movie" as the main protagonist along with his son Max.
In the latter movie, Max goes into collage and Goofy, having lost his job, decides to go into collage with Max.
The movies premiered with the former in 1995 and the latter in 2000.
In his first appearance, Goofy is depectied as a much older dog.
His younger appearance wouldn't appear until The Whoopee Party.
Goofys last name is "Goof" despite him being a dog.
Goofy has gone through several different stages through his history:
His first was an old, miserable dog.
His second was a younger, less miserable version of the first.
His next was as a random clothed character, such as wearing some concert clothes in "The Band Concert", Janitor clothes in "Clockwork Cleaners", And A sailor suit in "The Whalers".
His trademark sweater wouldn't appear until the early 1940s.
His 4th was having a more bold look, and depectied as The Ghost of Jacob Marley in 1983s "Mickeys Christmas Carol".
Then he was animated In CGI in Mickey Mouse Clubhouse.
His present look in the Mickey Mouse short cartoon series is somewhat his first design, looking a little miserable again, but now he has more of a yellowish vest and in one episode "Goofys First Love" there is a closeup where he is seen as a "Gross Up-Close Up".
Goofy was the 5th Mickey Mouse Franchise character created, after Pete, Mickey, Minnie, And Pluto.
Donald appeared next in the 1934 short "The Wise Littke Hen
