Africa
Africa has more than 1.1 billion inhabitants and 20% of the world's population lives.
It is divided in 54 states
Much of Africa is between the two tropics:
Tropic of Cancer (north) and Tropic of Capricorn (south).
So most of the African climates are warm.
Only change the annual repartition and the total of precipitation.
From north to south, Africa has most types of climate.
In sequence from the north to equator
The rainshadow effect.
Much of North Africa is dry and hot: it is dominated by the Sahara Desert and does not receive much rain.
In Saharan Africa there are few rivers or other water sources.
Underground water sources, such as springs are very important in the desert.
These often form oases.
An oasis is an area of vegetation (plant life) and farming surrounded by desert.
In that part of the world the wind comes mostly from the east.
That does bring rain.
The Atlas Mountains near the north coast of Africa prevent rain from coming in from the north.
That is another rain shadow.
These two rain shadows are mainly responsible for the Sahara desert.
Conditions and winds are different further south, where huge amounts of rain falls near the equator.
The equator runs across the middle of Africa (see red line drawn on map).
That means much of Africa is between the two tropics:
According to the different climates there are different biomes:
Biomes of Africa
Savana in Benin.
Photography taken in March.
Desert pavement in the Sahara Mauretania.
Photography taken in January.
Africa got it's name from a Latin word "Afri" that was used to describe people living west of the River nil, which is North Africa.
Between the fifteenth and the nineteenth centuries (500 years), the Atlantic slave trade took an estimated 7-12 million slaves to the New World.
Between 1808 and 1860, the British Navy captured approximately 1,600 slave ships and freed 150,000 Africans who were aboard.
Areas of Africa under the control or influence of European nations in 1914 (at outbreak of World War I).
In the late nineteenth century, the European powers occupied much of the continent, creating many colonial and dependent territories.
They left only two fully independent states: Ethiopia (known to Europeans as "Abyssinia"), and Liberia.
Egypt and Sudan were never formally incorporated into any European colonial empire.
However, after the British occupation of 1882, Egypt was effectively under British administration until 1922.
The African Union (AU) is a 53-member federation consisting of all of Africa's states except Morocco.
The African Union, not to be confused with the AU Commission, aims to transform the African Economic Community, a federated commonwealth, into a state under established treaties.
The African Union has a parliamentary government, known as the African Union Government, consisting of legislative, judicial and executive organs.
It is led by the African Union President and Head of State, who is also the President of the Pan African Parliament.
A person becomes AU President by being elected to the PAP, and subsequently gaining majority support in the PAP.
A civil war in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (formerly Zaire) began in 1998.
Neighbouring African countries have become involved.
Since the conflict began, the estimated death toll has reached 5 million.
Political associations such as the African Union offer hope for greater co-operation and peace between the continent's many countries.
Extensive human rights abuses still occur in several parts of Africa, often under the oversight of the state.
Several American countries have significant African descendents among their inhabitants.
↑J.Hofman and S.Colbert 2009.
The ultimate guide to African mammals.
Libeal House, New Jersey.
↑J.Dorst and P.Dandelot 1983.
A field guide to the larger mammals of Africa.
Collins, London.
↑N.Myers 1997.
The rich diversity of biodiversity issues.
(In:Biodiversity II, ed. E.O. Wilson et al, National Academy Press.
