Eid al-Adha
Eid al-Adha (ar. عيد الأضحى Eid ul-Adha; Turkish: Kurban Bayramı) or Hajji Eid is the Islamic Feast of Sacrifice (Qurban) (Turkish: kurban means "sacrifice"), the most important Islamic Feast.
It marks the first four days of the month of zu al-Hijjah, the last month of the Islamic calendar.
During this Feast, Muslims who are able to perform the Hajj, the pilgrimage to Mecca, the fifth practical duty of Islam, which is why this feast is also called Hajj.
He comes two months and ten days after Ramadan.
Eid al-Adha lasts for four days.
Girls ready to celebrate Eid al-Adha in Hama, Syria, at the end of Ramadan, 2009
On the first day of Eid al-Adha, Muslims celebrate in their homes, men go to the mosques at dawn for the morning prayer, wait for the sunrise and offer the Eid prayer.
Congratulations follow.
They then go to cemeteries (graveyards), and then return to their homes, where they offer the sacrifice of the Sacrifice according to the rules of Sharia law.
Muslims most often sacrifice ram or sheep, and the sacrificial meat is divided into three parts: one for the family, one for neighbors and relatives, and one for the poor.
During this time, the women prepare a hearty meal, and preference is given to the use of sacrificial meat.
Children are given presents (sweets or money), neighbors and relatives are visited and given presents, and a piece of sacrificial meat is brought to them, as a symbol of blessing and devotion to God.
It is believed that around 2000 BC.
Kr.
God sent one of His slaves to earth in the Sumerian region, in the city of Ur, when people obeyed their idols and statues.
He sent him with the Truth to one God.
That man was Ibrahim or Abraham.
His journey was not easy.
The path of truth is full of thorns and difficulties of various kinds, so that until his old age, when he was already losing hope, he could not have a son with his wife Sarah.
Then they decided on a custom at the time, that Sarah did not give him a child, to find a woman who would give him a child.
It was Hagar or Hajar who gave birth to a son named Ismail or Ishmael He will be the ancestor of the Arab people.
But a big surprise awaited Ibrahim.
He was greeted by "three" and informed that Sarah would give birth to a child, which she laughed at because she knew she was too old to give birth, to which they said that she would give birth and that it would be a man and that he would call him Ishak.
in Old Hebrew it means a smile.
From him will come the Jews.
Ibrahim lived happily until He commanded him to sacrifice his son Ismail Ibrahim set out to obey him, but when God saw that Ibrahim was ready to kill his firstborn Ismail just for the command He commanded, as a great temptation, he stopped the execution and instead of Ismail he placed a ram as a sacrifice.
From that day until now, Muslims (those who are committed to the will of God) carry out the command to sacrifice the kurban.
It is most often a sheep, preferably, but it can also be the equivalent in money of buying meat to sacrifice those sheep.
This act is performed during Hajj, in the last month according to the Hijri calendar of Dhul-Hijjah.
The meat that is slaughtered is divided into thirds, so that one third goes to relatives, one goes to the poor and one third to those who need it the most.
The kurban is slaughtered by one who has the material means to do so, if he cannot it is not his sin.
The slaughter of the kurban, (sacrifice) is present throughout all world cultures and civilizations.
The very symbolism of Eid al-Adha is based on sacrifice and piety.
The sacrifice that Ibrahim (peace and blessings be upon him) was to offer could hardly be made by anyone without firm faith.
For this piety shown by God, he raised Abraham as His true friend, and promised him a rich land and great descendants, and indeed today all three great civilizations, Western as Christian, Jewish and Islamic, have a common ancestor Adam, and from Ibrahim mentioned by the Old The Covenant and the Qur'an an even closer relative.
The very purpose of the kurban is to relive liberation by capturing oneself with God's word, His will, and the Law.
This is best seen during the Hajj, when Eid al-Adha is celebrated, at the time of the strongest unity of human souls around a common goal, an event that represents a unique image of equality and brotherhood on Earth.
