His father, James Roosevelt, and his mother, Sara, were each from rich old New York families, of Dutch and French ancestry respectively.
Franklin was their only child.
His paternal grandmother, Mary Rebecca Aspinwall, was a first cousin of Elizabeth Monroe, wife of the fifth U.S. President, James Monroe.
In 1921, Roosevelt got sick with poliomyelitis, a disease that paralyzes people.
He never walked again, but Roosevelt remained physically fit, becoming an avid swimmer.
Roosevelt became a champion of medical research and treatment for crippling illnesses, but kept his illness as hidden as much as possible from the public, fearing discrimination.
His disability did not limit his political career; Roosevelt was elected the Governor of New York in 1928.
His wife, Eleanor Roosevelt helped his career by travelling and meeting people when Roosevelt could not.
She became famous as his eyes and ears, meeting thousands of ordinary people and bringing their concerns to Roosevelt.
Presidency
Roosevelt won the election against the unpopular incumbent (president at the time)
Herbert Hoover and became president in early 1933.
He started a series of popular programs known as the New Deal to fight against the Great Depression.
The New Deal gave people jobs building roads, bridges, dams, parks, schools, and other public services.
Also, it created Social Security, made banks insure their customers, gave direct aid to the needy, and made many regulations to the economy.
Because of this, he was re-elected in a large victory in 1936 and continued the New Deal.
The United States did not fully recover from the Great Depression until it entered World War II.
In 1939, Roosevelt became the first President of the United States to appear on television.
Roosevelt was elected a third term in 1940.
He gave weapons and money to the Allies fighting in World War II as a part of the Lend-Lease program at this time, but the United States was still technically neutral in the war.
War
On December 7, 1941, Japan launched its attack on the Pearl Harbor military base in Hawaii.
On December 8, the United States Congress declared war on the Empire of Japan.
It was formulated an hour after the famous Infamy Speech by Roosevelt.
After the declaration, Japan's allies, Germany and Italy, declared war on the United States.
This brought the United States fully into World War II.
For overcoming the difficult challenges of a depression and a world war, historians generally consider him to be one of the best U.S. presidents.
Other pages
Other websites
References
↑Davis, Kenneth S.FDR: The Beckoning of Destiny, 1882-1928 (1972), ISBN 978-0-399-10998-0 : popular biography
↑Goodwin, Doris Kearns.
No Ordinary Time: Franklin and Eleanor Roosevelt: The Home Front in World War II (1995), ISBN 978-0-684-80448-4 : popular joint biography
