Duolingo
The project was initiated by the professor Luis von Ahn and the postgraduate student Severin Hacker.
In its development, it used principally the programing language Python, and with him participated Antonio Navas, Vicki Cheung, Marcel Uekermann, Brendan Meeder, Hector Villafuerte and Jose Fuentes.
To participate in the courses, the user must create an account with an active and valid email address, where the user will receive the confirmation.
Users are periodically sent reminders to practice the language.
The user also can help to translate web pages and others documents.
It is important to have backing material such as dictionaries.
In addition to courses, Duolingo provides to its users a space where can apply the knowledge gained through text translation.
People can only access this space through the website and not through phones applications.
On July 22, 2004, Duolingo released Duolingo Test Center, a platform of an official English certification.
This can be done in the website, iOS or Android, where the tests are supervised through camera and microphone.
The tests require 20 minutes, cost $20 American dollars and qualifies the student from a note of 0-10.
Duolingo is used increasingly in classrooms.
For example, in Costa Rica and Guatemala, Duolingo has been used in public schools as a pilot project carried out by the government.
In January 2015, Duolingo launched a project entitled Duolingo for Schools, in order to provide teachers a control panel through which they can follow the progress of their students in a particular language.
The board helps the teacher to understand the weaknesses and strengths of each student individually.
Duolingo has 28 languages available for English speakers (Including 3 constructed languages), and 6 more currently in development.
"Hatching" means the course is still in development.
Duolingo has courses available for speakers of other languages as well, but Duolingo courses for non-English speakers are very limited, with most of the available languages only offering English as a course.
All other available languages offer English as a course.
However, the Guarani and Catalan courses are only available for Spanish speakers, which has the most available courses for speakers of non-English languages, with 9.
Tagalog: English (Hatching)
Tamil: English (Hatching)
Telugu: English (Hatching)
Thai: English
Turkish: English, German, Russian, French (Hatching)
Ukranian: English
Vietnamese: English
