Muhammad
Muhammad (also referred as Mahomet in French) is a prophet in Islam born on April 570 or 571 at Mecca, current Saudi Arabia and passed away on July 632 or 633 at Madinah in the same country.
He is considered as the most influent person of the human history.
Muhammad ibn Abdallah ibn Abd al-Mouttalib was born at Mecca, from a father who has died seven months before his birth, Abdullah ibn Abd al mouttalib, and his mother Amina bint Wahab, who died when Muhammad was 6 years old.
His grandfather Abd al-Mouttalib ibn Hachim ibn Abd Manaf ibn Qusai ibn Kilab ibn Murrah ibn Ka'b ibn Luay ibn Ghalib ibn Fihr ibn Malik ibn An-Nadr ibn Kinanah ibn Khuzaimah ibn Mudrikah ibn Ilyas ibn Mudar ibn Nizar ibn Ma'ad ibn Adnan also passed away when his grandchild reached 8 years, then his uncle Abou Taleb raised him.
He has been married to Khadijah bint Khouwaylid when he was 25 or 28 years old.
It was from the habit of Muhammad that he'd go into the Hira Cave, thinking and meditating, till he reached 40 years old.
When this age reached, the angel Gabriel went into him from the sky, and told him that he would become a prophet, of what is now Islam.
After declaring this to his population, the Quraychtribe, most of people mocked from him, the new believers were too low in amount.
They were uniting in one of them's house, secretly sneaking away from their homes in night, thus hiding their faith in public.
Weeks later, Muhammad was ordered to start public declarations, with slight positive results, as people began to join Islam in a higher rate than before.
Nevertheless, Quyrach noble people found that the extension of this religion would be harmful for their activities, and would threaten their ancestors' religious behaviors.
Heavy torturing has been committed, the first persons who died for Islam were Soumayya bint Khayyat, and her husband Yasir ibn Amir, while their son Ammar survived by tricking Quraych people that he had came back into his old religion, which wasn't the case.
Several years later, Muhammad's wife Khadija and his uncle Abou Taleb died in the same year, which was therefore named by historians as the year of sorrow, this because the closest persons to him are now dead : in fact, Khadija was giving him internal support from the beginning of his prophet mission, while Abou Taleb was protecting him from Quraych rushes, being one of their most respectable community leaders.
His tribe didn't wait too much to start harassing Muhammad and treating his followers in the worst manners for 3 years.
Muhammad then decided to go into Madinah, which was called Madyan before.
His coming was followed by a huge acclaiming, Madinah becoming then the capital of the new religion.
The religion has developed there more and more, along with external conquests and alliances with other tribes.
Muhammad then came back to Mecca, where he was ordered to take it back.
Leading more than 100 000 men ready to fight, he didn't have to battle, though.
Instead, he entered Mecca peacefully, with no blood wasted.
Islam went to grow even further, as it also reached Persian and Roman empires.
He died when he reached 63 years old, then the era of Khilâfa started, beginning with Abou Bakr Al-Siddiq, to finish with Ali ibn Abi Taleb.
