Harry Potter
Harry Potter is a fantasy series of 7 novels written by British author J.K. Rowling(full name Joanne Kathleen Rowling).
J.K. Rowling was born on July 31, 1965, in Yate near Bristol, England.
Harry potter was first published in 1997, with the philosopher’s stone(sorcerer’s stone in America).
This was followed by chamber of secrets(1998), prisoner of Azkaban(1999), goblet of fire(2000), order of the phoenix(2003), half-blood prince(2005), and finally deathly hallows(2007).The books have sold over 500 million copies worldwide, with over 180 million copies sold in the U.S.A alone.
The books popularity was supplemented by the release of 8 films by David Heyman studios and directed by a number of directors .
The films featured Daniel Radcliffe, Rupert Grint, and Emma Watson as the famous trio.(see harry potter film series).
As his parents were killed when Harry was just one year old, he grew up with his aunt's family, the Dursleys, who have a boy named Dudley and treat Harry badly.
When the family goes for a long drive, they end up at a hut on the ocean where giant Hagrid barges in and tells Harry that he is a wizard.
On his train journey towards Hogwarts School of Witchcraft and Wizardry, Harry meets two other child wizards, Hermione Granger and Ron Weasley.
They quickly become friends and will support each other throughout all the adventures and difficulties that they'll have to face during the next seven years.
Harry potter was created by J.K Rowling in 26 June 1997, when harry potter and the philosopher's stone was released.
Since then, harry potter has become a much loved fictional character, with 7 books and 8 films made since.
As of February 2018, the books have sold more than 500 million copies worldwide, making them the best-selling book series in history, and have been translated into eighty languages.
The books follow the adventures of the young wizard harry potter and his best friends Ron Weasley and Hermione granger, a witch with muggle parents.
We see Harry's epic journey against his arch-enemy Voldemort, and his quest to destroy the horcruxes and defeat Voldemort once and for all.
Every journey is not without loss: harry loses his mentor Dumbledore, and his godfather Sirius black, to name a few..
The books popularity was supplemented by the release of 8 films by David Heyman studios, which went out from 2001 to 2011.
The films featured Daniel Radcliffe, Rupert Grint, and Emma Watson as the famous trio.(see harry potter film series).
