Pasta
Pasta is a common type of food that is used in many cuisines today.
Pasta is made of ground durumwheat, water and in some cases eggs.
The most common type of pasta seen nowadays is in the form of spaghettinoodles.
Pasta is commonly known to have originated from Italy.
However, there are many theories of on pasta actually came to be what it is today.
Contradictory to popular belief, the base for the creation of pasta might have originated from China as a form of Asian noodles.
It is said that these noodles were developed into pasta ever since in was brought back to Italy by Marco Polo.
Some researchers also suggest that pasta was only developed into the durum wheat form that is seen commonly today when it reached the Mediterranean.
This was a suitable type of food in the Mediterranean since durum wheat had a long shelf life.
Pasta was introduced to America when Spanish setters arrived there.
The first form of pasta that was common to Americans was macaroni pasta.
This type of pasta was popularised by Thomas Jefferson when he introduced the macaroni machine to America in 1789.
However, the point in which pasta became a common food was when Italian immigrants moved to the USA.
When the creation of pasta was still in development, it was made of ground durum wheat, water and eggs.
At the time, it was preferable for the pasta to be made in this way since it would then have a high gluten level but still have low moisture.
This allowed the pasta to be preserved for a decent amount of time until it has to be cooked.
Today, pasta is made of pure semolina flour and water.
First, the semolina flour is mixed and kneaded with the water.
The colour of pasta can be changed from its usual color of light brown into either a green or red colour by mixing with spinach or tomato.
Then, the pasta is shaped into the many different shapes recognised today by pushing the kneaded pasta through metal holes.
Finally, the pasta is dried by heating it.
Pasta is especially known to help sustain energy in our body unlike other carbohydrates.
Pasta is also a cholesterol free food which makes it healthy even for daily and frequent consumption.
Furthermore, pasta contains iron and high amounts of Vitamin B. Based on research, a single cup of whole wheat pasta provides 25% of our daily fiber requirement.
Pasta that contains folic acid also helps women that are child-bearing.
Since pasta has a low glycemic index, it allows for healthy blood-sugar levels even if it is consumed in high amounts.
“History of Pasta”.
International Pasta Organisation.
Retrieved 2015-5-28.
Avey, Tori (2012-7-26).
“Uncover The History of Pasta”.
PBS Food.
Retrieved 2015-5-28.
“Pasta Nutrition”.
National Pasta Organisation.
Retrieved 2015-5-28.
Southan, Michelle (2011-11).
“How to make your own pasta”.
.au.
Retrieved 2015-5-28.
