Age of Enlightenment
The Enlightenment's most important idea was that all people can reason and think for themselves.
Because of this, people should not automatically believe what an authority says.
People do not even have to believe what churches teach or what priests say.
This was a very new idea at the time.
Another important idea was that a society is best when everyone works together to create it.
Even people with very little power or money should have the same rights as the rich and powerful to help create the society they live in.
The nobility should not have special rights or privileges any more.
These were very new ideas at the time.
They were also dangerous thoughts for the people in power.
Many Enlightenment philosophers were put in prison or were forced to leave their home countries.
The Enlightenment's ideas were also important to the people who fought in the French Revolution of 1789.
In some countries, kings and queens took some of the Enlightenment's ideas and made changes to their governments.
However, they still kept power for themselves.
These kings and queens were called "enlightened despots."
Examples include Catherine II of Russia (Catherine the Great), Frederick II of Prussia, and Gustav III of Sweden.
During the Age of Enlightenment, as more and more people began to use reason, some began to disagree with the idea that God created the world.
This caused conflicts - and, later, war.
Many ideas that are important today were created during the Enlightenment.
Examples of these ideas include:
Freedom, democracy, and reason should be the most important things in a society.
Everybody in a society should have the same rights.
Every government should have a contract which promises that people will have these rights.
Writers and philosophers should be free to look for the truth, even if they disagreed with the ideas of people in power such as aristocracy.
Nobody should have to follow a certain religion.
There should be freedom of religion, and people should accept others who follow different religions.
The Enlightenment's ideas about thinking with reason, having personal freedoms, and not having to follow the Catholic Church were important in creating capitalism and socialism.
Important people in the Enlightenment came from many different countries and shared ideas in many different ways.
Some of the best-known Enlightenment figures, organized by home country, are:
Voltaire (born François-Marie Arouet) (1694-1778): A philosopher, writer, playwright, and Deist.
He argued with the Catholic Church and the French government.
Because of this, he was put in prison and exiled from France.
He wrote many different books about philosophy, plays, and histories.
His ideas were important in the French Revolution.
Many people considered the 18th century to be le siècle de Voltaire (the "Century of Voltaire").
Denis Diderot (1713-1784): He wrote the Encyclopédie, which included 28 different books.
In these books, he wrote about all different kinds of learning.
Thomas Jefferson (1743-1826): A statesman, political philosopher, and Deist.
He was a Patriot, fighting against England, during the American Revolution.
He helped write the United States Declaration of Independence (1776) and the United States Constitution (1787).
