Yemen
30,491,00099% Islam, 1% includes Christians, Hinduism, and others
From 1517 onwards, the period of division began when the British occupied South Yemen by force, aiming for Aden, a blessed trading port, in 1839 while being ruled by the Ottoman Empire.
When the Ottoman Empire was defeated in World War I in 1918, North Yemen became independent first, and a capitalist state was established following a military coup in 1962.
Meanwhile, South Yemen, which gained independence under the support of the Soviet Union , was established as a socialist state.
In 1972, 1973, and 1979, armed conflict continued between South Yemen and North Yemen over border issues.
1990 May, but united by the sacrament Civil negotiations in 1994 became a full-scale civil war re-start the division in May 1994.
July was fulfilled again unified in one-sided victory of the Yemen Arab Republic.
Located in the Middle East, the country has two neighbors, Saudi Arabia to the north and Oman to the east.
It is surrounded by the Gulf of Aden and the Arabian Sea to the south and the Red Sea to the west.
Oil, fish, rock salt, marble, coal, gold, lead, nickel, copper and fertile lands in the west are its main natural resources.
The desert climate is effective in the country and dust and sand storms are seen throughout the year.
Agriculture is varied, but takes advantage of less than 10% of the territory.
There are vineyards and fruit trees of temperate and tropical climate (date palm), fields of grains, between which the sorghum, the wheat, the barley and the millet predominate, the vegetables, the truffles, the oilseeds (sesame and cotton), vegetables, coffee and tobacco.
And to a modest importance the elevation and the fishing.
Mining extracts coal, salt and stone, and currently gold and other metallic minerals and, above all, oil.
There are food industries, chemical compounds, cement and construction, and an important oil refinery in Aden, a city that also has one of the most prominent ports in Arabia.
