Korean War
The Korean War, known in China as the "War to Resist American Aggressiom and Aid Korea", and in the DPRK as the "Korean Liberation War" was a war fought in Korea between armies from North Korea and from South Korea.
The war began on 4:30 AM on June 25, 1950 and fighting stopped July 27, 1953.
More than two million Koreans died, most of them in the north.
Both sides blame each other for starting the war.
The north, led by communistKim Il-Sung, was helped mostly by the People's Republic of China, and the USSR.
The south, led by nationalistSyngman Rhee, was helped by many countries in the United Nations, and especially by the United States.
The war ended with a truce.
South Korea and North Korea are still officially at war, and the United States still keeps troops in South Korea, in case North Korea ever invades again.
North and South Korea are divided by the 38th parallel.
In 1910, Japan put Korea under Japanese rule and was still ruling Korea when World War Two ended.
When Japan surrendered, the United States and the USSR agreed to split Korea into two temporary occupation zones with USSR occupying the North and USA occupying the South.
This was, at first, to be for a short time.
The Cold War was an important cause in the Korean War.
Relations between the two occupying powers were bad and when China became Socialist in October 1949, the President of the USA, Harry Truman, and the American capitalist class were very worried that other countries around China may also become Communist, such as Japan.
The American Army was about one twelfth the size of five years earlier and Joseph Stalin had recently lost a Cold War dispute over the Berlin Blockade and subsequent airlift.
casualties near Pusan
25th June 1950
North Korea invades South Korea and takes most of South Korea.
The South Korean Army retreats to Busan.
July 1950
UN Forces landing at Inchon
United Nations army intervenes and lands at Inchon, a small port just about half-way down South Korea, from there on they fight the North Korean army and push them past the border separating North and South Korea and close to the Chinese border, just south of the Yalu River.
China starts to feel threatened with the war happening so close to them and tells the UN Army and the South Korean army to return to the border and that they have no business to fight so far into North Korea.
October 1950
The warning given by the Chinese is ignored by the UN and so the Chinese army, called the People's Liberation Army, invades North Korea and helps the North Koreans fight the UN until the UN forces are pushed past the border separating North and South Korea.
Fighting continues until order is restored and neither army is in the other country.
Peace talks begin.
Douglas MacArthur relieved of his commands for making public statements that contradicted the administration's policies
March 1951 - 27th July 1953
Peace talks continue.
On the 27th July 1953 no peace has been declared but an armistice has been signed by both countries and the UN withdraws.
As of 2019, the two countries are still technically at war.
Stopped communist expansion.
Greece and Turkey joined NATO.
Upheld Truman Doctrine.
Far too aggressive, this made other countries nervous
First major success.
Could only win through violence, not peace talks
Both Koreas
North Korea got a treaty with China.
Many people died; much property was wrecked.
No re-unification.
South Korea remained capitalist.
China
Foreign war united the country and improved rulers' prestige
USSR relations became worse.
USSR
North Korea stayed Socialist.
Tested their Air Force against the United States
Chinese relations became worse.
Lost a great deal of money.
The popular television show M*A*S*H was about American doctors serving in the Korean War.
The show lasted longer than the war did.
↑Keely Rogers and Jo Thomas, History 20th Century World - The Cold War (2008) p.50
