Farming
Agriculture started at least 10,000 years ago, but no one knows for sure how old it is.
The development of farming gave rise to the Neolithic Revolution whereby people gave up nomadichunting and settled in what became cities.
Many people live by doing what is called subsistence agriculture, on a small farm.
Only the farmer's family lives on the farm.
Subsistence agriculture is growing only enough food to feed the farmer, his family, and his animals.
Extra food or animals are sold for money or other things the farmer cannot grow.
The yield is the amount of food grown on a given amount of land, and the yield is often low.
This is because subsistence farmers are generally less educated, and they have less money to buy equipment.
When yields are low, forests are sometimes cut to provide new land to grow more food.
This is good in the short term, but can be bad for the country and the surrounding environment over many years.
In rich countries, farms are often much larger.
The yield on farms has gotten bigger in the last one hundred years because farmers are able to grow better varieties of plants, use more fertilizer, use more water, and more easily control weeds and pests.
Many farms also use machines, which cut down on the number of people needed to farm the land.
This results in fewer farmers in rich countries, but the farmers are able to eat more.
This kind of intensive agriculture comes with its own set of problems.
Farmers use a lot of chemical fertilizers, pesticides (chemicals that kill bugs), and herbicides (chemicals that kill weeds).
These chemicals can pollute the soil or the water.
They can also create bugs and weeds that are more resistant to the chemicals, causing outbreaks of these pests.
The soil can be damaged by erosion (blowing or washing away), salt buildup, or loss of structure.
Irrigation (adding water from rivers) can pollute water and lower the water table.
Having fewer farmers also changes society and can make a country less able to feed itself in bad times.
Farmers select plants with better yield, taste, and nutritional value.
They also choose plants that are more resistant to disease, more tolerant to drought, and easier to harvest.
Centuries of careful selection and breeding have had enormous effects on the characteristics of crop plants.
The crops produce better yield with other techniques (use of fertilizers, chemical pest control, irrigation).
It is important for there to be enough food for everyone.
The food must also be safe and good.
Other people say intensive agriculture is damaging the environment.
For this reason, there are several types of agriculture.
Traditional agriculture is mostly done in poor countries.
Intensive agriculture is mostly done in wealthier countries.
It uses pesticides, machinery, chemical fertilizers.
Organic farming is using only natural products.
Integrated farming is using local resources, and trying to use the waste from one process as a resource in another process.
Agricultural policy focuses on the goals and methods of agricultural production.
At the policy level, common goals of agriculture include food security: to be sure there is enough food for everyone, enough income for the farmer to carry on with their profession and improvement of their skills and methods.
The major crops produced in the world in 2002, are maize (corn), wheat, rice, and cotton.
Maize 624 millions of metric tons
Wheat 570 millions of metric tons
Rice 381.1 millions of metric tons
Cotton 96.5 millions of metric tons
↑Colin
Tudge argues "from at least 40,000 years ago... people were managing their environment to such an extent that they can properly be called 'proto-farmers'".
Tudge, Colin 1998.
Neanderthals, bandits and farmers: how agriculture really began.
London:
Weidenfeld & Nicolson, p3.
ISBN 0-297-84256-7
↑Harris, David (ed) 1996.
The origins and spread of agriculture and pastoralism in Eurasia: crops, fields, flocks and herds.
UCL Press.
ISBN 1-56098-675-1
