Geography
A geographical landscape
Geography is a science that describes and studies the Earth as a space where humans and nature interact.
It's mostly concerned with locations and distribution on the Earth surface, trying to answer questions such as "where?"
and "why there?".
One major geographer's tool is the map, where he shows locations and distributions.
Several maps may constitute an atlas.
For the convenience of describing and analyzing the main content of geography:
Natural geography and
Human geography is divided into two branches.
Natural geography is the part of geography where different parts of the earth and their structural elements are discussed.
It consists mainly of the fossils, the atmosphere, the atmosphere, the earth's surface, and the global plant and animal world (biosphere) and discusses their problems and their solutions.
The different branches of natural geography are as follows:
The branch of science that studies the physical environment of the surface of the crust and the various geophysical processes at work in it is called natural geography.
Most geographers are interested in dividing geography into two branches, natural and human.
Many people divide geography into three branches namely natural, human and biogeography as it is not advisable to ignore the ecology of the biosphere on the surface.
Over the past few decades, the definition, content, and reading methods of natural geography have changed dramatically.
In the beginning, natural geography meant only the study of the natural environment (land friendliness, water and air).
For example, according to Arthur Holmes (1960), ‘natural geography is the study of the Earth's surface friendliness, the oceans and the atmosphere that make up the natural environment.
According to Carl Ritter (1779-1859), "natural geography is the branch of science that considers the earth as a distinct unit with all its shapes, variations and relationships."
The work of natural geography provided. '
Considered from this point of view, natural geography is not only an integration of some geological subjects, it also reviews the type of interaction of human activities with the natural environment.
Natural geography as an established branch of geography studies the spatial type in the regional context and the ecological relationship of the elements of the terrestrial environment.
It also explains the reasons for the environmental relationship with the regional type, as well as the reasons for the change in the elements of the environment.
From this it can be said that natural geography is a detailed study of the land, air, water and the biosphere that supports the life of animals and plants.
