Pakistan
The word "Pakistan" is made up of two words; "Pak" and "stan".
The word Pak means "pure", and the suffix -stan means "land of".
Pakistan is located in south Asia.
It borders with Afghanistan on the west, with Chine on the north, India on the east, Arabic Sea on the south and with Iran on the south-east.
Pakistan has one of the highest mountains on Earth , (K2) .
K2 is the highest mountain of Pakistan and is the second highest mountain of the world.
K2 is located in north of Pakistan.
The Desert of Thar formes a natural border between India and Pakistan.
Pakistan has a continental type of climate, but it receives variations of temperatures , both seasonally and daily.
SUMMER :
Dry and hot Hot winds Occasional dust storms and thunderstorms
WINTER:
Cold Foggy Snowfall in northern regions and in Balochistan
Sindh is a province boardering Arabian sea, Indus River delta is in Sindh.
Pakistan's largest city "Karachi" is also in Sindh.
Balochistan is a semi-desert area, with greenry in some parts.
It is a Plateu, and mountains can reach about 2,000 meters above sea level.
Khayber Pakhtoon Khwa, often shortened to KPK, is a provience in western Pakistan, which is boardering Afghanistan in west.
Gilgit Baltistan is the northern province of Pakistan K-2, the second highest mountain on Earth lies in Gilgit Baltistan province of Pakistan.
Azad Kashmir is a green mountainous region, bordering Gilgit Baltistan and Punjab.
Pakistan became independent from India on the 14 august 1947 with the guidance of the politician Mohammed Ali Jinnah also referred as Quaid-e-Azam.
Because he played a huge role in Pakistan’s fight for independence he obtained the deserved the title of “ father of the nation”.
He sadly died a year after reaching his goal, his death was caused by tuberculosis on the 11 September.
Every year Pakistan celebrates his birthday (25 dicember 1876).
Urdu is the official language of Pakistan with English.
Other most spoken languages of Pakistan are Punjabi Sindhi Balochi Pashto
INDEPENDENCE DAY (14 AUGUST)
RAMADAM,the day of ramadam changes every year, it's a religious festivity,it consist of fasting from sunrise to sundown.
It lasts for one month
EID-UL-FITAR: this day celebrates the end of ramadam, people pray in the morning and then family and friends gather at a house and have a big feast.
EID-UL-AZAA on this day people "slauther" a sheep, goat or cows as a sign of sacrifice to Allah, after this people organize a feast at their house for thir family and friends.
DEFENCE DAY: Celebration of the day when India attacked Pakistan on the night of 6 September 1965 and Pakistan won .
Still today the country celebrates its victory.
Vehicles like buses, trucks are usually painted in various colours, mostly in red , orange , yellow , green and blue.
The most popular sport in Pakistan is Cricket, Almost all districts and neighborhoods in Pakistan have a cricket team and people start playing from a young age.
Pakistan has won international cricket events, which include the 1992 Cricket World Cup, the 2009 ICC World Twenty20 and the 2017 ICC Champions Trophy besides finishing as runner-up in the 1999 Cricket World Cup and the 2007 ICC World Twenty20.
Women's cricket is also very popular, with Kiran Baluch holding the current record of the highest score in a women's test match with her innings of 242.
The Pakistan Cricket Board controls both the men's and women's games.
