Markus Persson
Markus Alexej "Notch" Persson (born: 1 June 1979), known on YouTube as Nizzotch, is a Swedish independent video game developer who is best known as the creator of best-selling video game Minecraft, and one of the founders of the Swedish video game company, Mojang Studios.
In 2005 he started working as a game developer for , which he left in 2009 to work as a programmer at Jalbum.
He is also one of the founders of Wurm Online.
After Minecraft sales grew he moved from full-time to part-time at Jalbum and then eventually left to focus full-time on Minecraft in June 2010; many of the original Mojang employees (including former CEO Carl Manneh) were also ex-Jalbum employees.
After the full release of Minecraft, Persson transferred creative authority of the game's development to Jens Bergensten.
Persson sold Mojang and all of its assets to Microsoft on September 15, 2014.
In a lengthy blog post, Notch states "I love games and I love to program, but I don't make games with the intention of them becoming huge hits, and I don't try to change the world."
He then goes on to say that "I've become a symbol.
I don't want to be a symbol, responsible for something huge that I don't understand, that I don't want to work on.
Persson left Mojang on November 5, 2014, along with the other founders.
He wrote that "as soon as this deal is finalized, I will leave Mojang and go back to doing Ludum Dares and small web experiments.
If I ever accidentally make something that seems to gain traction, I'll probably abandon it immediately.
Though even before or after he left Mojang, he had been making other video games besides Minecraft, most notably, his Ludum Dare entry games, or other similar prototypes.
During his later years, and more currently, he had been posting a lot of tweets on Twitter, mostly jokes, games, and electronic music.
He had been regarded as a "troll" to some people, due to his rants on certain topics, though he likely had been doing this since he created his Twitter account.
He also has a Tumblr account, which he also used to post random blog posts and stuffs about Minecraft, as well as his real life events; he last posted was on August 2013.
Most of his social medias were also untouched, like Instagram, Facebook, GitHub, Reddit, etc. and he was since focused on posting recent topics on his main Twitter account.
Notch created his YouTube channel on August 11, 2008.
He uploaded his first video on that same day called "Creating Breaking the Tower".
it is a time-lapse of him creating Breaking the Tower.
The most notable video on the channel is "Cave game tech test" where he shows off the first test run of Minecraft.
He described the game as an Infiminer clone He began to post daily development videos about Minecraft, up until the official game's release in 2011.
After he had left Mojang, he had privated all of his videos on his original channel.
As of 2021, he had earned an amount of 97k subscribers in his channel.
He has recently been criticized for posting tweets in favour of far-right politics and conspiracy theories.
Though his channel had been inactive, Notch is still uploading content throughout his current main account, which has 28k followers, mostly posting blog posts, and posting Satisfactory and Factorio gameplays.
Also, in his original channel, he had been posting daily vlogs for his audience, like uploading his music, or showcasing his awards.
All of these videos was then moved to his current account.
His YouTube account was primarily linked in his Twitter and Instagram.
