Qur'an
The Qur'an (Arabic: القرآن ال-قرآن) (also: Qur'an Majid or Qur'an-Majid-D) is considered to be the religious foundation text of Islam, the event in which the message was revealed.
The Qur'an has been divided into a large number of plays (suras in Arabic) and divided into chapters (suras).
This book revealed the verses of the Qur'an orally to the last Prophet of Islam, Muhammad, through the angel of God, Gabriel, and the entire Qur'an was revealed for a long twenty-three years.
The first verse of the Qur'an was revealed on December 22, 609 AD when Muhammad was 40 years old and the revelation ended in the year of the death of Muhammad, i.e. 632 AD.
Muslims believe that the Qur'an is the most important miracle of Muhammad which is the proof of his prophethood and the final stage of the continuous process of sending the divine message which started from Adam and ended with Muhammad.
However, the followers of Sufism believe that the Qur'an was revealed to make all the activities of Muhammad understandable to the Ummah.
The word Qur'an appears 60 times in the verses of the Qur'an.
According to Islamic history, it was revealed to the Prophet Muhammad in fragments over a long period of twenty-three years.
Followers of Islam believe that the Qur'an is a complete way of life.
There are a total of 114 suras in the Quran.
The number of verses or lines is 6.8; 6,236 in the dissent.
It was revealed in the original Arabic language.
According to Muslim thought, the Qur'an is the last of a series of religious books to be revealed, and this process of revelation began with Adam, the first messenger of Islam.
The Qur'an mentions many historical events with which the Bible and other religious texts have many similarities, but not less.
However, there is no detailed description of any event in the Qur'an.
According to Islamic commentary, the Qur'an is immutable, and Muslims refer to it in Surah Al-Hijr (Surah 15), verse 9, and this is:
Translation; Indeed, We have sent down this admonition, and verily, We are its Guardian.
