Bahrain
Bahrain is a small country at the Persian Golf.
Bahrain has 33 islands.
Bahrain has only one neighbouring country: Saudi-Arabia.
Bahrain is connected with Saudi-Arabia with a bridge at the western side of Bahrain.
The name literally means "two seas" in Arabic.
Bahrain became independent of the United Kingdom on 16 December 1971.
The Kingdom is very important as military rank and focal point of the U.S. Fifth fleet in the Persian Gulf.
The capital Manama serves as Center of the American Navy in the region.
Location of Bahrain
Bahrain consists of a group of 33 islands in the Persian Gulf, interconnected by a network of bridges.
There is also a bridge connection with Saudi Arabia: King Fahd Causeway.
Bahrain literally means "two seas", denoting the low fresh water which used to be under the salt layer seawater around the Islands.
This layer fresh water is gone.
By the current climate in the Gulf Bahrain is largely desert.
Other notable Islands are Umm Nasaneiland, Muharraq, Nabih Saliheiland and Hawareilanden off the coast of Qatar.
Bahrain is a rocky island, including salt marshes on the southwest coast.
Bahrain was probably already asked in connection with the culture of ancient Sumer.
It is almost certain that the land in those days was called Dilmun.
An important historical place is the tell Qal'at al-Bahrain, the first finds of habitation date back to 2300 BC to 700 AD, Bahrain was an important center of the Nestorians, a Christian fork after the first Council of Ephesus.
The Bahrain Islands were formerly known as Aval Islands.
The Portuguese ruled Bahrain from 1507 to 1602.
In 1602, the Shiite Arabs from Persia under Shah Abbas the power over.
In 1783 seized the Sunni Khalifa family, which comes from Kuwait, after a prolonged power struggle between Persians and Arabs.
This family governs the country to date.
Established in 1805 were relations with the English, who in 1820 in a treaty and in 1867 in British protectorate culminated.
By 1861 to 1971 the British ruled the whole island, but in the name, Bahrain remained independent.
Sheikh Isa bin Salman al-Khalifa became emir of the country in 1961.
Jesus ' reign was marked by the independence of the country in 1971.
While the Government initially had considered joining the United Arab Emirates, Qatar, Isa, as decided not to join, from dissatisfaction with the proposed Constitution.
He tried to introduce a moderate form of parliamentary democracy, and the male population had the opportunity
