Bangladesh
Location of Bangladesh in Asia
Bangladesh is a country in Asia.
It is number eight in population ranking in the world.
The capital is Dhaka.
It is number 11 in population ranking.
Bangladesh has the Sundarbans, which is the largest mangrove forest in the world, and home to the highest number of tigers.
The word Bangladesh is found in the early twentieth century, when the term began to be used as a general term through patriotic songs such as Kazi Nazrul Islam's "Nom Nom Nom Bangladesh Mom" ​​and Rabindranath Tagore's "Aji Bangladesh Hridoy To".
In the past, the word Bangladesh was written as two separate words in the form of Bangla Desh.
In the early 1950s, Bengali nationalists used the term for political meetings, processions and rallies in East Pakistan.
The word Bengali is a major name for both the Bengal area and the Bengali area.
The earliest use of the word is found in the Nesari plaque of 605 AD.
The term Vangladesa is also found in 11th-century South Asian manuscripts.
The term gained official status during the Bengal Sultanate in the 14th century.
In 1342, Shamsuddin Ilyas Shah declared himself the first Shah of Bengal.
The most common use of the Bengali word to refer to that region began during the Islamic rule.
In the 16th century, the Portuguese started referring to the region as Bangala.
The origin of Bengali or Bengal words is unknown; It is thought that the modern name derives from the Bengali word of the Bengali sultanate.
But some historians speculate that the word originated from a Dravidian-speaking tribe or group called the Bang or Bang.
The Bong people settled in the region around 1000 BC.
According to some historians, Bong was the second son of Hind, where Hind was the first son of Ham and Ham's father was Prophet Noah.
According to another theory, the word originated from the word Bhanga (Banga), which came from the Austrian word "Banga", meaning Anshumali.
The word Bhanga and other words that are supposed to refer to the word Banga (such as Anga) are found in ancient Indian texts, such as the Vedas, Jain texts, the Mahabharata and the Puranas.
The earliest reference to "Bhangaladesa Bengal) is aimed at the Nesari plaque of Rashtrakuta Govinda III (before 605 AD), where the account of King Dharmapala of Bhangala is written.
