Brunei
Map of Brunei
Brunei, officially the State of Brunei Darussalam (Malay: Negara Brunei Darussalam) is a country in Southeast Asia.
It is located on the island of Borneo to the South China Sea and is completely surrounded by Malaysia.
The surface of Brunei Darussalam is 5,765 km².
Brunei was from the 14th century an independent Sultanate and included when the southern Philippines, and Sarawak and Sabah.
In 1888 it became a British protectorate.
The representatives of the British King were the British residents in Brunei and later the High Commissioners.
The Japanese occupied Brunei on January 6, 1942.
On 14 June 1945 Brunei was recaptured by the English.
The Sultanate eventually became independent on 1 January 1984.
Since 1967 the reign sultan Hassanal Bolkiah as an absolute monarch.
The half appointed and half elected Parliament was abolished after independence from the British time but restored in 2004.
Brunei has affiliations with APEC, ASEAN and the Commonwealth of Nations (formerly: British Commonwealth)
Brunei consists of two parts, both on the Bay of Brunei located, but not connected to each other.
97 percent of the population lives in the western part that by far the largest.
About ten thousand people live in the mountainous eastern part, in the province of Temburong.
Brunei also claims parts of the Spratly Islands.
A plane of Royal Brunei Airlines at Brunei International Airport
Brunei International Airport is the international airport.
the capital is accessible by bus from the West of Brunei or via Miri in Sarawak in Malaysia from the Sungai Tujuh Bus terminal and via the coastal road.
The East of Brunei (Temburong) is accessible from Sarawak in Malaysia, the Kuala Lurah via Limbang from the Bus terminal.
The bus station in Bandar Seri Begawan is located in Jalan Cabrera.
There are six bus routes near Bandar Series Begawan the Central Line, Circle Line, Eastern Line, Southern Line, Western Line and the Northern Line.
There is also a bus connection with the places Tutong, Seria and Kuala Belait.
There is a water taxi, known under the name penambang, between Bandar Seri Begawan and Kampong Ayer.
There are also links to Temburong and Limbang, Lawas, Sundar and Labuan in Malaysia.
The road network in Brunei is well developed.
There are several highway projects, where the route along the North coast from Kuala Belait to Seria via Bandar Seri Begawan the longest.
This Highway France 2 x 2 lanes and consists of a number of parts which together 85 kilometers.
Then there are two more highway projects in Bandar Seri Begawan itself, bringing the total highway network to 120 kilometers.
In Brunei, as well as in neighboring Malaysia, left.
The capital Bandar Seri Begawan is quite vast and has a pretty big underlying road network.
Files are not so very much for.
