List of Greek gods and goddesses
This is a list of the gods and goddesses of Greek mythology.
Roman Mythology uses different names, calling Zeus by the name of Jupiter, and Aphrodite by the name of Venus, for example.
The Roman names are often better known to English-speaking people than the Greek names.
The Twelve Olympians
These gods are the most important and powerful gods.
The home of these gods was Mount Olympus, except for Hades who is only allowed on Olympus once a year.
Hades lives in the Underworld the rest of the time.
Goddess of love and beauty.
She was married to Hephaestus.
Ares is her lover and she loves him as well.
Eros is her son.
She was born from Uranus's blood falling in the sea when Cronus killed him, making her the first and eldest Olympian.
God of the Sun, music, archery, poetry, healing, and prophecy.
He is Artemis' twin brother, and Son to Zeus.
God of war, murder and bloodshed.
Brother to Hephaestus, and is the lover of Aphrodite and son of Zeus.
Goddess of the hunt, wilderness, wild animals, especially deer and fawns, night, and the moon.
Apollo is her twin brother.
Artemis is an eternal maiden goddess and is also the protector of maidens.
She has no children and sworn to being a virgin.
Goddess of wisdom, weaving, the arts, warfare and reason.
She is the daughter of Zeus.
She has grey eyes.
Goddess of fertility, grain and harvest.
Demeter is a sister of Zeus.
Her daughter is Persephone, Hades' forced wife.
God of wine, parties/festivals, madness and merriment.
He is a son of Zeus.
God of the Underworld.
Brother of Poseidon and Zeus.
God of fire and the forge.
The "ugly" son of Hera and Zeus is his father in some accounts.
Married to Aphrodite, but she does not love him because he is deformed and as a result is cheating on him with Ares.
Goddess of marriage, women and childbirth.
Zeus' wife and sister.
God of flight, thieves, commerce and travellers, Jack of all trades.
Master of none.
Messenger of the gods.
Zeus's son by Titanness.
God of the sea, .
A few of his sons are Polyphemus, Pegasus and Triton, the Cyclops and the Horse(land creature)for reasons of Athena.
His weapon is a trident by which he can stir up the seas and summon any creature that lives in the sea of his choice to aid him in battle.
The father of all fathers, the wisdom and light.
The king of the gods after killing his father, Kronos, who ate Zeus's siblings but their mother managed to save baby Zeus.
When Zeus grew up, he fed Kronos a mixture of wine and mustard to make him vomit his immortal siblings who had grown up in Kronos's stomach.
Zeus is the ruler of Mount Olympus and the god of the sky, thunder and lightning.
Though he is married more than once, his real queen is Hera.
Zeus is the father of Hermes, Hephaestus, Hercules, Dionysus, Athena, Ares, Apollo, Artemis and Persephone.
- Goddess of the hearth, fireside, family, and home.
Was one of the Olympians until she gave up her throne for Dionysus and occupies the fire on Olympus.
Primeval Goddess of air, Chaos is believed to be one of the first beings to exist in the universe.
Chaos is not really depicted as having a personality or physical form.
Chaos is the lower atmosphere which surrounded the earth.
Her name Khaos means the gap, or the space between heaven and Earth.
Mother of Nyx (night), Erebus (Darkness), Aither (Light), and Hemera (day).
Goddess of the Earth , mother of Kronos and the other Titans, grandmother of Zeus, Hades, Poseidon, Hera, Demeter and Hestia
Goddess of night Daughter of Chaos.
Wife of Erebus and mother of Hemera (day).
Goddess of Hellhounds.
The darkest pit in the world at the edge of the world.
Ouranos
God of the Sky (Father Sky), father of Kronos and the other Titans (Roman name is Uranus)
Primordial God/Goddess of Creation.
Thesis is sometimes thought to be a child of Chaos and to have emerged with Hydros before Gaia.
Phanes
Primeval God of procreation and is referred as the primal generator of life.
Phanes is Nyx's father and was the ruler of the universe before her.
Titans
Koios - also spelled Coeus.
God of intelligence, heavenly prophecy and the axis.
Krios - also spelled Crius.
God of leadership, domesticated animals and the constellations.
Kronos - also spelled Cronus.
God of time.
King of the Titans.
Roman name Saturn.
Mnemosyne - Goddess of memory, the inventiveness of words and language.
Phoebe - Goddess of the Oracle of Delphi and intellect.
Tethys - Goddess of Subterranean forces of fresh water and patron goddess of nursing mothers and the young.
Theia - Goddess of sight, gold, silver, and gems.
Themis - Goddess of divine law and order.
Other Titans:
Atlas - God of astronomy.
Holds the sky from the earth as his punishment.
Menoitios - God of violent anger, rash reactions and human morality.
Prometheus - God of forethought and crafty counsel.
Gave humanity the gift of Fire.
Minor Gods and Goddesses
Ariadne - goddess of passion and mazes (was a mortal princess engaged to Theseus, but was abandoned.
Married the god Dionysus and was made immortal.)
Aeolus - god of winds (mortal at birth, but became immortal)
Bia - goddess of violence
Cratos - god of strength and power.
Deimos - personification of terror; brother of Phobos.
Eris - goddess of strife and discord.
Hebe - goddess of youth.
Hecate - goddess of magic, witchcraft, necromancy and crossroads.
Janus - god of doors, gates and choices
Khione - goddess of snow (her father is Boreas, the god of the north wind cold)
Leto - mother of Artemis and Apollo.
Nemesis - goddess of balance, consequences and revenge.
Nike - goddess of victory
Persephone - goddess of spring and flowers and wife of Hades, hence queen of the Underworld.
Phobos - god of phobias and fear in general; brother of Deimos.
The Erinyes - otherwise known as The Furies.
Goddesses of revenge, commanded by Hades.
The Horae - actually two groups of separate goddesses worshipped in different periods: the first three were goddesses of the seasons, the second generation were goddesses of law, justice and order.
Tyche - goddess of luck, destiny and fortune.
Zelus - god of dedication.
The Moirae: Klotho, Lachesis and Atropos - controllers of life and destiny.
The Muses - representatives of the arts, sciences and songs.
The Oneiroi: Morpheus, Phobetor and Phantasos - personifications of dreams and sons of Hypnos.
Pan - god of the Wild.
Triton - god of ships, prince of Atlantis
Paean - doctor of the gods.
The Keres- goddesses of violent Death.
The Charites - goddesses of charm, beauty, human creativity, and fertility.
