Shahjalal University of Science and Technology
Shahjalal University of Science and Technology (Shabiprabi or Sust for short) is an autonomous public university located in Sylhet, Bangladesh.
The medium of instruction of the university is English.
It is one of the largest science and technology universities in Asia.
Shabiprabi is one of the IT rich universities in Bangladesh.
The university introduced integrated honors courses for the first time in Bangladesh as well as the semester system (American semester system) for undergraduate courses from the 1996-97 session.
Besides, the only search engine in Bangladesh "Pipilika" is also the contribution of this university which has been providing information services successfully since its launch in 2013.
It is the first science and technology university in the country.
The university organizes various competitions in literature and science in the Sylhet region, including various Olympiads.
Among the competitions organized by Shabiprabi are National High School Programming Competition, National Women's Programming Competition, Bangladesh Biology Olympiad, Bangladesh Mathematical Olympiad, Bangladesh Science Olympiad, Bangladesh Physics Olympiad, Bangladesh Astronomy Olympiad etc.
Teachers and senior students of different departments jointly organize and conduct their regional competitions in Sylhet region.
Shahjalal University of Science and Technology, a major contributor to engineering and a leading local university in Bangladesh, was established on 25 August 1986 and began its academic activities on 13 February 1991 with three departments.
Its campus is located at Kumargaon, about 5 km from Sylhet city.
The university has 26 departments under 6 faculties.
The first and second convocations of the university were held on 29 April 1996 and 6 December 2007 respectively.
In addition, the university has a very good position in the web metrics ranking by performing the highest number of research papers.
Recently, out of all the government universities in Bangladesh, the graduates of this university are engaged in higher education and research work in other countries of the world at the highest rate.
The students of the university are quite enthusiastic in cultural studies and new research.
Academic activities are completed on credit basis in 2 semesters per year.
Scholarships are given to 85% of the students.
Students at Shabiprabi can be admitted at undergraduate, graduate and postgraduate levels.
Students have to get the opportunity to study in this university with very competitive exams.
About 84 students participated in the admission test against one seat.
Admission test is done under the supervision of admission committee in different schools.
