Bono
Paul David Hewson, known as Bono, is an Irish singer-songwritter, musician and a businessman.
He was born on May 10, 1960 in Dublin.
Now he is 56 years old and he is still known worldwide.
He is the lead vocalist of the rock band, U2.
His parents names were Iris and Bobby Hewson.
During his childhood Bono grew up in Ireland with his brother Norman.
When he was fifteen years old, Paul lived a very difficult period, because his two parents died in the same year.
Many fans believe that this tragic event has built his personnality.
Ever since he has been involved in music; he took his inspiration from bands like Patti Smith, Thin Lizzy, The Ramones and Television.
During his high school years he was nicknamed "Bono Vox" by his friend Guggi.
At the time, it was the name of a hearing-aid store on O'Connel Street in Dublin.
In school, Bono was very popular and honest.
He excelled in History, chess and art ( he was a very good painter).
He has also developed a passion for drama; therefore he was comfortable on the screen.
One day in 1976, he answered an ad posted at Mount Temple Comprehensive School in Dublin which proposed to form a group.
The metting at the home of Larry Mullen, Larry, Dave Evans (The Edge) and Adam Clayton.
They formed a group that became one of the largest in the history of rock'n'roll.
It's the beginning of U2.
Bono writes almost all U2 lyrics, frequently using religious, social and political themes.
During U2's early years, his lyrics contributed to their rebellious and spiritual tone.
As the band matured, his lyrics became inspired more by personal experiences shared with other members.
Outside the band he was waked (?) and recorded with numerous artists, he is also widely known for his activism concerning Africa, for which he co-founded DATA, EDUN, the ONE Campaign and Product Red.
He has organized and played in several charity concerts and has met many influential politicians.
Currently his most famous songs are : One, Bad, Where the streets have no name, Bloody Sunday...
With all his songs in company of his band, he has received several awards that makes him a well-known and popular singer (NRJ Music Award in 2000, NAACP, Image Award in 2007...)
