Minecraft
On September 15, 2014, Microsoft announced that it was going to buy Mojang (and, therefore, Minecraft) for $2.5 billion (USD).
Today, Minecraft is the 1st most sold video game of the world.
Minecraft is a sandbox game .
The player appears in a three-dimensional world composed of blocks.
He must survive, build, create and live in the world.
There are four gamemodes in minecraft : survival, creative, hardcore and adventure.
In the survival mode, the player has to obtain what he needs (limited resources), survive.
His life is represented by 10 red hearts which he loses when getting damage and can slowly regain.
His hunger is represented by 10 shanks.
Creative mode is made to create freely: the player has unlimited resources, can fly and does not die.
Hardcore mode is a harder version of survival, where the player is on hard, cannot cheat and cannot respawn after he or she died.
When the player dies, the world is deleted.
In 1.8, you can now see your world in spectator mode, but you can't change anything.
The player is about 1.8 blocks tall.
There are 2 main skins of the player: Steve (a man with brown hair, light brown skin, blue eyes, a light blue T-shirt, dark blue trousers and grey shoes) and Alex (a woman with long orange hair, a light green T-shirt, a dark green belt, brown trousers and black boots).
The skin can then be changed in the options, and you can download skins from the internet or create them.
A mob (abbreviation for mobile) is a living, moving entity which can live, die, and have effects.
There are different types of mobs: passive mobs (do not attack), neutral mobs (do not attack until provoked) and hostile mobs (always attack)
Piglins are a new mob added in the 1.16 update for both the mobile and computer editions of Minecraft.
You can trade gold ingots with them for gold ingots.
They only attack you if you attack them first, you aren't wearing gold armor, or if you open a container (chest, barrel, etc) near them.
The blaze is a mob from the nether.
He has a yellow head with yellow rods turning around him, and emits smoke.
When he sees the player, he shoots fireballs which burn the player for a few seconds, and can also deals contact damage.
It drops blaze rods.
The creeper is one of the most frequent hostile mobs.
He is a green mob that is about 1.7 blocks tall with 4 legs.
Creepers go next to the player and then explode.
If killed by a player or a tamed dog, they drop gunpowder.
They also give music discs if killed by a skeleton.
If creepers are struck by lightning, they will become a charged creeper which will have a larger blast radius, and all zombies, skeletons, wither skeletons or creepers in the radius will drop their heads.
They were invented by a bug which made the pig have a vertical body.
When the player uses an ender pearl, there is a chance that an endermite will appear.
An endermite is a small dark purple mob who attacks the player like a silverfish.
When an enderman sees an endermite, he will try to kill him.
Ghasts are hostile mobs from the nether.
When they see the player, they will open their mouth and shoot a fireball.
The fireball can be pushed back by your hand or an arrow, and if touched by their own fireball, ghasts will immediately die.
They drop ghast tears.
Guardians and elder guardians are hostile mobs that spawn in ocean monuments.
Skeletons are mobs that shoot arrows to attack the player.
They drop bones when killed.
Slimes are hostile mobs that split up after being killed.
Small slimes will only push the player.
Small slimes drop slimeballs after being killed.
Other slimes don’t drop anything.
Magma cubes are the variant of slimes that spawn in the nether.
They drop magma cream.
Witches are hostile mobs that use potions both to heal up and to attack the player.
They may drop the potion they are drinking upon death.
They might also drop brewing ingredients and sticks.
Wither skeletons are nether mobs that, unlike normal skeletons, use a melee attack.
The zombie is one of the most frequent mobs.
He looks like a green Steve with his hands in front of him.
Like skeletons, zombies can spawn with armor or a sword (which can be enchanted) or take a dropped armor or sword (which can also be enchanted).
Upon death, zombies will drop rotten flesh, which can be eaten but gives you food poisoning.
It can also be used to feed dogs.
Zombies can spawn as zombie villagers.
Zombie villagers look like green villagers with torn clothes.
When zombies kill villagers, the villagers have a chance to become zombie villagers (0% on easy, 50% on normal and 100% on hard).
Working in progress
In early 2009, Minecraft was being privately developed by Notch, aka Markus Persson.
It was released just 6 days later, in the first phase.
Players were only limited to a few blocks and creative mode.
Added features in this phase were more about testing.
This game was originally called Cave Game.
This game was different than other online games where you create things because instead of simply creating structures, you also have to gather resources to build those structures.
This mix was unusual because most games at the time usually only had the player gather resources and not build or to build but not have to gather resources.
On top of that, Minecraft was also a survival game.
You have to survive hostile mobs and can explore the vast world.
You can also use your resources to craft new materials that you can use to create structures, survive longer, and craft more materials.
Updates that occurred after the release was 1.0.0.
It was the explorer update that added all the features in the base game, like health and other base features.
