Weebly
The Current Logo of Weebly
Weebly is Web-Hosting (Create Website)
For Create Blogs, Online Shops For *FREE* or *PREMIUM*
The Weebly Website Create By : Chief executive officer David Rusenko, Chief technology officer Chris Fanini, and Chief operating officer Dan Veltri.
New Weebly Website In Editing ( )
The Company is headquartered in San Francisco The Company Was Founded By Chief executive officer David Rusenko, Chief technology officer Chris Fanini, and Chief operating officer Dan Veltri. !
The Website Founded in March 29, 2006 11 Years Ago, Also in 2007, Weebly raised a US$650,000 financing round from several angel investors, including Ron Conway, Steve Anderson, Mike Maples, and Paul Buchheit.
In 2008 Weebly added "Pro" accounts and Google AdSense monetization features, as well as compatibility with Google Chrome and Safari.
Weebly reached one million users in 2008 and released a statement announcing that it had become profitable.
During its initial startup years, Weebly received criticism for its lack of CSS/HTML editing support, and in 2009 it added this functionality.
In 2011, Weebly raised a growth-stage round from Sequoia Capital and added Roelof Botha to its board of directors.
Rusenko stated in August 2013 that the company signed a lease for a 36,000 square feet (3,300 m2) warehouse in San Francisco, based on an expectation of ongoing growth.
The new office will house the majority of a global team of 600 employees in 2014 when it moves into the property.
As of August 25, 2013, Weebly had 80 employees and was based in an 11,000 square feet (1,000 m2) space in the Pacific Heights area of San Francisco.
In October 2015 it was announced that a Berlin office would open in late 2015/early 2016 to offer European-based support and marketing.
In April 2016, Weebly integrated JotForm software on its services.
Weebly's free online website creator uses a simple widget-based site builder that operates in the web browser.
All the site elements are drag-and-drop, and it automatically generates a mobile version of each website.
Storage is unlimited, but the service restricts individual file sizes.
Consumers are given the option to have any url ending in .
, .com, .net, .org, .co, .info, or .us.
Android and iPhone apps are available that allow users to monitor their website traffic statistics, update blog posts and respond to comments, and add or update products if the user has an e-commerce online store.
Basic features for blogging and e-Commerce are supported: site owners can develop simple stores with payments through either PayPal, Stripe or .
Users can choose to incorporate advertisements in their pages, and visitor statistics can be tracked through an in-house tracking tool or Google Analytics.
A new version was released on October 1, 2015.
Named Weebly Carbon, it enabled users to add plugins into their websites among other features.
