Every Witch Way
The first season aired from 1 January through to 30 January of 2014.
There were 20 episodes in the first season.
On 31 March of 2014 the series was renewed for a second and third season.
The second season aired from 7 July through to 8 August of 2014.
The second season had 23 episodes.
The third season was confirmed.
It was aired in January 5, 2015.
Emma Alonso, a 14-years old teen who moved to Miami, enrolled in the Iridium High School.
She meets Andi, her future best friend who will help Emma to adjust to her new city and meet new friends.
Emma meets Daniel (Nick Merico), the boyfriend of Maddie (Paris Smith) and the captain of the swimming team "The Sharks".
Emma will have to deal with their new powers and defeat enemies, always with the help of his friends.
Paola Andino as Emma Alonso: A teenage girl with magic powers.
She is "The Choosen One", the most powerful witch of her generation.
Nick Merico as Daniel Miller: Captain of The Sharks and boyfriend of Maddie (then Emma's boyfriend).
He is oppose of magic and tramps.
Paris Smith as Maddie Van Pelt: The most popular girl in the Iridium High School.
She is the leader of the Panthers.
Rahart Adams as Jax Novoa: A new character on season 2.
He is an evil wizard who loves Emma.
He is from Sydney, Australia.
Daniela Nieves as Andi Cruz: The best friend of Emma.
She is an athletic and energetic girl.
She helps Emma with her powers.
Tyler Alvarez as Diego Rueda: Member of The Sharks.
He is a Kanay, a person who control the elements.
Elizabeth Elias as Mia: A new character on season 3.
She is an evil witch and want to destroy Emma.
Denisea Wilson as Katie Rice: Friend of Maddie and member of the Panthers.
Autumn Wendel as Sophie Johnson: Friend of Maddie and member of the Panthers.
Rene Lavan as Francisco Alonso: Dad of Emma and the principal of Iridium High on season 2.
Katie Barberi as Ursula Van Pelt: Mom of Maddie.
She loves Emma's father.
Denisea Wilson as Lilly: The school nurse and Emma guardin witch.
She becomes a Magic Council member on season 2.
