Yusuf I of Granada
This article may have too many red links.
You can help Vikidia by writing articles to help lower the number of red links.
Coming to the throne at age fifteen, he was initially treated as a minor and given only limited power by his ministers and his grandmother Fatima.
In February 1334, his representatives secured a four-year peace treaty with Granada's neighbours Castile and the Marinid Sultanate; which was joined by Aragon in May.
After gaining more power, in 1338 or 1340 he expelled the Banu Abi al-Ula family who had masterminded the murder of his brother and been the leaders of the Volunteers of the Faith.
After the treaty expired, he allied himself with Abu al-Hasan Ali (1331-1348) of the Marinids against Alfonso XI of Castile (Template:Reign1312-1350).
After winning a major naval victory in April 1340, the Marinid-Granadan alliance was decisively defeated on 30 October, in the disastrous Battle of Río Salado.
He was then unable to prevent Castile from taking several Granadan castles and towns, including Alcalá de Benzaide, Locubín, Priego, and Benamejí.
In 1342-1344, Alfonso XI besieged the strategic port of Algeciras.
Yusuf led his troops in diversionary raids in Castilian territories, and later engaged the besieging army, but the city fell in March 1344, followed by a ten-year peace treaty with Castile.
Alfonso XI broke the treaty and invaded again in 1349, besieging Gibraltar.
Ismail was responsible for supplying the besieged port, and led counter-attacks into Castile.
The siege was lifted when Alfonso XI died of the Black Death in March 1350.
Out of respect, Yusuf ordered his commanders to not attack the Castilian army as they retreated from Granadan territories carrying their King's body.
Yusuf signed a treaty with Alfonso's son and successor Peter I (Template:Reign1350-1366).
Afterwards, he reluctantly sent his troops to suppress a domestic rebellion against the Castilian king, as required by the treaty.
His relation with the Marinids deteriorated when he provided refuge for the rebellious brothers of Sultan Abu Inan Faris (Template:Reign1348-1358).
He was assassinated by a madman while praying in the Great Mosque of Granada, on the day of Eid al-Fitr, 19 October 1354.
In contrast to the military and territorial losses suffered during his reign, the emirate flourished in the fields of literature, architecture, medicine, and the law.
Among other new buildings, he constructed the Madrasa Yusufiyya inside the city of Granada, as well as the Tower of Justice and various additions to the Comares Palace of the Alhambra.
Major cultural figures served in his court, including the Template:TranslAbu Nu'aym Ridwan, the poet Ibn al-Jayyab and the polymath Ibn al-Khatib, who consecutively became his vizier.
Modern historians consider his reign and that of his son Muhammad V (Template:Reign1354 - 1359 and 1362 - 1391) as the golden era of the Emirate.
Yusuf was born in 1318 in the Alhambra, pictured in 2018
Abu al-Hajjaj Yusuf ibn Ismail was born on 29 June 1318 (28 Rabi al-Thani 718 AH) in the Alhambra, the fortified royal palace complex of the Nasrid dynasty of the Emirate of Granada.
He was the third son of the reigning Sultan Ismail I and a younger brother of the future Muhammad IV.Template:Sfn Ismail had four sons and two daughters, but Yusuf was the only child of his mother, Bahar, an umm walad (concubine).Template:Sfn When Ismail was assassinated in 1325, he was succeeded by the ten-year old Muhammad, who ruled until he too was assassinated in 25 August 1333, when he was en route back to Granada after the victory at the siege of Gibraltar.
Template:Sfn The Template:Transl (chamberlain) Abu Nu'aym Ridwan, who was present at the assassination, rode quickly to the capital, arriving on the same day, and after consultation with Fatima bint al-Ahmar (the mother of Ismail, and grandmother of Muhammad and Yusuf) arranged for the declaration of Yusuf as the new sultan.
Template:SfnTemplate:Sfn The proclamation took place the next day, 26 August (14 Dhu al-Hijja 733 AH).Template:Sfn The Nasrid dynasty of Granada had no specific rule of succession, and there was no mention of why Yusuf was chosen over Ismail's second son Faraj, who was a one year older.
Template:SfnTemplate:Sfn
Yusuf's later vizier, the historian Ibn al-Khatib, described the young Yusuf as "white-skinned, naturally strong, had a fine figure and an even finer character", with large eyes, dark straight hair, and a thick beard.
He further wrote that Yusuf liked to "dress with elegance", was interested in art, architecture, a "collector of arms", and "had some mechanical ability".
Template:Sfn
Coming to the throne at the age of fifteen, Yusuf was initially treated as a minor and according to Ibn al-Khatib, his authority was limited to only "choosing the food to eat from his table".
Template:Sfn His grandmother, Fatima, and the Template:Transl Ridwan became his tutors and exercised some powers of government, together with other ministers.
Upon his accession he took the laqab (honorific or regnal name) al-Mu'ayyad billah ("He who is aided by God").
The founder of the dynasty, Muhammad I, had taken a laqab (al-Ghalib billah, "Victor by the grace of God") but not subsequent sultans.
After Yusuf this was done by almost all sultans.
Template:Sfn According to the Christian chronicles, Yusuf immediately requested the protection of Abu al-Hasan Ali of the Marinid Sultanate, his late brother's ally.
Template:Sfn
Granada and the surrounding kingdoms in the 14th century
The emirate was the last Muslim state on the Iberian Peninsula, founded by Muhammad I in the 1230s.
Template:Sfn Through a combination of diplomatic and military manoeuvres, the emirate succeeded in maintaining its independence, despite being located between two larger neighbours: the Christian Crown of Castile to the north and the Muslim Marinid Sultanate in Morocco.
Granada intermittently entered into alliance or went to war with both of these powers, or encouraged them to fight one another, in order to avoid being dominated by either.
Template:Sfn From time to time, the sultans of Granada swore fealty and paid tribute to the kings of Castile, an important source of income for Castile.
Template:Sfn From Castile's point of view, Granada was a royal vassal, while Muslim sources never described the relationship as such, and Muhammad I, for instance, on occasions declared his fealty to other Muslim sovereigns.
Template:Sfn
Yusuf's predecessor, Muhammad IV, sought help from the Marinid Sultanate to counter a threat by an alliance of Castile and the powerful commander Uthman ibn Abi al-Ula, who supported a pretender to the throne in a civil war.
He had to yield Ronda, Marbella, and Algeciras in exchange for a military alliance.
Subsequently the Marinid-Granadan forces captured Gibraltar and fended off a Castilian attempt to retake it, before signing a peace treaty with Alfonso XI of Castile and Abu al-Hasan the day before his assassination.
Template:Sfn While the actual killing of Muhammad IV was carried out by a slave named Zayyan, it was a politically motivated plot by Abu Thabit ibn Uthman and Ibrahim ibn Uthman, prominent members of the Banu Abi al-Ula family and leaders of the North African Volunteers of the Faith, the corps of North Africans fighting in the Iberian Peninsula on behalf of Granada.
Template:SfnTemplate:SfnTemplate:Sfn According to Ibn Khaldun, they decided to kill Yusuf due to his closeness to the Marinid Sultan Abu al-Hasan-their political enemy-while according to Castilian chronicles it was because of the friendly way he treated Alfonso XI at the conclusion of the siege.
Template:SfnTemplate:Sfn As a result of Muhammad's cessions to the Marinids and the taking of Gibraltar, at Yusuf's accession the Marinids had sizable garrisons and territories on traditionally Granadan lands in Al-Andalus .Template:Sfn
A map of the Emirate of Granada, depicting relevant towns and cities
The peace that Muhammad IV secured after the siege of Gibraltar was, by the principles of the time, rendered void by his death, and representatives of Yusuf met with those of Alfonso XI and Abu al-Hasan Ali.
Template:SfnTemplate:Sfn They signed a treaty at Fez, in Morocco, on 26 February 1334 with a four year duration.
Like previous treaties, it authorised free trade between the three kingdoms, but unusually, it did not include payments of tribute from Granada to Castile.
Marinid ships were to be given access to Castilian ports, and the Marinid Sultan Abu al-Hasan promised not to increase his garrisons on the Iberian peninsula-but he could still rotate them.
Template:Sfn The latter condition was favourable not only to Castile but also to Granada, which was wary of possible expansionism by the larger Marinid Sultanate into the peninsula.
Template:Sfn Additionally, Alfonso IV of Aragon agreed to join the treaty in May 1334, and signed his own agreement with Yusuf on 3 June 1335.
After Alfonso IV's death in January 1336, his son Peter IV renewed the bilateral Granadan-Aragonese treaty for five years, ushering in a period of peace between Granada and all its neighbours.
Template:Sfn
With the treaty in place, the monarchs redirected their attentions elsewhere: Alfonso XI cracked down on his rebellions nobles, while Abu al-Hasan waged war against the ZayyanidKingdom of Tlemcen in North Africa.
Template:Sfn During these years, Yusuf acted against the Banu Abi al-Ula family, the masterminds of Muhammad IV's assassination.
In September 1340 (or 1338), Abu Thabit ibn Uthman was removed from his post as the overall Chief of the Volunteers and replaced by Yahya ibn Umar of the Banu Rahhu family.
Abu Thabit was expelled along with his three brothers and the entire family to the Hafsid Kingdom of Tunis.
Template:SfnTemplate:Sfn Historian L. P. Harvey comments that "[b]y the standards of acts of revenge in those days ... this was quite restrained", probably because Yusuf did not want to unnecessarily create tensions with the North African volunteers.
Template:Sfn
In the spring of 1339, after the expiration of the treaty, hostilities recommenced with Marinid raids into the Castilian countryside.
Confrontations ensued between Castile on one side and the two Muslim kingdoms on the other.
Granada was invaded by Castilian troops led by Gonzalo Martínez, Master of the Order of Alcántara, who raided Locubín, Alcalá de Benzaide and Priego.
In turn, Yusuf led an army of 8,000 in besieging Siles, but was forced to lift the siege by the forces of the Master of the Order of Santiago, Alfonso Méndez de Guzmán.
Template:Sfn The personal rivalry between Martínez and Guzman appears to have caused the former to defect to Yusuf, but he was soon captured by Castillian forces, hung as a traitor and his body burned.
The Marinid commander on the peninsula, Abu Malik Abd al-Wahid, son of Abu al-Hasan, died during a battle with Castile on 20 October 1339, but Marinid forces continued to ravage the Castilian frontiers until they were defeated in Jerez.
Template:Sfn
In autumn 1339, the Aragonese fleet under Jofre Gillabert tried to land near Algeciras but was driven away after their admiral was killed.
Template:Sfn On 8 April 1340, a major battle took place off Algeciras between the Castilian fleet under Alfonso Jofré Tenorio and a larger Marinid-Granadan fleet under Muhammad al-Azafi, resulting in a Muslim victory and the death of Tenorio.
Template:SfnTemplate:Sfn The Muslim fleet captured 28 galleys out of the 44 in the Castilian fleet, and 7 carracks.
Abu al-Hasan saw the naval victory as a harbinger for the conquest of Castile.
Template:Sfn He crossed the Strait of Gibraltar with his army, including siege engines, his wives, and his entire court.
He landed in Algeciras on 4 August, was joined by Yusuf, and laid siege on Tarifa, a port on the Strait, on 23 September.
Template:Sfn Alfonso XI marched to relieve Tarifa, joined by Portuguese troops led by his ally, King Afonso IV of Portugal.
Template:Sfn They arrived five miles from Tarifa on 29 October, and Yusuf and Abu al-Hasan moved to meet them.
Template:Sfn Alfonso XI commanded 8,000 horsemen, 12,000 foot soldiers and an unknown number of urban militia, while Afonso IV had 1,000 men.
Template:Sfn The Muslim strength is unclear: contemporary Christian sources claimed an exaggerated 53,000 horsemen and 600,000 foot soldiers;Template:Sfn while modern historian Ambrosio Huici Miranda in 1956 estimated 7,000 Granadan troops and 60,000 Moroccans.
Crucially, the Christian knights had much better armor than the more lightly equipped Muslim cavalry.
Template:Sfn
The Battle of Río Salado, where Yusuf and his ally Abu al-Hasan was defeated by the Castilian and Portuguese forces, in a 17th-century painting
The resulting Battle of Río Salado, on 30 October 1340, was a decisive Christian victory.
Yusuf, who wore a golden helmet in the battle, fled the field after a charge by the Portuguese troops.
The Granadan contingent initially defended itself and was about to defeat Afonso IV in a counter attack, but was routed when Christian reinforcements arrived, leaving their Marinids allies behind.
The Marinids too were routed in the main battle, which lasted from 9 a.m. to noon.
Template:Sfn Harvey opined that the key to the Christian victory-despite their numeric disadvantage-was their cavalry tactics and superior armor.
Muslim tactics-which focused on lightly armored, highly mobile cavalry-were well suited for open battle, but in the relatively narrow battlefield of Río Salado the Christian formation of armored knights attacking in a well-formed battle line had a decisive advantage.
Template:Sfn
In the aftermath of the battle, the Christian troops pillaged the Muslim camp and massacred the women and children, including Abu al-Hasan's Queen Fatima, the daughter of King Abu Bakr II of Tunis-to the dismay of their commanders who would have preferred to see her ransomed.
Template:Sfn Numerous royal persons and nobles were captured, including Abu al-Hasan's son, Abu Umar Tashufin.
Yusuf retreated to Granada through Marbella.
Abu al-Hasan marched to Gibraltar, sent news of victory back home to prevent any rebellion in his absence, and crossed the Strait to Ceuta the same night.
Template:Sfn
Various Muslim authors laid the blame on the Marinid Sultan, with Umar II of Tlemcen saying that he "humiliated the head of Islam and filled the idolaters with joy",Template:Sfn and Al-Maqqari commenting that he allowed his army to be "scattered like dust before the wind".
Template:Sfn Yusuf appeared to not have been blamed, and continued to be popular in Granada.
Template:Sfn Alfonso XI returned victoriously to Seville and paraded the Muslim captives and the booty taken by his army.
Template:Sfn There was so much gold and silver that their prices as far away as Paris and Avignon fell by one sixth.
Template:Sfn
With the bulk of the Marinids retreating to North Africa, Alfonso XI was able to act freely against Granada.
Template:Sfn He invaded the emirate in April 1341, feigning a plan to attack Málaga.
When Yusuf reinforced this western port-taking many men from elsewhere-Alfonso redirected his troops towards Alcalá de Benzaide, a major border fortress thirty miles north of Granada, whose garrison had been reduced in order to reinforce Málaga.
Template:Sfn The Castilian army started a siege and ravaged the surrounding countryside, not only taking food but also destroying vines-causing lasting damage to the local agriculture without any benefit to the attackers.
In response, Yusuf moved to a strong position in Pinos Puente to block Castilian attempts to raid further into the rich plains surrounding the city of Granada.
Alfonso XI extended the raids into more areas in order to tempt Yusuf to leave his position, but the Granadan army held its ground as the Castilians devastated the area surrounding Locubín and Illora.
Template:Sfn As the siege progressed, Yusuf received Marinid reinforcements from Algeciras and moved ten kilometers (six miles) to Moclín.
Neither side was willing to risk a frontal attack and Alfonso unsuccessfully tried to provoke Yusuf into an ambush.
Template:Sfn With relief unlikely, the Muslim defenders of Alcalá offered to surrender the fortress in exchange for safe conduct, to which Alfonso agreed; the capitulation took place on 20 August 1341.
Yusuf then offered a truce, but Alfonso demanded that he break his alliance with the Marinids, which Yusuf refused to do, and the war continued.
Template:SfnTemplate:Sfn
Concurrently with the siege of Alcalá, Alfonso's troops also captured the nearby Locubín.
In the following weeks after the fall of Alcalá's, the Castilians captured Priego, Carcabuey, Matrera, and Benamejí.
Template:Sfn} In May 1342, a Marinid-Granadan fleet sailing in the Strait of Gibraltar was ambushed by Castilian and Genoese ships, resulting in a Christian victory and the destruction of twelve galleys and the dispersal of other vessels along the Granadan coast.
Template:Sfn
The ports of the Strait of Gibraltar, 1329-1350.
Green: controlled by the Marinid Sultanate in 1350.
Red: controlled by Castile in 1350
Alfonso XI then targeted Algeciras, an important port on the Strait of Gibraltar which his father Ferdinand IV had failed to take in 1309-10.
Alfonso arrived in early August 1342 and slowly imposed a land and sea blockade on the city.
Template:Sfn Yusuf's army took to the field, joined by Marinid troops from Ronda, trying to threaten the besiegers from the rear or divert their attention.
Between November 1342 and February 1343, it raided the lands around Écija, entered and sacked Palma del Río, retook Benamejí and captured Estepa.
Template:SfnTemplate:Sfn In June, he sent his Template:Transl, Ridwan, to Alfonso offering payments in exchange for the lifting of the siege.
Alfonso countered the offer by increasing the payment he would require.
Template:SfnTemplate:Sfn Yusuf sailed to North Africa to consult with Abu al-Hasan and raise the money, but the payment from the Marinid Sultan was not enough.
Despite the safe conduct given by Alfonso, Yusuf's galley was attacked by a Genoese ship in Alfonso's service, which tried to steal the gold.
Yusuf's ships repulsed the attack; Alfonso apologised but did not take any action against the Genoese ship's captain.
Template:SfnTemplate:Sfn
On 12 December 1343, Yusuf crossed the Palmones River and engaged a Castilian detachment.
This was reported in Castilian sources as a Muslim defeat.
Early in 1344, Alfonso constructed a floating barrier made of trees chained together, that stopped supplies from reaching Algeciras.
With the hope of victory fading and the city on the verge of starvation, Yusuf began negotiations again.
Template:SfnTemplate:Sfn He sent an envoy, named Hasan Algarrafa in Castilian chronicles, and offered the surrender of Algeciras if its inhabitants were allowed to leave with their movable property, in exchange for a fifteen-year peace between Granada, Castile, and the Marinids.
Despite being counselled to reject the offer, and instead to take Algeciras by storm and massacre its inhabitants, Alfonso was aware of the uncertain outcome of an assault when hostile forces were nearby.
He agreed to Algarrafa's proposal, but requested that the truce be limited to ten years, which Yusuf accepted.
Other than Yusuf and Alfonso, the treaty included Abu al-Hasan, Peter IV, and the Doge of Genoa.
Yusuf and Alfonso signed the treaty on 25 March 1344 in the Castilian camp outside Algeciras.
Template:SfnTemplate:Sfn
War broke out again in Granada in 1349 when Alfonso declared that the peace treaty no longer prevented him from attacking Muslim territories because the Marinid Iberian territories were now controlled by Abu Inan Faris, Abu al-Hasan's son, who had rebelled and seized Fez the year before.
In June or July 1349, his forces began the siege of Gibraltar, a port which had been captured by Ferdinand IV in 1309 before falling to the Marinids in 1333.
Prior to the siege, Yusuf sent archers and foot soldiers to reinforce the town's garrison.
In July, Alfonso was personally present among the besiegers, and in the same month he ordered his Kingdom of MurciaTemplate:
Efn to attack Yusuf's Granada.
Template:Sfn Despite Yusuf's protests, Peter IV sent an Aragonese fleet to assist the siege, even though in order to respect the peace treaty with Yusuf he instructed his men not to harm any subject of Granada.
Template:Sfn With the Marinids unable to send help, the main responsibility for fighting Castile fell to Yusuf.
He led his troops in a series of counter-attacks.
During the summer of 1349 he raided the outskirts of Alcaraz and Quesada, and besieged Écija.
In the winter he sent Ridwan to besiege Cañete la Real, which surrendered after two days.
Template:Sfn
As the siege progressed, the Black Death (known in Spain as the mortandad grande), which had entered Iberian ports in 1348, struck the besiegers camp.
Alfonso persisted in the siege despite the urgings of his counselors.
He became infected himself and died on Good Friday 1350 (26 March), or the day before.
The Castilian forces withdrew from Gibraltar, with some of the defenders coming out to watch.
Template:Sfn Out of respect, Yusuf ordered his army and his commanders in the border regions not to attack the Castilian procession as it traveled with the King's body to Seville.
Template:Sfn Alfonso was succeeded by his fifteen year-old son, Peter I. Yusuf, Peter, and Abu Inan of the Marinids concluded a treaty in 17 July 1350, which was to last until 1 January 1357.
Trade was reopened between Granada and Castile (except for horses, arms, and wheat), and captives were exchanged.
In exchange for peace, Yusuf paid tribute to Peter and agreed to provide 300 light horsemen when requested, but Yusuf did not formally become Peter's vassal.
Despite privately disliking Peter, Yusuf observed his treaty obligations: he reluctantly sent 300 jinete cavalry to help the Castilian king suppress the rebellion of Alfonso Fernández Coronel in Aguilar, and refused to help the King's half-brother, Henry, when he attempted to start a rebellion against Peter from Algeciras.
Template:Sfn
Abu al-Hasan tried unsuccessfully to regain the Marinid throne until his death in 1351.
Two other challengers to Abu Inan, his brothers Abu al-Fadl and Abu Salim, fled to Granada.
Yusuf refused pressure from the Marinid Sultan to hand them over.
Template:Sfn Like many other Nasrid sultans, Yusuf found that the presence of Marinid pretenders in his court gave him leverage in case the two states came into conflict.
Template:Sfn At Yusuf's encouragement, Abu al-Fadl then went to Castile to seek help from Peter.
Peter, seeking to incite another civil war in North Africa, provided ships to land the prince in Sus in order to attack Abu Inan.
Template:SfnTemplate:Sfn The Marinid Sultan was extremely angered by Yusuf's actions but felt unable to take action, knowing that he was supported by Castile.
Template:Sfn Abu al-Fadl was subsequently captured by Abu Inan and executed in 1354 or 1355.Template:SfnTemplate:Sfn Abu Salim eventually became sultan in 1359-1361, well after Yusuf's death.
Template:Sfn
Bab al-Sharia, now the Tower of Justice, built by Yusuf I in 1348 as part of the entrance to the Alhambra.
Yusuf constructed the Bab al-Sharia (now the Tower of Justice) in the Alhambra in 1348, forming the grand entrance to the complex.
He also built what is now the Broken Tower (Torre Quebrada) of the Citadel of the Alhambra, and the Tower of the Captive on the ramparts.
He also carried out work in the Comares Palace, including renovations of the its hammam (bathhouse), as well as the construction of the Hall of the Comares, also known as the Chamber of the Ambassadors, the largest Nasrid structure in the complex.
He built various new walls and towers to accommodate his enlargement of the Comares, and adorned many of the courts and halls of the Alhambra, as may be seen from the repeated appearance of his name in the inscriptions on the walls.
Template:Sfn In 1349, he founded a religious school, Madrasa Yusufiyya, near the Great Mosque of Granada (now Granada Cathedral).
Only its prayer room remains today.
Template:SfnTemplate:Sfn Outside Granada, he enlarged the Alcazaba of Málaga, the ancestral home of his paternal grandfather, Abu Said Faraj, the former governor of Málaga, as well as the city's Gibralfaro precinct.
Template:Sfn
Yusuf also constructed new defensive structures throughout his realm, including new towers, gates, and barbicans, especially after the defeat of Río Salado.
He reinforced existing castles, walls, as well as coastal defences.
The Template:Transl Ridwan built forty watchtowers (tali'a), stretching the entire length of the Emirate's southern coast.
Template:Sfn Yusuf reinforced the city walls of Granada, as well as the Bab Ilbira (now the Gate of Elvira) and the Bab al-Ramla (the Gate of the Ears).Template:SfnTemplate:Sfn
Yusuf's administration was supported by numerous ministers, including "a constellation of major cultural figures", according to the modern scholar Antonio Fernández-Puertas.
Among them was Ridwan, who held the post of Template:Transl (chamberlain), a title created for the first time in the Nasrid rule for him by Muhammad IV and outranked that of the vizier and other ministers.
The Template:Transl had command of the army in the absence of the sultan.
He was dismissed and imprisoned after the defeat at Río Salado; he was freed a year later but then refused Yusuf's offer to reappoint him, as vizier.
Template:Sfn The next Template:Transl, Abu al-Hasan ibn al-Mawl, came from a prominent family but proved unskilled in political matters.
Template:SfnTemplate:Sfn He was dismissed after a few months and fled to North Africa to avoid the intrigues of his rivals.
Template:Sfn The office of Template:Transl remained vacant until Ridwan regained it under Yusuf's successor Muhammad V (first reign, 1354 - 1359); following Ridwan's assassination in 1359, the post again disappeared until the appointment of Abu al-Surrur Mufarrij by Yusuf III (r. 1408-1417).Template:SfnTemplate:Sfn
The famous poet Ibn al-Jayyab was appointed as vizier in 1341, becoming the highest-ranked minister and the mastermind of Yusuf's cautious policy after Salado.
Template:Sfn He was also the royal secretary, therefore he was titled dhu'l-wizaratayn ("the holder of the two vizierates").Template:SfnTemplate:Sfn He died of the Black Death in 1349.Template:Sfn In accordance to his wishes, he was succeeded as both vizier and royal secretary by his protégé, Ibn al-Khatib.
Template:SfnTemplate:Sfn Ibn al-Khatib had entered the court chancery (diwan al-insha) in 1340, replacing his father who died at Salado and serving under Ibn al-Jayyab.
Template:Sfn After becoming vizier he was also appointed to other posts, such as superintendent of the finances.
Template:Sfn With access to official documents and the court archives, Ibn al-Khatib produced numerous works; he remains one of the main historical sources on the Emirate of Granada.
Template:SfnTemplate:Sfn
Yusuf received his subjects publicly twice each week, on Monday and Thursday, to listen to their concerns, assisted by his ministers and members of the royal family.
According to Shihab al-Din al-'Umari, these hearings included the recitation of a tenth of the Quran and some parts of the hadith.
On solemn state occasions, Yusuf presided over court activities from a wooden folding armchair that is currently preserved in the Museum of the Alhambra and bears the Nasrid coat of arms across its back.
Template:Sfn Between April and May 1347, he made a state visit to his eastern regions, with the main purpose of inspecting the fortifications in this part of his realm.
Accompanied by his court, he visited twenty places in twenty-two days, including the port of Almería, where he was well received by the populace.
Template:Sfn Ibn al-Khatib describes other anecdotes that illustrate Yusuf's popularity, including his reception by a well-respected judge in Purchena, by the people-including common womenfolk-of Guadix in 1354, and by certain Christian merchants in the same year.
Template:SfnTemplate:Efn According to the historian Francisco Vidal Castro, gold coins bearing Yusuf's name had particularly beautiful designs, many of which are still found today .Template:Sfn
In diplomacy, for the first time in Nasrid history he sent and embassy to the Mamluk Sultanate of Cairo.
A surviving copy of a letter from the Mamluk Sultan al-Salih Salih indicated that Yusuf had requested military help to fight the Christians; al-Salih prayed for Yusuf's victory but declined to send troops, saying they were needed for conflicts in his own borders.
Template:Sfn Many of Yusuf's diplomatic exchanges with the rulers of North Africa-especially the Marinid Sultans-are preserved in Rayhanat al-Kuttab compiled by Ibn al-Khatib.
Template:Sfn
In the judiciary, the chief judge (qadi al-jama'a) Abu Abdullah Muhammad al-Ash'ari al-Malaqi who was appointed by Muhammad IV continued to serve under Yusuf until his death on the battle of Río Salado.
Template:Sfn He was known for his strong opinion; in one occasion, he wrote a poem to Yusuf warning him of officials who squandered tax revenues, and in another, he reminded the Sultan of his responsibilities to his subjects as a Muslim leader.
Template:Sfn After the death al-Malaqi, Yusuf appointed, consecutively, Muhammad ibn Ayyash, Ibn Burtal, Abu al-Qasim Muhammad al-Sabti.
Template:Sfn The latter resigned during his tenure in 1347 and Yusuf then appointed Abu al-Barakat ibn al-Hajj al-Balafiqi, who previously served as judges in various provinces and was known for his love of literature.
Template:Sfn Yusuf strengthened the function of the muftis, distinguished jurists who issued legal opinions (fatwas), often to assist judges in interpreting difficult points of the Islamic law.
Template:Sfn The Madrasa Yusufiyya, where Maliki Islamic law was among the subjects taught, was created partly to increase the influence of the muftis.
Template:SfnTemplate:Sfn Yusuf's emphasis of the rule of law and appointment of distinguished judges improved his standing among his subjects and among other Muslim monarchies.
Template:Sfn
Two of Yusuf's concubines bore him children.
His concubine Buthayna gave birth to Muhammad (later Muhammad V) when Yusuf was twenty, and to a daughter named Aisha.
Another concubine, Maryam, bore him seven children: two sons-Ismail (later Ismail II), who was born nine months after Muhammad, and Qays-as well as five daughters-Fatima, Mu'mina, Khadija, Shams and Zaynab.
The eldest daughter married her cousin, who would reign as Muhammad VI.
Maryam's influence was said to be greater than that of Butayna, and Yusuf favored his second son Ismail above his other children.
Initially, Yusuf designated Ismail as his heir, but later-a few days before his death-he named Muhammad instead.
The education of the children was entrusted to Abu Nu'aym Ridwan, the who was a former Christian and managed to teach the young Ismail some Greek.
Yusuf's grandmother Fatima, who had been influential in the Granadan court for multiple generations, died in 1349 aged 90 lunar years, and received an elegy from Ibn al-Khatib.
The activity of Yusuf's mother Bahar was also attested: when the North African traveller Ibn Battuta visited Granada in 1350 and sought a royal audience, Yusuf was sick and in his place Bahar provided Ibn Battuta with enough money for his stay, even though it was unknown if Bahar actually met him or if he was received inside the Alhambra.
Yusuf's concubine Maryam played an important role after his death: In 1359, she financed a coup that involved 100 men and deposed her stepson Muhammad V in favor of her son Ismail.
The reigns of Yusuf and his son Muhammad V (coin pictured) was seen by modern historians as the cultural peak of the Nasrid dynasty.
Yusuf was assassinated whilst praying in Granada's Great Mosque on 19 October 1354 (Eid al-Fitr/1 Shawwal 755 AH).
A maniac stabbed him with a dagger during the last prostration of the prayer ritual.
He was carried to his royal apartment in the Alhambra, where he died.
The motivation for this attack remains unknown.
The assassin was interrogated, but his words were unintelligible.
He was soon killed by a mob.
His body was burnt (according to Ibn al-Khatib, though this statement might have referred to his supposed burning in hellfire) or "cut into a thousand pieces" (according to Ibn Khaldun).
Yusuf was succeeded by his eldest son, who became Muhammad V.
Yusuf was buried in the royal cemetery (rawda) of the Alhambra, alongside his great-grandfather, Muhammad II, and his father, Ismail I. Centuries later, with the surrender of Granada, the last sultan, Muhammad XII (also known as Boabdil), exhumed the bodies in this cemetery and reburied them in Mondújar, part of his Alpujarras estates.
Fernández-Puertas describes the reigns of Yusuf and his successor Muhammad V as the "climax" of the Nasrid period, as seen from the realm's architectural and cultural output, and the flourishing of the study of medicine.
Similarly, the historian Brian A. Catlos describes the reigns of the two Sultans as the emirate's "era of greatest glory", and Rachel Arié describes the same period as its "apogee".
L. P. Harvey describes Yusaf's cultural achievements as "considerable" and "solid", and as marking the beginning of the dynasty's "Golden Age".
Furthermore, Yusuf's Granada survived the "onslaught of Alfonso XI's attacks" and at the end reduced its dependency on the Marinids.
However, Harvey notes that he was defeated at Río Salado, "the greatest single reverse suffered by the Muslim cause" during the Nasrid period before the fall of Granada, and presided over the strategically significant losses of Algeciras and Alcalá de Benzaide.
