iOS
When the operating system of the initial iPhone was made in 2007, it did not have a specific name.
It was said to be a part of OS X, as on Apple desktop computers.
It got the name "iPhone OS" in 2008.
It was eventually renamed "iOS" in 2010 after Apple achieved a commercial arrangement with Cisco.
Cisco had been using the name "IOS" for 10 years as the name of its operating system for network equipment.
Apple in June 2021 introduced the latest version of its iOS operating system, iOS 15, which is set to be released on September 20.
iOS 15 introduces new features for FaceTime calls, tools to reduce distractions, a new notifications experience, added privacy features, complete redesigns for Safari, Weather, and Maps, and more.
Notifications have been redesigned in iOS 15, adding contact photos for people and larger icons for apps.
To reduce distraction, a notification summary collects notifications together for delivery at an appropriate time and arranges notifications by priority.
Focus is a new feature that can filter notifications and apps based on what a user wishes to focus on at a certain time.
When a user's Focus is blocking incoming notifications, their status will be displayed to others in Messages.
iOS will suggest a Focus for different occasions, such as work hours or winding down for bed, using on-device intelligence, but users can also create a custom Focus.
When a Focus is set on one Apple device, it automatically applies to other Apple devices.
Safari features a completely new design.
Controls are now easier to reach with one hand and give more focus to a webpage's content.
There is a new, compact tab bar that floats at the bottom of the screen so users can easily swipe between tabs.
Tab Groups allow users to save tabs and easily access them at any time across devices.
There is also a customizable start page and web extensions for the first time.
The Maps app now offers a new 3D view in cities with significantly enhanced details, showing buildings, pedestrian crosswalks, bike lanes, and more.
There is a new city-driving experience with added road details and improved Transit features, such as pinned favorite lines, notifications to disembark, and AR walking directions.
iOS 15 brings voice isolation and Spatial Audio to FaceTime calls so that voices sound as if they are coming from where the person is located on the screen.
FaceTime also supports Portrait mode and offers a new grid view to see more faces at the same time.
SharePlay is a new feature that allows users to share media together in sync during a FaceTime call.
Users can also generate shareable links to a scheduled FaceTime call, which can also be opened on Android and Windows devices.
Apple has launched iPhone 13 that ships with iOS 15 and if you've already ordered one, it's time to get your beast protected with some
