Player Unknown's Battleground (PUBG or PubG) is an online multiplayer Battle Royale created and published by PUBG Corporation, a subsidiary of South Korean video game company Bluehole.
The game is based on previous modes created by Brendon "Player Unknown" Green, inspired by Battle Royale to use other games, and expanded to a separate game under Brendon Green.
In the game, a hundred players have to parachute on an island and fight among themselves with different weapons to survive.
Weapons and equipment have to be collected from different places on the map.
The size of the safe zone on the map tends to get smaller over time, allowing players to meet and fight each other.
The one who fights among himself as the last man standing is the winner.
The game was released for Microsoft Windows in March 2016 through Steam's advance access beta program, and was fully released on December 20, 2017.
That same month, the game was released by Microsoft Studios for Xbox One under its Xbox Game Preview program.
A few months later, it was localized and released by Tencent Games in China, where two mobile versions based on the game were released for Android and iOS.
As of June 2018, it is one of the best-selling games of all time, with nearly 50 million sales on all platforms.
Also, the Windows version tops Steam at the same time in terms of the number of players playing the game, which is the all-time high of this platform.
PUBG has received a number of positive reviews from critics both during its first access and final release; Critics have found that when the game is not fully finished and there are some technical glitches, PUBG introduces a new type of gameplay that can be played by players of any skill and is a game worthy of replay.
Among other accolades, the game has received several Game of the Year nominations, and Green has been considered by Royal War Games as the defining game in the world.
Many other video games, in continuation of PUBG's success, have added combat royal style mode, moreover multiple clones were initially created outside of China.
PUBG Corporation has organized a number of small competitions and introduced in-game equipment to help viewers broadcast the game, so that they would like to become a popular sport.
PUBG is a player vs. player action game where 100 players fight in Battle Royale, a large-scale Last Man Standing match is held, where players continue to fight to the end.
Each match begins with a parachute landing on a map measuring approximately 6 × 8 km (5.0 × 5.0 m).
The flight path of the plane is at different places on the map depending on the match, players need to land on the ground by parachute in a quick and accurate place.
Even if the players have customized their clothes from the east, it does not affect the game.
Once they land, players can search buildings and other sites to find weapons, vehicles, armor and other equipment.
These items are effectively distributed across the map at the start of a match, especially in high-risk areas where there is usually good equipment.
Kill other players as well as acquire their gears (equipment).
Players can also play from a first person or third person perspective.
Each has its own advantages as well as disadvantages in war and situational awareness.
Every few minutes, the playable area on the map begins to shrink to an irregular position, the amount of damage (damage) increases if any player is out of the safe zone, and the player is eliminated if the safe zone is not entered in time.
In the game, players see the border as a flashing blue wall that moves over time.
As the amount of safe zones on the map gradually decreases, the chances of encounters between players increase.
During the match, red and bomb blasts are highlighted in unspecified areas of the map, posing a threat to players in that area.
In both cases, players are warned a few minutes before the incident, provided their safety replacement is provided.
Randomly, a plane flies to different parts of the playable map and drops various necessary equipment through a loot package, which is not available during normal gameplay.
These packages emit highly visible red smoke, attracting interested players closer to it and making players more exposed.
On average, a full round takes no more than 30 minutes.
At each round completed, players gain in-game currency based on how long they have survived fighting, how many players they have killed, and how much damage other players have suffered.
Coins are used by players to purchase a variety of items, including decoration items for character or weapon customization.
A rotating "event mode" was added to the game around March 2016.
These events change the rules of normal play, such as the placement of large teams or squads, or the distribution of weapons and armor throughout the game map.
