Justin Bieber
Justin Bieber's January 2014 mugshot, after being detained by police in Miami Beach, Florida
Justin Drew Bieber is a Canadian entertainer, specializing originally in teen pop.
He has since ventured into other genres including R&B. Bieber is a Christian, and of German, English, Irish, and French-Canadian ancestry.
Bieber was born in poverty on March 1, 1994 in London, Ontario, Canada.
He was raised by his unwed mother, Patricia Mallette, though his father, Jeremy Jack Bieber, maintained contact with the two.
Mallette worked low-paying office jobs to provide for her son.
The two lived in low-income housing.
At age 12, Bieber won second prize in a local talent contest.
He taught himself guitar, trumpet, drums, and piano.
His mother posted videos of Bieber performing to YouTube.
A former marketing executive, Scooter Braun, saw some of these videos and tracked Bieber down, taking him to Atlanta, Georgia, to make demo tapes in 2007.
In October 2008, Bieber signed with Island Records.
Braun became his manager.
In 2009, Bieber released several singles to great acclaim.
He appeared successfully on several television programs.
In 2010, his debut album, My World 2.0 was released.
It topped the charts in many countries.
In 2010, Bieber's voice began deepening on his way to manhood, and adjustments were made in the recording studio and on the concert stage.
In 2011, Bieber released his second studio album, Under the Mistletoe.
Bieber's bio-pic, Justin Bieber: Never Say Never, was also released.
Bieber's third studio album, Believe was released in 2012, by Island Records.
This album demonstrates his search for a more mature sound.
On January 23, 2014, Bieber was arrested in Miami Beach, Florida.
He was arrested for driving under the influence (DUI) of alcohol, marijuana and prescription drugs, drag racing, and resisting arrest without violence.
Bieber was driving a Lamborghini and R&B singer Khalil, who was also arrested, was driving a Ferrari.
Bieber was released on a $2,500 bond.
Bieber has had several run-ins with the law around the world before this incident.
