Luxembourg is a small country in Western Europe.
It is a member state of the European Union and a member of Benelux.
Its capital's name is also 'Luxembourg'.
In 2012, there were nearly 525,000 inhabitants.
It is the second smallest member country in the European Union after Malta.
The name of the country in official form is Grand-Duchy of Luxembourg, Luxembourg being the current form.
In 2014, Luxembourg was considered the most prosperous country in the world with a GDP of $115,000 per inhabitant.
Situated in the heart of West Europe, it does not have a coastal border.
But its geographical situation gives it a big linguistic advantage.
At school, children learn several languages other than Luxembourgish.
In primary school, children learn to read and write in German, then later in French, getting English generally as a third foreign language if Luxembourgish is the mother tongue.
Only pre- and nursery schools are in Luxembourgish.
Place d'Armes, Luxembourg, Luxembourg
With an area of 2,586 km squared, Luxembourg is smaller than a department of France or a Belgian province.
It is one of the smallest European countries and one of the smallest of the European Union.
It extends at maximum 82 km in length (from north to south) and 57 km in width (from east to west).
The four most important rivers are the Moselle, the Sauer, the Our and the Alzette.
963: Foundation of Luxembourg
1815: Luxembourg becomes a grand dukedom.
1839:
It became an independent state in Netherlands; it gains autonomy, but more that half of the country is attributed to Belgium
1867:
Obtained full independence.
1948: Luxembourg withdrew its policy of neutrality after having been invaded by Germany during the course of the Second World War; it entered into the Benelux Customs Union.
1949: It joined NATO.
1957: Became one of the six founding countries of the European Economic Community (which later became the European Union).
1999:
Adopted of the Euro.
It's (nearly) free on all the transport in Luxembourg.
There are trams, buses,metro and trains.
