Bangladesh National Cricket Team
Bangladesh Cricket Board Official logo
The Bangladesh National Cricket Team represents Bangladesh as the national cricket team in international cricket competitions.
They are also known as "Tigers".
The Bangladesh Cricket Board (BCB for short) manages the team.
Bangladesh is one of the permanent members of the ICC Test and One Day International.
Bangladesh played its first Test match in Dhaka in 2000 against India as the 10th Test playing nation.
Bangladesh made its debut in international cricket by participating in the ICC Trophy held in England in 1989.
They won 2 of 4 matches in the Seba tournament and lost the remaining 2 matches.
Seven years later, on March 31, 1986, they played their first one-day international in the Asia Cup against Pakistan.
Bangladesh won the ICC Trophy in 1996 and for the first time participated in the 1999 Cricket World Cup.
They beat Pakistan and Scotland in the World Cup.
The Bangladesh cricket team has been playing ODIs as an ICC ODI player since 1996.
On 26 June 2000, they became members of the ICC as the tenth Test playing nation.
As of February 25, 2020, they have played a total of 119 Test matches and won 14 of them.
They won their first Test against Zimbabwe.
They won the next two Tests against the West Indies.
In January, 2021, Bangladesh was ranked 9th in Tests, 8th in ODIs and 8th in Twenty20 Internationals according to the ICC rankings.
The Beginning Path (1989-1999)
Bangladesh became an associate member of the International Cricket Council (ICC) in 1986.
Later, Bangladesh made its debut in world cricket by participating in the ICC Trophy held in England in 1989 under the leadership of Rakibul Hasan.
They won 2 of 4 matches and lost 2 of them and left the competition.
Under the leadership of Gazi Ashraf Hossain Lipu, Bangladesh played its first one-day international against Pakistan in the Asia Cup on March 31, 1986.
Bangladesh national cricket team 1986
As the host country, Bangladesh participated in the 1986 Asia Cup.
This was the first international one-day cricket tournament held in Bangladesh.
Despite the catastrophic floods, Bangladesh proved to be a success as an organizer.
After participating in various international competitions, Bangladesh got its first victory in one-day international cricket in 1996.
After losing 22 long games, Bangladesh won the match against Kenya in India with the extraordinary skill of Mohammad Rafique (6 runs and 3 wickets).
Athar Ali Khan-Mohammad Rafique pair scored 136 runs.
Athar Ali Khan scored 48 runs.
Later in October, the ICC Knockout Trophy was organized by Bangladesh where all the Test playing teams participated in this one-day international knock-out competition.
By winning the ICC Trophy in 1996, Bangladesh got the opportunity to play in the 1999 World Cup in England and became a regular member of the International Cricket Council.
Bangladesh stunned the world by participating in the World Cup for the first time.
Bangladesh beat 1992 World Cup winners Pakistan by 72 runs thanks to the team's superb fielding and Khaled Mahmood's personal bowling (3/31).
Khaled Mahmood was considered the best in the match.
After losing to Scotland and Pakistan, Bangladesh failed to advance to the next round of the World Cup.
But this victory helped Bangladesh to become a member of the international Test team.
On 13 November 2000, the Bangladesh cricket team entered the first international Test cricket arena under the captaincy of Naimur Rahman.
Aminul Islam scored a century (145) in his debut Test against India at the Bangabandhu National Stadium alongside Charles Bannerman of Australia and David Hutton of Zimbabwe.
Captain Naimur Rahman's 132-run 7-wicket debut was the best bowling of any bowler in the first innings of a Test.
But due to batting disaster in the second innings, Bangladesh lost by 9 wickets.
Mohammad Ashraful later scored a century in his debut Test against Sri Lanka at the SSC in Colombo in 2001 at the age of 18 years and 61 days.
Bangladesh took the lead in the first innings for the first time in the Karachi Test against Pakistan in 2003.
They lost the third and final Test in Multan by 1 wicket.
Alok Kapali scored his first hat-trick in Test cricket for Bangladesh in this series.
After losing 21 Tests in a row, Habibul Bashar led Bangladesh to a draw in the second Test of the 2004 tour of Zimbabwe, although the game was suspended for three days due to bad weather.
In the 2004 St. Lucia Test against the West Indies, Bangladesh drew for the first time with a three-wicket century.
After Habibul Bashar and Mohammad Rafique in the first innings, Khaled Masood scored a century in the second innings.
Bangladesh won its first Test match against Zimbabwe in Chittagong in 2005.
Enamul Haque Jr. became the best in the match.
The other Test of the series also ended in a draw.
Bangladesh tasted the first series win in Test history.
In 2008, Bangladesh surprised the cricket world with a 156-run lead in the first innings but lost to Australia by 3 wickets.
Bangladesh won the first Test outside the country in 2009.
Bangladesh won both the Tests of the series against the new West Indies as all the top players went on strike.
On 13 November 2000, the Bangladesh cricket team entered the first international Test cricket arena under the captaincy of Naimur Rahman.
Aminul Islam scored a century (145) in his debut Test against India at the Bangabandhu National Stadium alongside Charles Bannerman of Australia and David Hutton of Zimbabwe.
Captain Naimur Rahman's 132-run 7-wicket debut was the best bowling of any bowler in the first innings of a Test.
But due to batting disaster in the second innings, Bangladesh lost by 9 wickets.
Mohammad Ashraful later scored a century in his debut Test against Sri Lanka at the SSC in Colombo in 2001 at the age of 18 years and 61 days.
Bangladesh took the lead in the first innings for the first time in the Karachi Test against Pakistan in 2003.
They lost the third and final Test in Multan by 1 wicket.
Alok Kapali scored his first hat-trick in Test cricket for Bangladesh in this series.
After losing 21 Tests in a row, Habibul Bashar led Bangladesh to a draw in the second Test of the 2004 tour of Zimbabwe, although the game was suspended for three days due to bad weather.
In the 2004 St. Lucia Test against the West Indies, Bangladesh drew for the first time with a three-wicket century.
After Habibul Bashar and Mohammad Rafique in the first innings, Khaled Masood scored a century in the second innings.
Bangladesh won its first Test match against Zimbabwe in Chittagong in 2005.
Enamul Haque Jr. became the best in the match.
The other Test of the series also ended in a draw.
Bangladesh tasted the first series win in Test history.
In 2008, Bangladesh surprised the cricket world with a 156-run lead in the first innings but lost to Australia by 3 wickets.
Bangladesh won the first Test outside the country in 2009.
Bangladesh won both the Tests of the series against the new West Indies as all the top players went on strike.
Main article: Bangladesh Cricket Board
The Bangladesh Cricket Board is the highest governing body of the Bangladesh national cricket team.
The main objective of this organization is to determine the playing field, tour the team, manage the team and improve the quality of cricket.
Also, the board is responsible for team sponsorship.
Founded in 1982, the body was known as the Bangladesh Cricket Control Board.
The draft constitution of the organization was prepared in 1986.
In January 2006, the board abolished the term 'control'.
The Bangladesh government appoints the president of the BCB.
Nazmul Hasan is the current BCB president.
From 2003 to 2012, the telecommunications company Grameenphone was the sponsor of the men's and women's national cricket teams.
They invested ৳ 151.5 million between 2006 and 2011 to improve the quality of cricket in the country.
Currently, the telecom company Robi is working as a sponsor of the men's and women's national cricket teams.
In 2006, BCB authorities set up an academy for teenagers and inexperienced players.
Central players are contracted and match fees are paid to encourage national players.
In 2005 he paid 1,000 per Test and $ 500 for one-day internationals.
Bangladesh team
