Kazakh Khanate
In 1227, within the Golden Horde, the proto-Kazakh state was formed in the steppe, which was the White Horde .
After separating from the Golden Horde in 1361, the White Horde became an independent state for a time, sometimes teaming up with the Blue Horde to re-establish the Golden Horde.
However, after the death of the Golden Horde khan, Barak Khan in 1428, the Golden Horde became fragmented, and the White Horde itself was divided into the Uzbek Khanate and the Nogai Horde (descendants of the ruling Mongol tribes), the remaining land was divided between Mustafa Khan in the south and Muhammad.
henna in the north.
The Uzbek Khanate, which dominated most of present-day Kazakhstan, ruled Abul-Qayr Khan who was one of the conspirators in the murder of Barak Khan.
Under the leadership of Abul-Qayr Khan, the Uzbek Khanate became a corrupt, unstable and weak state that often dealt with internal problems.
To make matters worse, the Ojrati raided the rope itself.
They ravaged nomadic settlements, and larger cities were looted and damaged, with accompanying massacres of civilians.
Peace was made in 1457 between the Uzbeks and the Oyrat, after Abul-Qayr Khan suffered a heavy defeat, due to which he lost his reputation among the Uzbeks.
The formation of the Kazakh Khanate began in 1459, when several Uzbek Mongol tribes dissatisfied with the rule of Abul-Qayr, led by Barak Khan's two sons, Yanibek and Kerei , fled the Uzbek Khanate in a case known as the Great Migration .
The two brothers led the nomads towards Mogulistan, eventually settling and establishing an independent state.
The Khan of Mogulistan united with them by offering them support against their opponents.
About 200,000 nomads joined the Janibek and Kerej Khan movement, which had enormous power and influence, which caused Abul-Qayr's concern.
The new Khanate soon became a protective state between Mogulistan and the Uzbek Khanate.
Although Yanibek and Kerey Khan are considered to be the founding rulers of the Kazakh Khanate, Yanibek Khan is the one who initially had most of the power.
Eager to liberate his country from Abul Qayr Khan, Yanibek attacked the Uzbek Khanate in 1468.
Abul Qayr, in response, launched a campaign against the Kazakhs, but died on the way to Zetis.
After the death of Kerej Khan in April 1473, Janibek Khan became the only ruler.
Perdue, Peter C (2009).
China Marches West: The Qing Conquest of Central Eurasia.
Harvard University Press.
