Benin
10,323,000(in 2002)
Christianity (42.8%), Islam (24.4%), Vodun, a traditional religion of Benin (17.3%), Other local traditional religions (6%), Other religious groups (1.9%), No religion (6.5%)
The name Benin comes from the Bight of Benin, itself coming from the Benin kingdom.
Benin is a small country, eight times smaller than Nigeria but about twice as big as Togo.
There are two seasons in Benin (like most countries in Africa): the dry season, where the temperature can rise up to 40 °C and the wet season, where the temperature drops to 15 °C.
It is a poor country, one of the poorest of the world.
The location of Benin.
The country shares its borders with four countries: Togo, Burkina Faso, Niger and Nigeria.
Its southern coast belongs to the Bight of Benin.
The Mekrou river
Benin has six major rivers:
the Mékrou river (between Benin and Niger), the longest river of Benin (410 km long);
the Mono river (between Togo and Benin), 100 km long;
the Sota river, 250 km long (on the borders between Niger and Benin).
There are a lot of forests, national parks in Benin, especially in north (the south is more urban, and most of the cities are more next to the sea (Porto Novo or Cotonou).
the W National Park (more than one million hectares), which is also in Burkina Faso and in Niger, and protected by the Ramsar convention;
There are many forests in Benin.
These are the most important ones (coming from North and going to the sea):
the Goungoun Forest;
the Sota Forest;
the Superior Alibori Forest;
the Trois-rivières Forest;
the Quenou Benou Forest;
the Superior Ouémé Forest;
the Ouari Maro Forest;
the Kouffé mountains Forest;
the Toui-Kilibo Forest;
the Agoua Forest;
the Dogo Forest;
There are three important hunting zones: the hunting zone of Djona, the hunting zone of Pendjari and the hunting zone of Latakora.
The capital of Benin is Porto Novo.
It is situated near the sea.
The largest and most inhabited city is Cotonou.
More than 800 thousand people live there.
It is the economic center of Benin.
Here is the list of the cities in Benin (the ten most inhabited ones are in bold):
The official language of Benin is French.
There are also lots of other languages, such as Peul, Yoruba, Fon,...
Benin is the 41th most multilingual country in the world, before France and after UK.
There are a lot of specialty foods from Benin, for example Wagasi cheese (made by the Fulani people in northern Benin), Acarajé, Moyo, Beye, Amiwo (red corn dough), Gari Dossi, Gari Pinnon, Féchouada (from Ouidah), but also red rice,...
