Padma Bridge
The Padma Bridge is a multi-purpose road and railway bridge under construction on the Padma River in Bangladesh.
Through this, Shariatpur and Madaripur districts will be connected with Munshiganj's Lohajang.
As a result, the north-eastern part will be connected with the south-western part of the country.
For a developing country like Bangladesh, the Padma Bridge is going to be one of the biggest challenging construction projects in its history.
The upper level of the two-tiered steel and concrete truss bridge will have a four-lane road and the lower level will have a single railway.
41 spans of 150 meters length have already been installed in the Padma-Brahmaputra-Meghna river basin, the largest bridge in the country is being constructed at a length of 6.150 kilometers and a width of 18.10 meters.
China Major Bridge Engineering Company, the contractor constructing the Padma Bridge, said it would take until April 2022 for the Padma Bridge to be operational.
In 2016-17, the World Bank withdrew its pledge after allegations of corruption by some people involved in project preparation, and other donors followed suit.
In this incident, the then Communications Minister Syed Abul Hossain was removed from the cabinet and Secretary Mosharraf Hossain Bhuiyan had to go to jail.
The case was later dropped by a Canadian court for lack of evidence.
Allegations of corruption were later refuted in court.
At present the project is being funded from the own resources of the Government of Bangladesh.
Construction of the multi-purpose socio-economic development project 'Padma Multipurpose Bridge' on the Padma River, designed by AECOM, was scheduled to begin in 2011.
It was supposed to end in 2013.
The original project was planned by the former caretaker government on August 26, 2006.
At that time the much talked about Padma bridge project worth 10 thousand 161 crore was passed.
Later, the Awami League government came and connected the railway and on 11 January 2011 revised the cost of the bridge in the first phase.
At that time the cost was estimated at Tk 20,508 crore.
The cost of the Padma Bridge was further increased by Tk 8,000 crore.
As a result, the total cost of the Padma Bridge stood at Tk 26,793 crore.
In April 2010, the Bangladesh Bridge Authority (BASEC) called for pre-qualification tenders for the project.
According to the first plan, construction of the bridge was scheduled to begin in early 2011 and major works were to be completed by 2013.
The project will cover three districts - Munshiganj .
The total land required and acquired for this is 918 hectares.
