Nintendo eShop
The official Nintendo eShop logo as of November 18, 2012.
Nintendo eShop is an online service offered by Nintendo Network for consoles Nintendo 3DS, Wii U, Wii and Nintendo DSI.
It was released on June 6, 2011 in North America and June 7, 2011 in Europe and Japan, by a system update of Nintendo 3DS, adding this functionality to the console.
Unlike the Nintendo 3DS, the Wii U online store is available from the launch of the console, but a system update is required to access it.
It is also a multitasking application, which means it is accessible even when the game is running in the background through the main menu of the system, although this feature is only available on Wii U. Nintendo eShop offers downloadable games, applications and information about video games for the console.
The Nintendo eShop icon is on the Start menu of Wii U and Nintendo 3DS and wireless Internet connection is required for access.
Unlike the Wii Shop Channel and Nintendo DSi Shop, as payment using Nintendo Points, Nintendo eShop used directly relevant regional currencies, such as euros and American dollar.
Is possible add money to your account by credit card or by prepaid cards, called Nintendo eShop Card, which can be purchased in stores.
Nintendo eShop stores a record of all downloads and purchases, allowing users to re-download previously purchased software at no additional cost, provided that the software is still available on the eShop.
Downloads can be started immediately, or you can choose are downloaded while the console is in standby mode.
The games and applications downloaded on a Nintendo DSi can be transferred to a Nintendo 3DS, with some exceptions, such as Flipnote Studio and the Nintendo DSi web browser.
Nintendo eShop offers a wide range of video services for Wii U and Nintendo 3DS.
Some of these services allow users to watch episodes of TV shows and movies on your Wii U at 480p, and in some cases in 720p HD, and Nintendo 3DS in 240p.
It should be noted however that these services through demand are independent of Nintendo Network services available.
These videos can be downloaded to the system memory via SpotPass or sent via wireless internet user.
In Nintendo 3DS, many of these videos are offered in 3D, while Wii U, only available in 2D videos.
The exact content available varies by region.
