Lommel
The Sint-Pietersbandenchurch in Lommel
Lommel is a city in Belgium.
It had in 2014 a population of 33.744 people on a surface of 102,37 km².
The name of the mayor is Peter Vanvelthoven.
Lommel exists since the year 990.
In the earlier periods made Lommel part at the Eninge of the Kempen also known as the Bailiwick of 's-Hertogenbosch is called.
Since 1648 Lommel was part of the United provinces.
People from Lommel was then called ' the Dutch in the place of the Belgians.
In the years 1798-1799 undertook the Dutch Reverend Stephanus Hanewinkel a trip through the entire Meierij of 's-Hertogenbosch and did in 1799 also Lommel.
He described the city as "the extreme Village of Majorij, on the borders of the modern country, lying around in very size and expansive heïen In 1795 the French invaded Lommel inside.
When the French left his troops back and got Lommel belonged to Kingdom of the Netherlands Lommel, Lommel remained so belong to the Bailiwick.
19 November 1817 joined passed of North Brabant to Limburg as Exchange against Luyksgestel that in 1819 of the province of Antwerp on North Brabant.
Luyksgestel belonged then to the prince-bishopric of Liège and Lommel to Meierijse exclave.
After the Belgian revolution until Kingdom Netherlands Lommel belonged under Belgian rule.
Although this piece of Netherlands Netherlands demands the Meierij has held on to the State.
On the market square, there is a statue of a teut, a typical historical phenomenon from the region.
Itinerant merchants and artisans were Teuten starting from the 16th to the 20th century with their merchandise (copper, textile, pottery ...) on the back to Germany, France, Netherlands and Luxembourg.
Lommel especially the district Barrier played an important role in the second world war in operation Market Garden.
By the Irish Guards on 10 September 1944, the British troops on a beachhead towards Netherlands.
On 17 September 1944, she crossed the Dutch border.
Some points of interest in Lommel (Lommel) is the Glass house and the German Military Cemetery.
There are also many natural areas in Lommel, such as Watering and the Lommel Sahara.
Lommel is also the third shopping city of Limburg in Belgium with a trade center and shopping center called "The Singel".
On the right are also called the rivers Schelde and the Maas points of interest.
