French language
French uses the Latin alphabet just as English does, with the addition of several accent marks that are not used in English: the acute accent or accent aigu (é), the grave accent or accent grave (è), and the circumflex accent or accent circonflexe (ê).
There is also a diacritical mark called a cedilla or cédille, which is placed under the letter c (ç) to give it a soft pronunciation (like an "s" sound) in certain situations where it would otherwise be pronounced hard (like a "k").
There are 110 million people who can speak French natively.
But there are 300 million French speakers total, which means that 190 million people decided to learn the language as adults!
This is because there is a lot of interesting literature in French.
French is also a language often used in diplomacy.
French is spoken all around the world.
French evolved from the Latin language, just like Spanish, Italian, Portuguese, and Romanian.
In the 1600s, French people came to Canada and settled in the area we now call Québec.
Some French people (who were expelled from Canada) also settled in Louisiana, which was named in honor of King Louis XIV of France.
Louisiana is now a state of the United States.
In the 1800s, France conquered large parts of northern, western, and central Africa.
As France took over ruling these territories and their populations, they established French as the language of instruction in schools, and as the official language of the government.
Over time, French became the second native language of many African people, although local languages are still used most often in the home.
Although France no longer rules these former colonies, they still use French in daily life.
Alexandre Dumas (1802 - 1870), Les Trois Mousquetaires (The Three Musketeers)
Jules Verne (1828 - 1905), Vingt mille lieues sous les mers (Twenty Thousand Leagues Under the Sea)
Francois Marie Arouet, better known as Voltaire (1694 - 1778), Zadig ou la Destinée (Zadig, or The Book of Fate)
Gaston Leroux (1868 - 1927), Le Fantôme de l'Opéra (The Phantom of the Opera)
There once was a Dame Tartine
Dans un beau palais de beurre frais.
Who lived in a beautiful palace of fresh butter.
La muraille était de praline,
The walls were made of praline,
Le parquet était de croquets,
The floors were of croquettes,
Morning bells are ringing, morning bells are ringing.
This song can be sung as a 'round', which is when one person or group starts the song, and when they arrive at the end of the first verse, the second person or group begins.
