Cell
In biology, the cell is the basic structure of organisms.
All cells are made by other cells.
Eukaryotes are complex cells with many organelles and other structures in the cell.
They are larger than prokaryote cells: they can be as much as 1000 times greater in volume.
Eukaryotes store their genetic information (DNA) on chromosomes in the cell nucleus.
Organisms (living things) which are made up of multiple cells are eukaryotes.
The only kinds of prokaryotic organisms alive at present are bacteria and archaea.
Prokaryotic organisms evolved before eukaryotic organisms, so at one point the world consisted of nothing but prokaryotic organisms.
There are also viruses, which are hard to classify, but cause some important diseases.
Viruses are made of RNA, or DNA, and protein, and they reproduce themselves inside the cells of bacteria or eukaryotes.
Unicellular organisms live without other cells to help them.
Many of these organisms need to:
Multicellular organisms are made from many cells.
They are complex organisms.
This can be a small number of cells, or millions of cells.
All plants and animals are multicellular organisms.
The cells of a multicellular organism are not all the same.
They have different shapes and sizes, and do different work in the organism.
The cells are specialized.
This means they do only some kinds of work.
By themselves, they cannot do everything that the organism needs to live.
They need other cells to do other work.
They live together, but cannot live alone.
Cells were discovered by Robert Hooke (1635-1703).
He used a compound microscope with two lenses to look at the structure of cork, and to look at leaves and some insects.
He did this from about 1660, and reported it in his book Micrographica in 1665.
He named cells after the Latin word cella, meaning room.
He did this because he thought cells looked like small rooms.
Leeuwenhoek's discoveries and drawings of 'little animalules' opened up a whole new world for naturalists.
Protozoa, and microorganisms generally were discovered, and the discoveries about them are still going on today.
Christian Gottfried Ehrenberg's book Die Infusionsthierchen summarised what was known in 1838.
Lorenz Oken (1779-1851) in 1805 wrote that infusoria (microscopic forms) were the basis of all life.
The idea that cells were the basis of the larger forms of life came in the 18th century.
Finding out who did the work has taken some time:
"The work of the Czech Jan Purkyně (1787-1869) and his student and collaborator Gabriel Valentin (1810-1883) was unjustly denigrated by the nationalistic Germans.
They have a claim to some priority in the cell theory".
Chapter 9Johannes Müller (1801-1858) also made great contributions.
"It was, however, his student Theodor Schwann (1810-1882) and Matthias Schleiden (1804-1881) who got the credit for the cell theory, despite the fact that some of their observations were not correct, and their credits to previous workers were "a travesty".
p97
The cell theory includes these important ideas:
All living things are made of cells.
The cell is the basic unit of structure and function in all organisms.
Every cell comes from another cell that lived before it.
The nucleus is the core element of the cell.
Prokaryotic cells reproduce using binary fission, where the cell simply splits in half.
For both mitosis and binary fission the cell must replicate (copy) all its genetic information (DNA) so that each new cell will have a copy.
↑Alberts B. et al. 2002.
Molecular biology of the cell.
4th ed, Garland.
↑ 3.03.13.23.3Harris H. 1999.
The birth of the cell.
Yale University Press, New Haven.
↑Gall J.G. & McIntosh J.R. (eds) 2001.
Landmark papers in cell biology.
Bethesda MD and Cold Spring Harbor NY: The American Society for Cell Biology and Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press.
