The Banauja Bangabandhu is the most advanced missile frigate of the Bangladesh Navy.
It is currently serving as the main ship of the Bangladesh Navy.
Banauja Bangabandhu was named after the first President of Bangladesh, Sheikh Mujibur Rahman, whose title was Bangabandhu.
It is capable of performing its duties equally in times of war and peacetime.
Construction of the ship began on March 11, 1997 at Deyu Shipbuilding and Marine Engineering in the Republic of Korea, and was completed on August 29, 2000.
On June 20, 2001, the Banauja Bangabandhu was commissioned in the Bangladesh Navy.
The ship was later decommissioned on February 13, 2002 for repairs.
In 2006, it was re-commissioned as Banauza Khalid bin Walid.
In 2009 it was renamed as Banauja Bangabandhu.
The Banauja Bangabandhu has been participating in bilateral exercises with the United States Navy since 2011.
In November 2012, the ship participated in the Exercise Ferrous Falcon in Doha, Qatar.
On 29 August 2013, the Banauja Bangabandhu was given the national flag.
The ship took part in a search in the Bay of Bengal in 2014 after Malaysia Airlines Flight 370 went missing.
This warship is the most advanced frigate in its class.
It is equipped with sophisticated weapons.
The ship's automatic MK2 Block 4 is a state-of-the-art anti-ship missile capable of striking at a range of more than 160 km.
These missiles can change course halfway after launch so the warship does not have to change position to attack.
As an anti-aircraft weapon, it has six FM-90 surface-to-air missiles capable of hitting up to 15 kilometers.
The ship also carries naval artillery and torpedoes.
The Banauja Bangabandhu has one hangar which carries Augusta-Westland AW109 power helicopter.
This helicopter is capable of carrying C-601 anti-ship missiles and torpedoes.
The primary and main responsibility of this warship is to provide supervision and security to the special economic zone of the country.
The ship also works to prevent maritime terrorism, natural pollution and smuggling along Bangladesh's maritime borders.
It is also capable of carrying out search and rescue operations as required.
