Culture of Bangladesh
Folk culture is a part of the culture of Bangladesh.
The common culture has been nurtured for ages and therefore the folk culture in the general sense.
This culture is known as folk culture as it is prevalent in the mouths of the people.
This culture is usually influenced by the rural people-centered livelihood system, the social norms.
People have been following this culture for thousands of years.
This culture flows with religious beliefs, processes of action, entertainment.
The name of this culture based on these things is known as folk culture.
Born in the mouths of ordinary people, this culture has spread from one generation to another for thousands of years.
Much has changed in this folk culture that is being told by people.
Its journey started from the rural agrarian society.
In many ways, different trends have been created in this culture-
Elements of folk culture:
The things that have the identity of folk culture are called the elements of folk culture.
These elements are of two types e.g.
A) Material material and B) Material material.
Material: The material elements that can be touched in folk culture are material.
Such as - weaving, bronze, pottery, nakshi kantha, fishing, etc.
Objective material: All the aspects of folk culture that cannot be grasped or touched, that is, born from human thought and spread by word of mouth, are called objective material of folk culture.
Literature is the main subject of material.
Other material elements include folk songs, khanar bachan, rhymes, proverbs, etc.
Examples of conventional folk culture:
Our country still has a large conventional folk culture.
Folk culture has spread from generation to generation.
Again some folk culture is lost in the flow of time.
Below are some examples of conventional folk culture:
(1) A large part of the material element of folk culture is the ceremony of wearing yellow.
Yellow on the skin is a big part of our culture.
Different types of rituals and reforms are performed centering on the yellow ritual on the body.
(2) The material element or belief of folk culture performed for rain.
The event is held to call for rain to relieve the long drought.
To get the rain down, the village girls go from house to house with open and sing rain songs or rhymes in their mouths.
Then the girls of the house poured water on the opening.
They believe that this is how rain will come down from the sky.
The main reason for calling for rain in this way is the liberation of farmers from drought.
(3) Nakshi Kantha is one of the elements of the folk culture of Bangladesh.
At present, Nakshi Kantha is very popular in Bangladesh and there is a lot of demand abroad.
The exquisite and eye-catching design of Nakshi Kantha attracts everyone's attention.
Nakshi Kantha is made from house to house in different parts of Bangladesh, especially in Jessore and Jamalpur villages.
(4) The element of folk culture that is equally prevalent in cities and villages in the fair.
Fairs can be seen all over Bangladesh.
Especially Baishakhi Mela occupies a special place in the city.
Numerous shops are built around this fair.
Where many parts of folk culture are found.
Such as nakshi Kantha, earthenware, children's dolls, and toys, carousel, bioscope, puppet dance, journey, etc.
Influence of folk culture in our life
People of almost all ethnic groups in Bangladesh celebrate with songs and dances.
Dancing for Radha-Krishna is the favorite of Manipuris.
This is called gopi dance.
In the spring we celebrate Holi with pomp.
Like all other ethnic groups in the world, there are different kinds of beliefs among the people of the small ethnic groups in Bangladesh.
For example, the night of the full moon and the new moon are of special significance to Manipuri and other Buddhist communities.
We also celebrate many religious and cultural festivals on the night of the full moon.
On the other hand, Bengali New Year is another festival.
All the countries of the world are associated with one or another religion or festival.
But this festival has no religious connotation.
The festival is especially associated with agriculture and business.
On this day all the debts of the workplace are calculated.
As a result, day by day it became a festival of universal joy.
