Cuba
Map of Cuba in the Caribbean Sea
Cuba is a country in the Caribbean Sea.
The country is made up of one big island and many smaller islands.
It is near the United States, Mexico, Haiti, Jamaica and the Bahamas.
People from Cuba are called Cubans, and they speak Spanish.
Cuba has a warm climate, but has many hurricanes every year.
The capital city of Cuba is Havana.
In Spanish, the capital is called "La Habana".
Cuba is famous for many types of music, especially dance music such as the Salsa and Mambo.
Because Cubans come from Spain, Africa, South America and North America, Cuban music is special and different.
Before Cuba was conquered by the Spaniards,three tribes lived on the island were the Taínos, the Ciboneys, and the Guanajatabeyes.
The Taínos were the largest and most common of the three tribes.
They farmed crops such as beans, corn, squash, and yams.
The Taínos also slept in hammocks which the Spaniards would introduce to the rest of the world.
Then, in 1492, Christopher Columbus arrived in Cuba on his first trip to the Americas.
Three years later he claimed the islands for the Spanish.
The Spanish began to rule Cuba afterwards.
The Spanish brought thousands of slaves from Africa to Cuba to work for them.
Most of the native Cubans died because of the new diseases brought by the Spanish and Africans.
The Spanish also treated the native Cubans very cruelly and massacred many of them.
The Spanish ruled for many years.
Cuba became the most important producer of sugar.
In the 19th century, Cubans rebelled against the Spanish rulers, but failed until 1898, when the United States went to war with the Spanish and defeated them.
Cuba became American for four years afterwards, before it became an independent republic in 1902.
Even though Cuba was independent, the Americans still controlled the island by a law called the Platt Amendment.
In 1933 the Cubans stopped the Platt Amendment, but the Americans still had a big say in Cuban politics.
Americans owned most of Cuba's businesses.
The Americans supported the leader Fulgencio Batista, who was seen by many Cubans as corrupt.
In 1959, Fidel Castro led a revolution against Fulgencio Batista.
Castro took power of Cuba with Che Guevara from Argentina, his brother Raul, and others who fought against Batista.
Castro made many changes to Cuba and ended American ownership of Cuban businesses.
This made Castro unpopular in America and the United States banned all contact with Cuba.
Many Cubans also went to America because of this.
In 1961 the Americans helped some of these Cubans to attack Cuba and remove Castro, but they failed.
Castro then asked the Soviet Union to help defend them from the Americans, which they did.
The Soviet Union put nuclear weapons in Cuba and aimed them at America, after the U.S put nuclear weapons in Turkey.
American President Kennedy demanded that they be removed or a new war would begin.
This was known as the Cuban Missile Crisis.
The Soviet Union then removed the missiles.
Cuba became a socialist country like the Soviet Union after this.
The Soviet Union bought most of Cuba's sugar for expensive prices.
Cuba spent this money on health, education and the army.
This made Cuba's schools and hospitals some of the best in the world, and the army fought in Africa to support black Africans against the white South African army.
Cuba also supported groups in South America fighting against the dictators of those countries.
However, the Cuban government began to seize the property of people who had been rich and powerful prior to the revolution.
Many wealthy Cubans did not like this and tried to leave Cuba.
Most Cubans who left went to America.
In 1991, the Soviet Union collapsed.
This meant that Cuba, which had sold most of its products to the Soviet Union, had no money coming into the country.
The Americans made the restrictions against contact with Cuba tighter.
America said the restrictions on contact would continue unless Fidel Castro gave up power.
Cuba became very poor in the 1990s.
This became known in Cuba as “The Special Period”.
Because of the disaster, Cuba changed to allow less control by the government over the economy, non-communist parties were allowed to operate in Cuba, and the government allowed small businesses to be created.
Cuba also tried to get tourists to visit the island.
In the 2000s, tourism to Cuba began to make money for the island again.
Though Fidel Castro had remained in power, he had passed all duties to his brother Raul after an illness.
Fidel Castro is 80 years old and was one of the longest serving heads of state.
In 2008, Raúl Castro became the official president of Cuba, and in 2019, Miguel Diaz-Canel become the President.
In 2016, Fidel Castro died.
Men who are between the ages of 16 and 28 are required to serve at least two years of active military service.
The population of Cuba is close to 13 million.
The ethnic groups of Cuba is 48% White, 30% Black, 22% Mulatto, 1% Amerindian and 1% other.
Cuba is the largest island in the West Indies.
It has many resources.
Only about one-fourth of the land is mountains or hills.
Much of the land is gentle hills or plains which are good for farming or raising cattle.
Cuba has fertile soil and a warm climate that makes it great for growing crops.
Sugar is the most important crop of Cuba, and they may get it from the sugar cane.
Sugar cane is the largest cash crop growin in Cuba, and it brings in most of the money.
After that, the second is Tobacco.
Tobacco is made into cigars by hand.
A hand-made cigar is considered by many people to be the finest in the world.
Other important crops are rice, coffee, and fruit.
Cuba also has many minerals.
Cobalt, nickel, iron, coopper, and manganese are all on the island.
Salt, petroleum, and natural gas are there too.
The coast of Cuba has many bays and a few good harbors.
Havana, which is the capital, is also a port.
Other harbors have port cities.
Nuevitas is a port city on the north coast.
Cienfuegos, Guantánamo, and Santiago de Cubaare some of the port cities on the south coast.
Cuba has a semi-tropical climate.
That means that the cool ocean winds keep it becoming hot, despite its being in the tropiocal zone.
Cuba has a wet season and a dry season.
The dry season is from November to April, and the wet season is from May to October.
August to October is also the hurricane season in the Atlantic Ocean.
Because of this, most of Cuba's port cities can be flooded along the coast.
The people of Cuba come from three different groups.
The largest group is the descendants of the Spanish settlers who came to Cuba.
The smallest group is the descendants of the black African slaves who were brought in to do the work.
The middle-sized group is a mix of African and Spanish.
The government succeeded in seeing that the three different groups were treated the same.
The socialist government guarantees the people the right to a basic education.
All the children are required to go to school from six to twelve years old, and nearly everybody are able to read and write at least.
Reading is very popular in Cuba.
Many people especially enjoy reading books or things that came from outside the country.
99 percent of the Cuban population is literate.
Cuban people love music and sports.
Cuban music is very lively.
This is because a lot of it comes from African and Spanish rhythms.
Baseball, basketball, and track and field events are loved by many Cuban people.
Fidel Castro was a very important man in Cuba.
There were pictures of him all over the country, and his speeches were often printed in the newspapers and broadcast on television or radio.
Because of Castro, many times soldiers have been sent to other countries to support communist and anti-imperialist rebels.
Cuban soldiers have fought against anti-communist groups in Angola, Ethiopia, and Nicaragua.
But after the fall of socialism in Europe, Russia has stopped paying for these soldiers, and almost all of them came home.
